CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF DeBARY, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council, 1996 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DeBARY, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Donald E. Smith 
Mayor 
____________ 
Florence K. Little 
Cliff Rutz 
Carmen Rosamonda 
Rob Sullivan 
City Council 
____________ 
Robert G. Mauney 
City Manager 
____________ 
William L. Colbert 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of DeBary, Florida. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Faith Miller, former City Clerk, Robert Mauney, City Manager, William Colbert, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of DeBary, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of DeBary, Florida. 
©  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of DeBary, Florida. 1996. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 25-96 
An Ordinance of the City of DeBary, Florida, Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of DeBary, Florida; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing for Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; Providing for Severability, Conflicts, and Effective Date. 
Now, Therefore, Be it Ordained by the City of DeBary, Florida: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of DeBary, Florida" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of chapters 1 through 50, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 7, 1996, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference herein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or a term of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or both a fine and term of imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this Section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code Section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisance, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses and permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 7, 1996, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. If any section or portion of a section of this Ordinance proves to be invalid, unlawful or unconstitutional, it shall not be held to impair the validity, force or effect of any other section of part of this Ordinance. 
Section 8. That all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith be and the same are hereby revoked and any existing Code sections in conflict herewith be and the same are hereby amended to reflect the intent of this Ordinance. 
Section 9. That this Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage and adoption. 
Adopted on the first reading the 11th day of December, 1996. 
Adopted on the second reading the 8th day of January, 1997. 
CITY COUNCIL 
CITY OF DEBARY, FLORIDA 
/s/   
      Donald E. Smith, Mayor 	
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Robert G. Mauney, Acting City Manager 	
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of DeBary, Florida, as adopted by Laws of Fla. ch. 93-351 and by referendum on September 7, 1993, and effective on December 31, 1993. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CORPORATE NAME/PURPOSE OF THE CHARTER 
 
Sec. 1.01. - City of DeBary. 
The municipality hereby established shall be known as the City of DeBary, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 1.02. - Purpose of the Charter. 
This Charter is ordained and established by the people of the City of DeBary, Florida, to promote the general welfare and common good of the community by providing the framework within which a municipal corporation exercises municipal home rule powers under the Constitution and laws of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
ARTICLE II. - TERRITORIAL BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 2.01. - Boundaries of the City of DeBary. 
The territorial boundaries of the City of DeBary shall include the following areas situated in the County of Volusia, State of Florida: 
BEGIN at the point of intersection of the thread of the St. Johns River with the North line of the South one-half of Section 19, Township 18 South, Range 30 East, Volusia County, Florida; thence Easterly along the North lines of the South one-half of Sections 19, 20, 21, and 22, Township 18 South, Range 30 East, to a point of intersection with the Easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 17 & 92 in said Section 22; thence Southwesterly, along said Easterly right-of-way line, to a point of intersection with the Northerly right-of-way line of Highbanks Road in Section 27, Township 18 South, Range 30 East; thence Easterly, along said Northerly right-of-way line, to a point of intersection with the Easterly right-of-way line of Enterprise Road in Section 25, Township 18 South, Range 30 East; thence Southeasterly, along said Easterly right-of-way line, to a point of intersection with the Westerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway #4 (I-4) in said Section 36, Township 185, Range 30E; thence Southwesterly, along said Westerly right-of-way line, to a point of intersection with the thread of the St. Johns River; thence Northerly, along said thread of the St. Johns River, to the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96) 
Editor's note— The description of the boundaries of the city in this section does not include the annexations into the city. The annexations are on file in the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 2.02. - Extension of the corporate limits/annexation. 
The corporate limits of the City of DeBary may be revised as provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96) 
State Law reference— Municipal annexation procedures, F.S. ch. 171.  
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL POWERS OF THE MUNICIPALITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166. 
 
Sec. 3.01. - All powers possible. 
The City of DeBary shall have all governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers to enable it to conduct municipal government; perform municipal functions; and render municipal services, and may exercise any power for municipal purposes except as otherwise provided by law. 
The powers of the City of DeBary shall be construed liberally in favor of the municipality, limited only by the Constitution, general law, and specific limitations contained herein. The specific mention of particular powers in the Charter shall not be constructed as limiting in any way the general power granted in this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 3.02. - Joint exercise of powers. 
The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation by contract or otherwise, with any one or more states, counties, municipalities, or any agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof, or private vendors serving a public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 3.03. - Eminent domain. 
The City is prohibited from exercising its power of eminent domain for the sole purpose of: 
(a)	Conferring a private benefit on a particular private party; or 
(b)	Transferring private property to another private party. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 5-3-06)  
ARTICLE IV. - CHARTER OFFICERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; open meetings law, F.S. § 286.011. 
 
Sec. 4.01. - Mayor and Council Members. 
(a)	There shall be a City Council, hereinafter referred to as the Council, with all powers of the City vested therein, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, consisting of a Council Member designated as the Mayor and four other Council Members, all of whom shall be elected from the City at-large. 
(b)	Council seats shall be designated as seats #1, #2, #3, #4, and #5. Council seat #5 is assigned to the Mayor. Candidates shall be required to seek election to a specific seat on the Council. 
(c)	Each member of the Council shall be a registered elector of the City and shall have resided within the corporate limits of the municipality for a minimum of one year prior to qualifying for election. 
(d)	The Council members are elected officials who are accountable to the citizens at regularly held elections and who are subject to recall as provided by law. The citizens, through these processes, have the opportunity to elect, re-elect, or dismiss their elected officials whose promise of performance or actual performance in office best reflects the policies which the citizens desire to implement in the government of the City. 
(e)	Policymaking is the sole prerogative of the Council. Administrative staff, whether hired or appointed under terms of this Charter, is subordinate to the elected officials, whose power derives from the consent of, and election by, the citizens of the City. 
(f)	Except as otherwise prescribed herein or provided by law, legislative and police powers of the City shall be vested in the Council, including the establishment of boards, commissions, and committees. The Council shall provide for the exercise of its powers and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the municipality by law. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01; Ord. No. 06-13, §§ 2, 3, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 4.02. - Mayor. 
The Mayor shall serve as Chairperson during meetings of the Council. In addition, the Mayor shall: 
(a)	Serve as the head of municipal government for the purpose of execution of legal documents as required by ordinance; 
(b)	Serve as the ceremonial head of the City; 
(c)	Be responsible to the Governor for the purposes of military law; 
(d)	Shall perform such other duties, consistent with his/her office, as may be delegated to him by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01; Ord. No. 06-13, §§ 2, 3, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 4.03. - Vice Mayor. 
At the first regularly scheduled meeting following the City's general election, the Council, by a majority vote, shall elect from among its membership a Vice Mayor who shall serve as Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor and, if a vacancy occurs, shall become Interim Mayor pursuant to Section 4.08 of this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 4.04. - Prohibitions. 
(a)	Neither the Council, nor any individual member of the Council, shall in any manner dictate the employment or removal of any employee other than the City Manager and City Attorney, but the Council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to the appointment or removal of such officers or employees. No individual member of the Council shall give orders to any officer or employee of the City. Recommendations for improvements in the City government operations shall come through the City Manager, but each member of the Council shall be free to discuss or recommend improvements to the City Manager, and the Council is free to direct the City Manager to implement specific recommendations for improvement in City government operations. 
(b)	No present or former elected City official shall hold any compensated appointive office or employment with the City until one year after the expiration of the official's elected term. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 4.05. - Compensation. 
(a)	Commencing January 1, 1997, the Mayor shall receive the sum of $500.00 per month during the term of his or her office and each Council Member shall receive the sum of $400.00 per month during his or her term of office. An ordinance increasing, or decreasing compensation of the Mayor or Council may be adopted at any time; however, in no event shall any increase in compensation become effective prior to the first day of the first month following the first regular election of the City subsequent to the adoption of such ordinance. 
(b)	The council may provide for reimbursement of actual expenses incurred by its members while performing their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 4.06. - Vacancies. 
The office of a member of the Council shall become vacant upon the member's inability to fulfill the duties of the office, resignation, or removal from office as authorized by law or this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 4.07. - Forfeiture of office. 
(a)	A member of the Council may forfeit his/her office, if the member: 
(i)	Lacks at any time during the term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law; 
(ii)	Violates any express prohibition of this Charter; or 
(iii)	Is convicted of a felony or criminal misdemeanor. 
If any of these events should occur, a hearing shall automatically be conducted at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting, and the member may be declared to have forfeited office by majority vote of the Council. 
(b)	A member of the Council shall forfeit his/her office, if the member misses three regular meetings of the Council within any twelve-month period regardless of the reason for absence. Absences from special meetings and workshops of the Council are discouraged, but do not count for purposes of forfeiting a Council member's office. Absences of Council members shall be reflected in the minutes of each meeting of the Council. The Council's approval of minutes reflecting absences of a Council member shall be prima facie evidence of the member's absence from a meeting. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 11-06, § 1, 5-3-06; Ord. No. 06-13, §§ 4, 5, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 4.08. - Filling of vacancies. 
A vacancy on the Council, except for the position of Mayor, shall be filled by appointment by majority vote of the Council members remaining, and said appointment shall be effective until a successor is chosen at the next regular election. In the event that all members of the Council are removed by death, disability, law, or forfeiture of office, the Governor shall appoint an Interim Council that shall call a special election to be held within 45 days following the occurrence of the vacancies. 
In the event that the Mayor becomes unable to fulfill the duties of his/her office, ceases to be qualified, or is removed from office as provided by law or this Charter, the Vice Mayor of the Council shall assume the full powers and duties of the Mayor under the following conditions: 
(a)	If six months or more remain in the current term of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor of the Council shall become Interim Mayor and shall temporarily relinquish his/her office as Council Member until the unexpired portion of the term is filled by a special election held and completed within 45 days of the occurrence of the vacancy; or 
(b)	If less than six months remain in the current term of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor of the Council shall temporarily relinquish his/her office as Council Member and shall assume the office of Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Council vacancy thus created shall be filled by an interim appointment under the provisions of this Charter, to be effective only until such time as the Mayor resumes his/her office or until the expiration of the term of the office, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 06-13, §§ 2, 3, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 4.09. - Judge of qualifications. 
The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of their office and for that purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and require the production of evidence. 
A Council Member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of this office shall be notified by the City Clerk by certified mail and shall be entitled to a public hearing at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Council as outlined in Section 4.07 of this Charter. Notice of such hearing shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City at least one week in advance of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 4.10. - Independent financial audit. 
The Council shall provide for an independent annual financial audit of all City accounts and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or a firm of such accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City government or in any of its officers. Residency in the City shall not be construed as a prohibited interest. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 4.11. - Meetings. 
The Council shall meet regularly at least once every month at such times and locations within the boundaries of the City as the Council may prescribe. 
Special meetings and workshops of the Council may be held on the call of the Mayor or the City Manager and, whenever practical, upon no less than a 24-hour notice to each member and the public. Action taken at a special meeting shall be limited to the purpose for which the special meeting is called. 
All meetings shall be public and shall be scheduled to commence no earlier than 7:00 a.m. nor later than 10:00 p.m. The Council shall provide a reasonable period of time at each regularly scheduled meeting for members of the public to address the Council upon matters relating to the City or of concern to its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 06-13, §§ 6, 7, 7-3-13 ) 
State Law reference— Open meetings, F.S. § 286.011.  
Sec. 4.12. - Rules and journal. 
The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall provide for keeping a journal and minutes and votes of its proceedings. The journal and minutes shall be public records. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 4.13. - Voting/quorum. 
Roll call voting shall be required upon the specific request of a Council member and shall be recorded in the minutes; otherwise, voting shall be by ayes and nays. 
Three members of the Council shall constitute a quorum. No action of the Council shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the Council Members present at the time a quorum exists. 
All council members in attendance shall vote on all Council actions, except when, with respect to any such member, there is, or appears to be, a possible conflict of interest as defined under general law. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
ARTICLE V. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS; TERMS OF OFFICE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Florida election code, F.S. chs. 97—106. 
 
Sec. 5.01. - Elections. 
The Council establishes the City's election qualifying dates and the City's election schedule as follows: 
(a)	In even-numbered years, the City shall hold its election qualifying during an 11-day period ending simultaneously with the time period established by the Florida Election Code for qualifying for county office in the general election, beginning at 9:00 a.m. and ending at noon on the appropriate days. The City shall have elections on the dates established by the State Election Code for first and second primaries. 
(b)	In odd-numbered years, the City shall hold its election qualifying during normal business hours between 9:00 a.m. on the first day and 12 noon on the last day during an 11-day qualifying period, the dates and times of which shall be compatible with the date of the City's General Election and determined by and through the Volusia County Supervisor of Elections. The City's General Election shall be held on a date established by and through the Supervisor of Elections that allows for sufficient time under applicable state election law to deliver overseas and military absentee ballots, and the runoff election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November. 
(c)	The Council by simple majority vote may change any qualifying or election date in order to avoid a conflict with a religious holiday. The Council may change any qualifying period or election date as may be authorized by state law. 
(Ord. No. 95-13, § 1, 6-21-95; Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 07-99, §§ 1, 2, 6-2-99; Ord. No. 05-11, § I, 5-18-11; Ord. No. 06-13, § 2, 3, 8, 9, 7-3-13 ) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 07-99 provides that the City of DeBary exempts itself from the application of Laws of Fla., ch. 95-462, as amended.  
Sec. 5.02. - Commencement of term. 
The terms of members of the Council shall begin on January 1st of the year following the election. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 5.03. - Terms of office. 
The term for all Council seats shall remain three (3) years for Council terms commencing prior to January 1, 2015. Commencing in the manner described herein, the term of office for all Council seats shall be for four (4) years. Four (4) year terms for seats 3, 4 and 5 shall commence on January 1, 2015 following the 2014 election for such seats and shall continue thereafter. Four (4) year terms for seats 1 and 2 shall commence on January 1, 2017, following the 2016 election for such seats and shall continue thereafter. No member of the Council shall serve (or, but for resignation would have served) for more than two (2) consecutive full terms of office. A candidate who has been elected to two (2) consecutive full terms of office may requalify for any vacant seat provided said candidate does not actually take office for at least a one-year period after the end of that candidate's previous two (2) full terms of office. Members of the City Council elected shall hold their seats for the term of office for which they were respectively elected until such time as they are reelected, their successors have been elected and take office, or such office is otherwise prematurely vacated. An individual appointed to fill a vacant office shall be bound to the term of office served by such individual's predecessor. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01; Ord. No. 06-11, § 2, 9-7-11)  
Sec. 5.04. - Qualified electors. 
Any person who is a resident of the City, who has qualified as an elector of the state, and who registers in the manner prescribed by law shall be an elector of this City. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96) 
State Law reference— Electors, F.S. chs. 97, 98.  
Sec. 5.05. - Adoption of election procedures. 
The Council, by ordinance, shall adopt such election procedures as are necessary. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 5.06. - Nonpartisan elections. 
All elections for officers of the City shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis without any designation of political party affiliation. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 5.07. - Multiple candidates; nomination of candidates, petitions for placement on ballot. 
When there are fewer than three (3) qualified persons nominated by petition for the office of mayor, then and in that event only, no primary election shall be held for the election of Mayor, and the City Clerk shall declare the person or persons so nominated by petition as nominee or nominees for the office of Mayor or for said City at the general election; however, if more than two (2) qualified persons are nominated for the office of Mayor, then the City Clerk shall include the nominees in the primary election. A candidate who receives a majority of the votes cast shall be declared to be the Mayor. If no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, the names of the two (2) candidates for nomination to the office of Mayor who shall receive the greatest vote in such primary election shall be placed upon the ballot at the next general municipal election. The candidate at the general election who shall receive the greater number of votes at said general election for the office of Mayor shall be declared to be the Mayor. 
When there are fewer than three (3) qualified persons nominated by petition, for the office of City Council, the City Clerk shall declare the person or persons so nominated by petition, as nominee or nominees for the office of City Council at the general municipal election; however, if more than two (2) qualified persons are nominated by petition, then the City Clerk shall include the nominee in the primary election as herein provided. 
A candidate who receives a majority of the votes cast in said primary election shall be declared elected to the City Council. If no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, the names of the two (2) candidates for nomination to the office of City Council who shall receive the greatest vote in said primary election shall be placed on the ballot at the next general municipal election. The ballot to be used at said elections shall be so arranged as to show clearly and to designate the names of the candidates for Mayor and the candidates for City Council. A tie vote between two (2) or more candidates for the office of Mayor or between two (2) or more candidates for the office of City Council shall be determined by the drawing of lots. 
(Ord. No. 95-13, § 8, 6-21-95; Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 5.08. - Recall. 
The qualified electors of the municipality shall have the power to recall and to remove any elected official of the City as prescribed by general law. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96) 
State Law reference— Municipal recall, F.S. § 100.361.  
ARTICLE VI. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 6.01. - Appointment and qualifications. 
The Council, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all Council Members, shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term and fix compensation. The City Manager shall be appointed primarily on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 16-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 6.02. - Removal. 
The Council may remove the City Manager for any reason by affirmative vote of a majority of all Council Members. If the vote is less than unanimous by all Council Members, the City Manager may, within seven days of the dismissal motion by Council, submit to the Mayor a written request for reconsideration. Any action taken by the Council at the reconsideration hearing shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 16-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 6.03. - Powers and duties. 
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City and shall implement and administer all ordinances, resolutions, and policies adopted by the Council and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the Council or law. The City Manager shall be responsible to the Council and shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)	To hire or fill existing positions and, when the City Manager deems it necessary for the good of the City service, suspend or remove City employees, except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter. 
(b)	To direct and supervise the administration of all employees, departments, and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(c)	To attend all Council meetings unless excused by the Council, and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote. 
(d)	To ensure that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and acts of the Council, subject to enforcement by the City Manager or by officers subject to the City Manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
(e)	To submit to the Council and make available to the public a complete report on the administrative activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(f)	To make such other reports as the Council may require concerning the operation of City departments, offices, and agencies subject to the City Manager's direction and supervision. 
(g)	To keep the Council fully advised as to the condition and future needs of the City and to make written recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the City. 
(h)	When needed, to perform the duties of City Clerk in addition to the duties of City Manager during any period of time so appointed by the Council. 
(i)	To perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or as may from time to time be assigned by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
ARTICLE VII. - CITY CLERK 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Appointment; duties. 
There may be a City Clerk who shall be appointed by the City Manager. The City Clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager and shall: 
(a)	Give notice of Council meetings to its members and the public. 
(b)	Keep the journal and minutes of the proceedings of the Council and its committees, which shall be public records. 
(c)	Authenticate by signature and record in full in books kept for that purpose all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council. 
(d)	Be the custodian of the City seal. 
(e)	Have the power to administer oaths. 
(f)	Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
ARTICLE VIII. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Appointment; duties. 
There shall be a City Attorney appointed by the Council, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all Council Members, who may represent the City in all legal proceedings and shall perform all other duties assigned by the Council. The Council may remove the City Attorney for any reason by motion requiring three affirmative votes. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS 
 
Sec. 9.01. - Establishment of additional departments. 
The Council may establish such other departments as it determines necessary for the efficient administration and operation of the City; such departments, offices, or agencies shall be established by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
ARTICLE X. - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum mandatory procedure for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041. 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Definition of ordinances and resolutions. 
As used in this Charter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings unless some other meaning is plainly indicated: 
(a)	"Ordinance" means an official legislative action of the Council, which action is a regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law. 
(b)	"Resolution" means an expression of the Council concerning matters of administration, an expression of a temporary character, or a provision for the disposition of a particular item of the administrative business of the City. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 10.02. - Adoption of ordinances. 
Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. The enacting clause for an ordinance shall be: 
"IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF DEBARY AS FOLLOWS…" 
An ordinance may be introduced by the Mayor or any member of the Council at any regular or special meeting of the Council. A proposed ordinance may be read by title, or in full, on at least two separate Council meeting days and shall, at least 10 days prior to adoption, be noticed once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice of proposed enactment shall state the date, time, and place of the meeting; the title of a proposed ordinance; and the place or places within the City where such proposed ordinance may be inspected by the public. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the Council, by at least a two-thirds vote of a quorum of the Council, as defined in Section 4.13, may adopt an emergency ordinance without complying with the requirements of notice expressed in the foregoing paragraph. An emergency ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; set service or user charges for any municipal services; or authorize the borrowing of money. An emergency ordinance shall become effective upon adoption and automatically stand repealed as of the 61st day following the date on which it was adopted. This shall not prevent reenactment of such ordinance under regular procedures. 
Ordinances which rezone specific parcels of private real property or which substantially change permitted use categories shall be enacted pursuant to general law. 
An ordinance shall, upon its final passage, be recorded in a book kept for that purpose and shall be signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk. A copy of the ordinance shall be available in the City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 10.03. - Adoption of resolutions. 
Every proposed resolution shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No resolution shall contain more than one subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. The clause which shall be used for all resolutions approved by the Council shall be: 
"IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED BY THE CITY OF DEBARY AS FOLLOWS…" 
A resolution may be introduced by the Mayor or any member of the Council at any regular or special meeting of the Council. 
A resolution shall, upon its final passage, be recorded in a book kept for that purpose and shall be signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk. A copy of the resolution shall be available in the City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
ARTICLE XI. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation and finance, F.S. § 166.101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of September. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96) 
State Law reference— Mandatory fiscal year, F.S. § 166.241.  
Sec. 11.02. - Submission of budget and budget message. 
On or before the 15th day of July of each year, the City Manager shall submit to the Council a budget in accordance with state law. It shall outline the financial policies of the City for the ensuing fiscal year; describe the important features of the budget; indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policy, including any changes in budgetary accounting methods from the current year expenditures and revenues together with the reasons for such changes; summarize the City's debt position; and include such other material as the City Manager deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 11.03. - Council action on the budget. 
(a)	The Council shall adopt the budget by resolution on or before the 30th day of September each year. 
(b)	Unless authorized by the electors of the City at a duly held referendum election, the Council shall not authorize or allow to be authorized the issuance of revenue bonds or enter into lease purchase contracts or any other unfunded multi-year contracts all for the purchase of real property or the construction of any capital improvement, the repayment of which extends in excess of eighty-four (84) months, unless mandated by state or federal governing agencies. 
(c)	The Council shall adopt a formal debt management policy by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 20-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01; Ord. No. 13-06, § 1, 5-3-06; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 5-3-06) 
State Law reference— Mandatory procedures for adoption of budget, F.S. § 200.065.  
Sec. 11.04. - Public records. 
Copies of the budget and the capital program as adopted shall be public records and shall be made available to the public at suitable locations in the City. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96) 
State Law reference— Public records, F.S. ch. 119.  
Sec. 11.05. - Budget amendments. 
(a)	Supplemental appropriations. If, during the fiscal year, the City Manager certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the Council, by resolution, may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess, so long as a fiscally responsible reserve is maintained. 
(b)	Emergency appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the Council, by resolution, may make emergency appropriations. To the extent that there are no unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the Council may by such emergency resolution authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals in any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year succeeding that in which the emergency appropriations were made if the emergency notes are to be paid from sources other than ad valorem taxes levied by the City. If the emergency notes are to be paid from ad valorem taxies levied by the City, the emergency notes and any renewals thereof may not have a maturity greater than twelve months from the date of issuance. 
(c)	Reduction of appropriations. If, during the fiscal year, it appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the City Manager shall report to the Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken, and recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The Council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose may, by resolution, reduce one or more appropriations. 
(d)	Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year, the City Manager may transfer any unencumbered appropriations among programs within a department, office, or agency, and, upon written request by the City Manager, the Council may by resolution transfer between funds any unencumbered appropriations from one department, office, or agency to another. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 20-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
ARTICLE XII. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 
 
Sec. 12.01. - Initiative and referendum. 
At least 25 percent of the qualified electorate of the City shall have the power to petition the Council to propose an ordinance or to require reconsideration of an adopted ordinance, and if the Council fails to adopt such ordinance so proposed, or to repeal such adopted ordinance, without any change in substance, then the Council shall place the proposed ordinance, or the repeal of the adopted ordinance, on the ballot at the next general election. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
ARTICLE XIII. - CHARTER AMENDMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Procedure for adopting Charter amendments, F.S. § 166.031. 
 
Sec. 13.01. - Initiation by ordinance. 
The Council may, by ordinance, propose amendments to any or all of this Charter to be submitted to the electors, as provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 13.02. - Initiation by petition. 
The electors of the City may propose amendments to this Charter by petition signed by at least ten percent (10%) of the registered electors as of the last preceding municipal general election, to be placed before the electors, as provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 21-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 13.03. - Charter review. 
The Charter will be reviewed at least every seven (7) years. 
A 5-member Charter Review Commission shall be appointed and funded by the Council. The Charter Review Commission shall be appointed at least six months before the next scheduled election and complete its work and present any recommendations for change no later than 60 days before the election. 
The Council shall hold a minimum of two public hearings on the proposed changes of the Charter prior to placing the proposed changes on the scheduled election ballot. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 21-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
ARTICLE XIV. - SEVERABILITY 
 
Sec. 14.01. - Invalidity of Charter provision or application. 
If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the Charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of this Charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the application of the [Charter and its provisions to other persons or] circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
ARTICLE XV. - TRANSITION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, adopted Aug. 7, 1996, amended Art. XV in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said article, to read as herein set out. The former Art. XV, §§ 15.01—15.12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the original codification. 
 
Sec. 15.01. - Creation and establishment of the City of DeBary. 
For the purpose of compliance with F.S. § 200.066, relating to assessment and collection of ad valorem taxes, the City of DeBary is hereby created and established effective December 31, 1993. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96)  
Sec. 15.02. - Transitional ordinances and resolutions. 
The Council shall adopt ordinances and resolutions required to effect any revisions or amendments made to the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 22-01, § 1, Exh. A, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 15.03. - Contractual services and facilities. 
Services for fire, police, public works, parks and recreation, planning and zoning, building inspection, development reviews, animal control, and solid waste collection may be supplied by contract between the City and any governmental entity or private entity until such time as the City Council establishes such independent services. 
Facilities for housing the newly formed municipal operations may be rented or leased until the City is in the position to obtain its own facilities. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 22-01, § 1, Exh. A, 8-1-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22-01, § 1, Exh. A, adopted Aug. 1, 2001, which passed at referendum on Nov. 6, 2001, repealed former §§ 15.03 and 15.04, and renumbered §§ 15.05—15.08 as §§ 15.03—15.06. The former §§ 15.02 and 15.03 pertained to transitional comprehensive plan and transitional land development regulations, and derived from Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, adopted Aug. 7, 1996.  
Sec. 15.04. - Ordinances preserved. 
All Ordinances in effect upon the adoption of any revision or amendment to this Charter, to the extent not inconsistent with this Charter, as revised or amended, shall remain in full force until repealed or changed as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 22-01, § 1, Exh. A, 8-1-01) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 15.03.  
Sec. 15.05. - Rights of officers and employees. 
Nothing contained in any revision or amendment to this Charter except as otherwise specifically provided, shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who are City officers or employees at the time of adoption of any such revision or amendment. Elected officials shall continue to hold their offices and discharge the duties thereof until their successors are elected or appointed as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 22-01, § 1, Exh. A, 8-1-01) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 15.03.  
Sec. 15.06. - Pending matters. 
All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings involving the City shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of any revisions or amendments to this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 22-01, § 1, Exh. A, 8-1-01) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 15.03.  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LAWS OF FLORIDA 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Laws of Fla. 
Chapter 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
93-351 	I—XV 	I—XV 
  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number 	Adoption 
 Date 	Referendum 
  Date 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
95-13 	 6-21-95 		1 	5.01 
			8 	5.07 
15-96 	 8- 7-96 		1 	1.01, 1.02 
				2.01, 2.02 
				3.01, 3.02 
				4.01—4.13 
				5.01—5.08 
				6.01—6.03 
				7.01 
				8.01 
				9.01 
				10.01—10.03 
				11.01—11.05 
				12.01 
				13.01—13.03 
				14.01 
			      Rpld 	15.01—15.12 
			      Added 	15.01—15.08 
07-99 	 6- 2-99 		1, 2 	5.01 
13-01 	 8- 1-01 		1, Exh. A 	3.01 
14-01 	11- 6-01 		1, Exh. A 	4.01(a) 
				4.02 
				4.04(a) 
				4.13 
15-01 	11- 6-01 		1, Exh. A 	5.03 
16-01 	11- 6-01 		1, Exh. A 	6.01, 6.02 
17-01 	11- 6-01 		1, Exh. A 	7.01 
18-01 	11- 6-01 		1, Exh. A 	8.01 
19-01 	11- 6-01 		1, Exh. A 	10.02, 10.03 
20-01 	11- 6-01 		1, Exh. A 	11.03(b) 
				11.05(b) 
21-01 	11- 6-01 		1, Exh. A 	13.02, 13.03 
22-01 	 8- 1-01 		1, Exh. A 	15.02 
			      Rpld 	15.03, 15.04 
			      Rnbd 	15.05—15.08 
			      as 	15.03—15.06 
10-06 	 5- 3-06 	11- 7-06 	1       Added 	3.03 
11-06 	 5- 3-06 	11- 7-06 	1 	4.07(d) 
13-06 	 5- 3-06 	11- 7-06 	1 	11.03(b) 
15-06 	 5- 3-06 	11- 7-06 	1       Added 	11.03(c) 
05-11 	 5-18-11 		I 	5.01 
06-11 	 9- 7-11 	11- 8-11 	2 	5.03 
06-13 
 7- 3-13 	11- 5-13 	2, 3 	4.01, 4.02, 
				4.08, 5.01 
			4, 5 	4.07 
			6, 7 	4.11 
			8, 9 	5.01 
  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of DeBary, Florida," and may be so cited.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of DeBary printed as Part I of this volume. 
City. The word "city" shall be construed as if the words "of DeBary" followed the word "city," and shall extend to and include its several officers, boards, committees and employees. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of DeBary, Florida. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by ordinance the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, Fla. Rules of Civ. Proc., Rule 1.090(a). 
Council. The words "council" or "city council" shall mean the city council of the City of DeBary. 
County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Volusia in the State of Florida. 
State Law reference— Volusia County boundary description, F.S. § 7.64. 
F.S. Whenever the abbreviation "F.S." is used, it shall refer to the official Florida Statutes and all amendments and supplements adopted by the state legislature. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; however, technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the word "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, boards, committees, etc. The title of any office, officer, employee, board, committee or commission shall be used as though the words "of DeBary, Florida" were added. Whenever a provision appears authorizing or requiring a particular officer or employee of the city to do some act, it shall be construed to authorize said officer or employee to delegate, designate and authorize subordinates to do the act unless the terms of the provisions or section specify otherwise. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenants by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, co-partnerships, and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery or open space adjacent thereto, all beaches, canals or other waterways. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall/may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The word "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to include streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a part of such buildings or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Written; in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. Unless otherwise designated, the word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, F.S. § 1.01 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.  
Sec. 1-4. - Internal references to chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
Whenever in one section of this Code reference is made to another section of this Code, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-6. - References to chapters or sections. 
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-7. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-9. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)	Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)	Appropriating funds or establishing or relating to the annual budget; 
(3)	Imposing taxes which are not inconsistent with this Code; 
(4)	Establishing positions, classifying employees or setting salaries and any personnel regulations; 
(5)	Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(6)	Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, or vacating any street or public way; 
(7)	Establishing or prescribing street grades; 
(8)	Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor or establishing special districts; 
(9)	Prescribing through streets, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way streets, speed limits, load limits or loading zones not inconsistent with this Code; 
(10)	Establishing land development regulations, zoning or rezoning specific property; 
(11)	Establishing subdivision regulations or dedicating, accepting or rejecting any plat or subdivision; 
(12)	Annexing or deannexing property; 
(13)	Which is special although permanent; 
(14)	Which is temporary, although general; 
(15)	Whose purposes have not been consummated. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed.  
Sec. 1-11. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-12. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "It Is Hereby Ordained by the City of DeBary, Florida: That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of DeBary, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "It Is Hereby Ordained by the City of DeBary, Florida: That the Code of Ordinances, City of DeBary, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
State Law reference— Minimum procedural requirements for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ ." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-14. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.  
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
State Law reference— Fines and forfeitures in county court payable to municipality, F.S. § 34.191; municipal ordinance violations, F.S. § 162.22; punishment for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of the city, art. III; Charter officers, art. IV; city manager, art. VI; city clerk; art. VII; city attorney, art. VIII; administrative departments, art. IX; ordinances and resolutions, art. X. 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Appointment and removal of board, committee and commission members. 
(a)	Appointment. Appointment of members and officers to city boards, committees and commissions and to interlocal government boards, committees and commissions shall be in the manner prescribed by the state law, Charter, and ordinance, or as otherwise determined by the city council. 
(b)	Removal. Unless prohibited by state law or the City Charter, the city council shall have the authority by majority vote to remove, with or without cause, any member and officer from any city board, committee and commission and from any position on an interlocal government board, committee and commission including, but not limited to, any board, committee and commission established by the Volusia County Charter or county ordinance, in which the city council has the authority to appoint a member or officer to such position. The city council may remove a member and officer under this subsection even if the member's or officer's term has not expired. 
(c)	Reports. All members of interlocal government boards, committees and commissions are required to provide quarterly reports, verbal or written, to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § I, 6-6-07)  
Secs. 2-32—2-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2—5. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-15 , § I, adopted December 2, 2015, repeals div. 2, §§ 2-46—2-65. Former div. 2, §§ 2-46—2-65 pertained to planning and zoning commission/local planning agency and derived from Ord. No. 95-02, adopted February 1, 1995; Ord. No. 17-07, adopted June 6, 2007; and Ord. No. 05-12, adopted August 1, 2012. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-15 , § I, adopted November 4, 2015, repeals divs. 3—5, §§ 2-66—2-84. divs. 3—5, §§ 2-66—2-84 pertained public safety advisory committee, economic development advisory committee and the streetscape advisory committee and derived from Ord. No. 94-32, adopted April 6, 1994; Ord. No. 02-07, adopted February 7, 2007; Ord. No. 6-99, adopted May 5, 1999; Ord. No. 05-00, adopted April 5, 2000; Ord. No. 03-01, adopted April 4, 2001; Ord. No. 05-03, adopted April 2, 2003; Ord. No. 11-04, adopted August 4, 2004; Ord. No. 08-09, adopted December 16, 2009; Ord. No. 05-12, adopted August 1, 2012; Ord. No. 04-13, adopted June 5, 2013. 
 
Secs. 2-46—2-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CODE ENFORCEMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; alarm systems, § 26-31 et seq.; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Code enforcement, F.S. ch. 162. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-12, § I, adopted Aug. 1, 2012, amended former Div. 1, §§ 2-86—2-88, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 94-36, §§ 2, 3, 12, 7-6-94; Ord. No. 95-09, §§ 2, 3, 12, 5-3-95. 
 
Sec. 2-86. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means City of DeBary, Florida. 
City attorney means the legal counsel for the city, any of his or her assistants or his or her designee. 
Code enforcement officer means any designated employee or agent of the city whose duty it is to enforce codes and ordinances enacted by the city. 
Repeat violation means a violation of a provision of a code or ordinance by a person previously found to have violated the same provision within five years prior to the current violation by a code enforcement board or the code enforcement board established by the city. 
Special Master means a special hearing officer that is appointed by the city council, who has the authority to hold hearings and receive and evaluate evidence and testimony regarding alleged violations of City of DeBary codes, including but not limited to the Code of Ordinances, Land Development Code regulations, and any resolution duly enacted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 2-87. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by authorizing the creation of a special master with the authority to impose administrative fines and other noncriminal penalties, to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective and inexpensive method of enforcing the codes and ordinances in force in the city, where pending or repeated violation continues to exist, including but not limited to occupational license, fire, building, zoning and sign codes. The city shall utilize a special master code enforcement system with the option of using a citation system as a supplemental method of enforcing city codes.  
Sec. 2-88. - Enforcement by other means. 
Nothing contained in F.S. ch. 162 and this article shall prohibit the city council from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other means. It is the legislative intent of F.S. ch. 162 and this article to provide additional options or supplemental means of obtaining compliance with local codes. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 2-89. - Designation, qualifications and training of code enforcement officers. 
The city manager is authorized to designate certain of its employees or agents as code enforcement officers. The training and qualifications of the employees or agents designated as code enforcement officers shall be determined by the city manager. Designation as a code enforcement officer does not provide the code enforcement officer with the power to arrest or subject the code enforcement officer to the provisions of F.S. §§ 943.085 through 943.255 and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 2-90. - Authority of code enforcement officers. 
All code enforcement officers are authorized to issue a courtesy notice, notice of violation and/or violation citation to a person or entity when, based upon personal observation or personal investigation, the code enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person or entity has committed a civil infraction in violation of a city code or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL MASTER ENFORCEMENT PROCESS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-12, § I, adopted Aug. 1, 2012, repealed former Div. 2, §§ 2-106—2-112, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Div. 2, pertained to a code enforcement board and derived from Ord. No. 94-36, § 4, 7-6-94; Ord. No. 95-09, § 4, 5-3-95. 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Special master. 
(a)	The city hereby establishes a special master code enforcement system for the enforcement of its various codes. Special masters shall have the authority to hold hearings and assess fines against violators of the various codes of the city. One or more special masters shall be appointed by the city council based upon the joint recommendation of the city attorney and city manager. Special masters shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed at anytime with or without cause by the city council. Any retired judge or retired lawyer who was licensed to practice law in the State of Florida at the time of retirement, or any lawyer who is licensed to practice law in the State of Florida may be appointed and may serve as special master. 
(b)	A special master shall have the power to: 
(1)	The special master shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide cases in which violations are alleged and any provisions of the city code and city ordinances except as specifically excluded herein; 
(2)	Adopt rules for the conduct of hearings; 
(3)	Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoena evidence to its hearings. The Volusia County Sheriff's Office may serve subpoenas; 
(4)	Subpoena evidence to hearings; 
(5)	Administer oaths and take testimony under oath; 
(6)	Issue orders that have the force of law finding a violation of the city code or city ordinances and commanding whatever steps are necessary to bring the violation into compliance; 
(7)	Enter orders finding compliance or non-compliance; 
(8)	Exercise any powers granted to an enforcement board under F.S. Chapter 162; and 
(9)	Negotiate and reduce fines and liens arising from fines imposed by this article. 
(c)	Special masters shall serve for terms established by the city council. Special masters shall be subject to removal, with or without cause, from their positions at any time during their terms, by the city council. Special masters shall not be considered to be city employees, although for such travel, mileage and per diem expenses as may be authorized. 
(d)	The jurisdiction of the special master shall not be exclusive. Any alleged violation of the City Code or city ordinances may be pursued by any appropriate remedy in court of competent jurisdiction at the option of the city council or administrative official whose responsibility it is to enforce the City Code or city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12; Ord. No. 08-14 , § I, 11-5-14)  
Sec. 2-92. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the responsible city departments, through the code enforcement officer, to initiate enforcement proceedings of the City Code and city ordinances through the special master process. The special master shall not have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. Any violations presented to the special master shall be administered by the code enforcement officer. 
(b)	The city attorney may act as legal counsel to the code enforcement officer as he or she presents cases to the special master or shall present the case for the code enforcement officer, if necessary. Because only attorneys or judges may hold the position of special master, the city council shall not be required to retain an attorney to represent the special master. 
(c)	In the case of a first time violation of the City Code or a city ordinance(s), the code enforcement officer shall notify the violator and give him or her a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified to correct the violation, the code enforcement officer shall request a hearing before the special master and provide notice to the alleged violator. All notices required by this section shall be provided to the alleged violator in accordance with the provision of F.S. §162.12 and in accordance with controlling legal precedent. 
(d)	If a repeat violation is found, the code enforcement officer shall notify the violator, but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. The code enforcement officer, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, shall request a hearing. The code enforcement officer shall schedule a hearing before the special master and shall provide notice to the violator. The case may be presented to the special master even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the special master hearing and the notice shall so state. 
(e)	If the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, said decision being made in conjunction with the city manager, the code enforcement officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately request an emergency hearing thereon. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 2-93. - Procedures and conduct of hearing. 
(a)	The code enforcement officer shall coordinate the calling of hearings by the special master. The city shall provide scheduling of a hearing room and clerical staff as may be reasonably required by the special master to conduct hearings and perform his or her duties. All hearings by the special master shall be open to the public and minutes shall be kept of all hearings. 
(b)	Each case before the special master shall be presented by the code enforcement officer and if necessary with the assistance of the city attorney or by the city attorney as the case may be. All relevant evidence shall be admitted. When appropriate, the code enforcement officer or city attorney may call as witnesses' property owners within the community who are adversely affected by the alleged code violation. 
(c)	The special master shall not be bound by formal rules of evidence. Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded, but all other evidence of a type of commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible, whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a trial in a court of law within the state. The special master shall be bound by the interpretations of the city council concerning the provisions of the codes, ordinances, resolutions and regulations. 
(d)	Each party to the hearing shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, introduce exhibits, cross-examine opposing witnesses, impeach witnesses and rebut evidence. The general public shall not be entitled to present evidence although members of the general public may be called as witnesses by either party. 
(e)	The alleged violator has the right, at his/her own expense, to be represented by an attorney at any hearing. 
(f)	All testimony before the special master shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The alleged violator or the city may cause a verbatim record of the proceedings to be made. 
(g)	The burden of proof shall be with the code enforcement officer and/or city attorney to show by greater weight of evidence that a code violation exists and that the alleged violator committed, allowed, or was responsible for maintaining the violation. 
(h)	If notice has been provided to the violator of the hearing (which shall be as required by F.S. Ch. 162), the hearing may be conducted and an order rendered in the absence of the alleged violator. 
(i)	At the conclusion of the hearing, the special master shall issue an order setting forth findings of fact, based on evidence of record, and issue conclusions of law, and shall render relief in the order affording the proper relief consistent with powers granted in this division and with Chapter 162, Florida Statutes. A written order shall be issued within a reasonable period of time subsequent to the hearing. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed if the order is not complied with by that date. A second hearing shall be scheduled by the city at which the special master shall determine when compliance has been attained in accordance with controlling legal precedent. 
(j)	A certified copy of an order imposing the fine provided for herein may be recorded in the public records of Volusia County or any other county, and thereafter such order shall constitute a lien against the property on which the violation exists or, if the violator does not own the land involved in the violation, upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator and may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state including levy against personal property, but shall not be deemed otherwise to be a judgment of a court except for enforcement purposes. 
(k)	When an order is recorded in the public records pursuant to this part of this article and the order is complied with by the dates specified in the order, the special master shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required if such is an order acknowledging compliance prior to the date set for compliance; provided, however, that the alleged violator shall have the right to request a hearing to determine when compliance has been attained. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 2-94. - Administrative fines and liens. 
(a)	A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this section runs in favor of the city, and the city council or the city manager may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this section. 
(b)	A fine imposed pursuant to this part of this article shall not exceed $250.00 per day per violation for a first violation, shall not exceed $500.00 per day per violation for a repeat violation and up to $5,000.00 per violation if the special master finds the violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature. In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the special master shall consider the factors set forth in F.S. § 162.09(2)(b), as may be amended from time to time. 
(c)	In addition, if the violation is a violation described in F.S. § 162.06(4), the special master shall notify the city council, which may make all reasonable repairs and corrective action required to bring the property into partial or full compliance, including without limitation, mowing and maintaining an unkempt yard and securing a structure or swimming pool. The violator shall be charged with the reasonable cost of such actions taken by the city along with the fine imposed pursuant to this section. Funds expended by the city to make repairs and correction action to correct, in whole or part, a violation of the code shall: (i) constitute a lien against the real property where the violation exists having the same priority under Florida law as non-ad valorem special assessments, and (ii) constitute a lien against all other real property and personal property owned by the violator(s) having the same priority as code enforcement fines/liens under this division. 
(d)	In formulating the provisions of the order, the special master should be consistent in the imposition of fines, paying special attention to the gravity of the violation, any actions and the timeliness of actions taken by a violator to correct the violation and any previous violations committed by the violator. The special master shall include in the order establishing a fine that the violator shall pay all costs of the proceedings incurred by the city. 
(e)	The fine imposed pursuant to this part of this article by the special master shall be final and may be appealed only to the circuit court in accordance with the controlling provisions of law. The violator may make arrangements through the city manager to pay the fine in monthly payments; provided, however, if the violator fails to timely perform under the agreement, the city shall have and maintain all enforcement rights relative to the fine imposed as reduced by payments that have been made. 
(f)	A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records of Volusia County or any other county and, therefore, shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of the state, including levy against the personal property, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant to this part of this article shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the city council may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on the lien. However, no lien created pursuant to the provisions of this section may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under article X, section 4 of the State Constitution. 
(g)	Notwithstanding the processes set forth relative to presentation of matters before the special master, the city may negotiate a stipulated order prior to a hearing and submit the order to the special master for his or her execution. 
(h)	Costs of the proceedings, as used in this section, means all costs incurred by or on behalf of the city from the first discovery of a code or ordinance violation through the appeal process and until compliance is achieved including, but not limited to, staff time in investigating the violation, inspecting the property where the violation occurred, preparing investigation reports, issuing and distributing notices, preparing for and attending any appeal hearing, and fees paid to the special master. 
(i)	No lien by this section shall continue for a longer period than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine/lien has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee, that it incurs in the foreclosure. The city council shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. The continuation of the lien affected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(j)	If after the final order imposing a fine and lien has been issued the cited violation has been corrected and the applicable property is in compliance with the code of ordinances, the special master may upon receipt of a request reduce any fine and lien imposed pursuant to this article which reduction decision shall be a final decision unless the city manager appeals such reduction decision to the city council in which case such post final order fine and lien amount reduction request shall be heard de novo and decided by the city council. A city manager appeal must be filed within 15 days of the special master's decision regarding the lien or fine reduction request. The violator shall have no standing or right to appeal to the city council decisions of the special master concerning such matters. Decisions made pursuant to this subsection (j) are not subject to appeal pursuant to section 2-95. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12; Ord. No. 08-14 , § I, 11-5-14)  
Sec. 2-95. - Appeal. 
An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final administrative order of the special master to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the special master. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the order to be appealed. A failure to file a timely appeal results in a waiver of defenses that might have been raised therein. A dispute with the special master's findings, fine determination and other legal defenses to the special master's actions cannot be raised for the first time in defense of a foreclosure suit or collection action brought by the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 2-96. - Pending cases. 
The special master shall have jurisdiction to hear and render orders on any code enforcement matter that was pending before the code enforcement board prior to the repeal of the provisions of the code governing the code enforcement board. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Secs. 2-97—2-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CODE ENFORCEMENT CITATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-12, § I, adopted Aug. 1, 2012 repealed former Div. 3, §§ 2-131—2-141 in its entirety and renumbered, substantially amended and restated the provisions of former Div. 4 as Div. 3. Former Div. 3 pertained to enforcement procedures and derived from Ord. No. 94-36, §§ 5—11, 7-6-94; Ord. No. 95-09, §§ 5—11, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 10-03, § 2, 7-2-03. Amended, renumbered and restated sections of former Div. 4 pertained to code enforcement citations and derived from Ord. No. 16-99, § 1, 3-1-00. 
 
Sec. 2-146. - Intent. 
The city hereby creates a supplemental and additional method of enforcing its codes and ordinances by the issuance of citations for violation of city codes and ordinances. The provisions of this article may be used for the enforcement of any city code or ordinance, including amendments and revisions thereof, or for the enforcement of all city codes and ordinances, including amendments and revisions thereof, unless prohibited by law. Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other means.  
Sec. 2-147. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division the following definitions shall apply: 
City means the City of DeBary. 
Code enforcement officer means any employee or agent of the City of Debary who has been designated by the city manager to enforce the city's codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 2-148. - Authority of code enforcement officers. 
All code enforcement officers are authorized to issue a citation to a person when, based upon personal observation or personal investigation, the code enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a city code or ordinance, and provides that the county court will hear the charge. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 2-149. - Citation procedure. 
Prior to issuing a citation, a code enforcement officer shall provide notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of a code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than 30 days. If, upon personal investigation, a code enforcement officer finds that a person has not corrected the violation within the time period, a code enforcement officer may issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation. A code enforcement officer does not have to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation if the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 2-150. - Delivery of warning notices and citations. 
(a)	A copy of warning notices and citations shall be provided to the alleged violator by hand delivery by the code enforcement officer. In the absence of the alleged violator, the warning notice or citation shall be delivered to the alleged violator by leaving a copy of the warning notice or citation at the alleged violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is 18 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the warning notice or citation, or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)	Issuance of a warning notice or citation to a person doing business may be accomplished by leaving copies at the person's place of business, during regular business hours, with and the owner or manager of the business and by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested to the owner of the property. Property owners shall be determined by latest tax roll provided by the Volusia County Property Appraiser. 
(c)	Whenever an alleged violator has a right or is required to do some act within a prescribed period after a notice of other paper and the notice or paper is served by mail, three days shall be added to the prescribed period. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12) 
_____ 
Sec. 2-151. - Violation of classification and civil penalty. 
(a)	Pursuant to F.S. § 162.21(5), the city is authorized to adopt a schedule of violations and penalties to be assessed by the code enforcement officer. Violations of city codes and ordinances and the applicable civil penalties shall be classified as follows: 
CIVIL PENALTY 
Violation Classification 	1st Offense 	2nd Offense 	3rd and Subsequent Offense 
Class I 	$50.00 	$100.00 	court hearing mandatory 
Class II 	100.00 	200.00 	court hearing mandatory 
Class III 	200.00 	300.00 	court hearing mandatory 
Class IV 	300.00 	400.00 	court hearing mandatory 
 
City codes and ordinances subsequently enacted or amended may set forth the applicable civil penalty for violations by designating the appropriate violation classification as provided in this subsection. 
(a)	All violations of codes and ordinances not listed herein shall be penalized as class I violations. 
(b)	Each violation of a city code or ordinance in the schedule of violations in this section is a separate civil infraction. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate civil infraction. 
(c)	Court costs in the amount of $10.00 per citation as well as other applicable court fees and surcharges collected shall be retained by the clerk of the circuit court. Civil penalties received by the county court for violator of the city codes or ordinances shall be paid into the general fund of the city. Court costs and other surcharges imposed pursuant to law shall be in addition to the penalties or fines imposed against the violator. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 2-152. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-153. - Schedule of violations and penalties. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to establish and implement a schedule of violations and penalties. Revisions, alternation, deletions and amendments to the schedule of violations and penalties may hereafter be approved via resolution by the city council. 
Chapter/Section 	Code Requirement 	Class 
Section 811 	Parking and storage of vehicles, shelters or watercraft 	Class I 
Section 30-36 	Property maintenance, weeds, accumulation of waste, rubble, debris, storage of junk, trash debris or litter. 	Class I 
Section 30-104 	Abandoned vehicles prohibited 	Class I 
Section 14 	Buildings and building regulations 	Class I 
Ordinance 11-99, sections 5 and 6 and LDC, Sec. 5-34 and Sec. 5-35 	Violations of the City of DeBary Sign Regulations; Prohibited and temporary signs 	Class I 
Code of Ordinances, section 30-13 through 30-170 	Noise: Violation of City of DeBary Noise Ordinance 	Class I 
LDC, per zoning and any applicable overlay districts 	Exterior storage or display in commercial/industrial zoning districts not permitted per City Code 	Class II 
Code of Ordinances, section 30-111 	Major repairs of boats and motor vehicles in a residential area 	Class II 
LDC, section 3-127 	Violations of section 3-127, LDC, Home Occupations 	Class II 
Code of Ordinance section 10-46 	Animals: Barking dogs, birds or other animals creating a nuisance. 	Class II 
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Article I 	Conducting a business, profession or occupation without a valid Business Tax Receipt 	Class II 
LDC, per zoning designation of property 	Operating an illegal designated use 	Class III 
LDC, zoning regulations 	Residential Zoning: Using a single-family residence as a rooming house or multi-family dwelling. 	Class III 
LDC, section. 3-130 	Occupancy or storage of a mobile home or motor home, other than permitted by code. 	Class III 
Code or Ordinances, Chapter 30, Article 7 	Illegal discharges into a drainage system 	Class IV 
F.S. ch. 515 and Code of Ordinances section 14-73 	Swimming pool not completely enclosed by a fence or screen enclosure. 	Class IV 
Code of Ordinance, section 14-87 	Excavation and/or fill operation without valid permit or approval. 	Class IV 
Code of Ordinance, section 30-224 	Hazardous/unsanitary/unsafe conditions of buildings or structures; as well as electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems 	Class IV 
 
_____ 
Sec. 2-154. - Procedures to pay or contest citations. 
(a)	Any person cited for a violation under subsection 2-151(a) shall be deemed to be charged with a civil infraction and cited to appear in county court. 
(b)	Any person cited for a violation under this part may, within 30 days of issuance of the citation: 
(1)	Pay the civil penalty set forth in the schedule of violations at the clerk of the circuit court's office; or 
(2)	Contest the validity of the citation in county court through appearance at the clerk of the circuit court's office to receive a court date. 
(c)	If the person cited pays the applicable civil penalty set forth herein, the person shall be deemed to have admitted the civil infraction and waived the right to a hearing. 
(d)	If the person cited appears at the clerk of the circuit court's office to receive a court date as provided for herein and thereafter fails to appear at such hearing, the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to contest the citation, and a civil judgement shall be entered against the person in an amount up to the maximum civil penalty; provided, however, that the court shall have the discretion to continue or reschedule any hearing when it determines that doing so will further the interest of justice. In such an event, the clerk of the court shall notify the code enforcement officer and the person cited of the date and time of the hearing. In addition, an order to show cause may be issued by the court requiring the person cited to appear in court to explain the person's failure to appear at the hearing. Failure to respond to the order to show cause may result in issuance of an arrest warrant. 
(e)	The willful refusal to sign or accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer or refusal to provide the information required in the citation shall be a violation of this part and such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, pursuant to F.S. § 162.21(6) and amendments thereto. If the person cited refused to sign the citation, the code enforcement officer shall write the words "refused" or "refused to sign" in the space provided for the person's signature and shall then leave a copy of the citation with the person cited, if possible. Following such refusal to sign, the code enforcement officer may contact the Volusia County Sheriffs Office to report such refusal as a violation of F.S. § 162.21(6) and amendments thereto. 
(f)	If the person cited fails to pay the civil penalty or fails to request a court hearing within 30 days of the issuance of the citation, the person shall have waived any right to contest the citation and a judgement shall be entered against the person cited in the amount of the maximum civil penalty plus applicable costs and fees provided for in subsection 2-152(d) herein. In addition an order of show cause may be issued by the court requiring the person cited to appear in court to explain the person's failure to pay or request a court hearing. Failure to respond to the order to show cause may result in issuance of an arrest warrant. 
(g)	If the person cited has been previously cited for the violation at least two times within a 12-month period, upon issuance of a third or subsequent citation, the person shall not have the option of paying the civil penalty but instead shall appear before a county court within 30 days to answer the charge. 
(h)	The court, after a hearing on the citation, shall make a determination whether or not a violation of the code or ordinance cited has been committed. If a violation is found to have occurred, the court may order the violation to correct the violation and may impose a civil penalty up to the maximum civil penalty plus all applicable cost of prosecution including without limitation all costs and fees provided for in subsection 2-152(d); in no event, however, shall such civil penalty imposed by the court be less than the civil penalty set forth herein. 
(i)	Should the person cited willfully fail to comply with a court order to abate or correct the violation, the court, after due notice and hearing on the matter, may hold the violator in civil contempt and may enter an order to that effect. 
(j)	In the event that a civil judgement is entered against the person cited as provided herein, the county may record a certified copy of said judgement in the Official Records of Volusia County and the same shall thereafter constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. 
(k)	In the event that an order is entered finding that a violation of the ordinance cited has been committed, the county may record a certified copy of said order in the Official Records of Volusia County and the same shall thereafter constitute notice to be binding upon the violator and any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest or assigns if the violation concerns real property. 
(l)	At any hearing pursuant to this division, the commission of a violation of a code or ordinance must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence. The Florida Rules of Civil Procedure and the Florida Evidence Code shall be applicable to any such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 16-99, § 1, 3-1-00; Ord. No. 06-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 2-155. - Citation contents. 
The citation issued by the code enforcement officer shall be in a form prescribed by the city and shall contain: 
(1)	The date and time of issuance; 
(2)	The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued; 
(3)	The date and time the civil infraction was committed; 
(4)	The facts constituting reasonable cause; 
(5)	The number or section of the code or ordinance violated; 
(6)	The name and authority of the code enforcement officer; 
(7)	The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation; 
(8)	The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation; 
(9)	The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation; and 
(10)	A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgement may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 16-99, § 1, 3-1-00)  
Sec. 2-156. - Disposition of citations and civil penalties. 
(a)	After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the code enforcement officer shall: 
(1)	Deposit the original citation and one copy of the citation with the clerk of the circuit court; 
(2)	Provide the alleged violator with one copy; 
(3)	Deposit one copy with the city clerk; and 
(4)	Retain one copy in the code enforcement officer's department file. 
(b)	All civil penalties received by the county court from violators of city codes or ordinance shall be paid into the general fund of the city in the penalty and fine account. All court costs shall be retained by the clerk of the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 16-99, § 1, 3-1-00)  
Sec. 2-157. - Provisions supplemental. 
It is the legislative intent of this division to provide an additional and supplemental means of obtaining compliance with city codes and ordinances. Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 16-99, § 1, 3-1-00)  
Secs. 2-158—2-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Independent financial audit, § 4.10; financial procedures, art. XI. 
State Law reference— Finance and taxation powers, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; budgets and millage adoption, F.S. ch. 200; financial matters, F.S. ch. 218. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-161—2-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Consultants' Competitive Negotiation Act, F.S. § 287.055. 
 
Sec. 2-176. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bid, proposal and quotation mean any offer specifically given to the city in response to a solicitation. 
Bidder means any business submitting an offer to the city. 
Business means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint venture, joint stock company or any other legal entity. 
City manager means the chief administrative officer of the city. 
Contract means all types of city agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the purchase of materials, supplies and equipment, and professional and contractual services. 
Contract management means the negotiations to arrive at an agreement, preparation of contract documents and the servicing of that agreement during its performance as applicable to the services of architects, engineers, land surveyors, construction contractors, construction managers, design-build contractors, maintenance contractors, other technically related service providers and the acquisition of right-of-way or other real property directly related to capital improvement projects. 
Contractor means any business having a contract with the city. 
Contractual services means and includes all utilities (gas, water, electric, etc.), construction and services which include labor, time or effort. 
Invitation to bid means and includes all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, used for soliciting sealed bids. 
Professional services means services as provided by architects, engineers, surveyors and other professionals as designated by the purchasing director, excluding attorneys and expert witnesses. 
Purchasing means buying, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring any supplies, materials and equipment and professional or contractual services, or construction. It also includes all functions that pertain to obtaining any supplies, materials and equipment, and professional or contractual services, or construction, including description of requirements, in conjunction with the using agency, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration, but not including contract management. 
Purchasing director and director mean the purchasing director of the city. Unless and until the city council creates the position of purchasing director, the city manager shall have all of the powers and duties of purchasing director under this article. The city manager may delegate such powers and duties to the county purchasing department during the term of any interlocal agreement providing for such services from the county to the city. 
Responsible means having the capability in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements and the tenacity, perseverance, experience, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment and credit which will ensure good-faith performance. 
Responsive means conforming in all material respects to the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation to bid. 
Supplies means and includes all supplies, materials and equipment. 
Using agency means any department, division, agency, commission, board, committee, authority or other unit in the city government procuring supplies, materials or equipment or contractual, professional or construction services as provided for in this division. 
Vendor means any business that will be or has been awarded a contract by the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, §§ I, II, 9-21-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-177. - Penalty. 
Violations of this division are punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-178. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to prescribe the manner in which the city shall control the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment, and professional and contractual services of the city and to maintain a high ethical standard for all officers and employees of the city in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-179. - Establishment of purchasing division. 
There may be established a purchasing division within the department of finance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-180. - Appointment and functions of purchasing director. 
(a)	Position created. There may be created the position of purchasing director, who shall be the principal contracting officer of the city. The purchasing director shall direct the purchasing division, and shall perform all duties required by law and such other duties as assigned by the city manager, and shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this division. 
(b)	Appointment. The purchasing director shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-181. - Scope of purchasing authority of purchasing director. 
(a)	The purchasing director shall have the power, and it shall be his duty, to perform the duties specified in this division in connection with the purchase of or contracting for all supplies and professional and contractual services needed by any using agency which derives its support wholly or in part from the city in accordance with procedures prescribed by this division and such rules and regulations as may be adopted for the internal management and operation of the purchasing division. 
(b)	The authority of the purchasing director to negotiate all purchases and contracts for all using agencies shall not be abridged, except as required by law, or as otherwise designated by the city council or city manager. 
(c)	Certain contractual and professional services for which there is not a purchasing function are excluded from the provisions of this division. This would include agencies funded in part by the city but over which the city does not have jurisdictional control. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-182. - Specific powers and duties of purchasing director; delegation of authority. 
(a)	In addition to any other powers and duties conferred by this division, the purchasing director shall: 
(1)	Procure for the city the best value in supplies and contractual and professional services. 
(2)	Encourage competition, discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and as open competition as possible on all purchases and sales. 
(3)	Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products, and secure for the city the benefits of research conducted in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, technical societies, trade associations, and private businesses and organizations. 
(4)	Prescribe and maintain a standard purchasing manual for all using agencies. 
(5)	Prescribe and maintain such forms necessary to the performance of this division. 
(6)	Prepare and adopt standard purchasing nomenclature for using agencies and suppliers. 
(7)	Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk to take full advantage of discounts. 
(8)	Obtain for the city all tax exemptions to which it is entitled. 
(9)	Have the authority to disqualify a bidder or vendor from receiving any business from the city for a stated period of time for noncompliance with this division or any other applicable laws, rules or regulations. 
(b)	The purchasing director may delegate authority to designees or to any department, agency or official and shall be responsible for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-183. - Additional regulations and procedures. 
The purchasing director is hereby authorized and directed to adopt such written regulations and procedures as may be necessary for the implementation of this division. Such regulations and procedures shall become effective when approved in writing by the city manager. Copies of the regulations shall be on file in the office of the purchasing director and shall be made available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-184. - Disadvantaged, small and women-owned business enterprises. 
(a)	Equal opportunity. The city is firmly committed to the principles of equal opportunity and affirmative action and, in keeping with these principles, hereby establishes goals and procedures by which disadvantaged, small and women-owned business enterprises shall be assured equal access to providing supplies and professional and contractual services required by the city. 
(b)	Definition. For purposes of this section, disadvantaged and women business enterprises are defined as a business firm which is at least 51 percent owned by disadvantaged or women group members; or, in the case of a publicly owned business, at least 51 percent of the stock of which is owned by disadvantaged or women group members. The disadvantaged or women business enterprise ownership must exercise actual day-to-day management and control of the business. The definition of a small business will depend on the industry, the commodity and the service involved. The city council may determine by resolution, amended periodically, groups that are socially and economically disadvantaged. 
(c)	Percentage goal for award of contracts. The city council shall set a goal of ten percent which shall be a percentage of the aggregate of the city's annual contracts and subcontracts for supplies and professional and contractual services, to be awarded to disadvantaged, small and/or women business enterprises. The city council may, from time to time, set and adjust the goals. 
(d)	Implementation of policy. The city council may adopt by resolution policies and procedures for implementing the intent of this section. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-185. - Small purchase procedures. 
(a)	Generally. All purchases of supplies and professional and contractual services with a total estimated value of $8,000.00 or less may be made without observing the procedures prescribed by this division for formal bidding. 
(b)	Minimum number of bids. All small purchases with a total estimated value of $3,000.00 or less may be awarded on the basis of a single verbal quote. All small purchases with a total estimated value of more than $3,000.00 shall, whenever possible, be based on at least three competitive quotes and shall be awarded to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation in accordance with the standards set forth in this division. 
(c)	Field purchase orders. Field purchase orders for certain purchases, with the approval of the purchasing director, may be used by the departments for immediately needed supplies and contractual services not to exceed the maximum value of $500.00. 
(d)	Invitation for quotes. The purchasing director shall solicit either verbal or written quotes for small purchases and shall use all reasonably available bidders' lists. All quotes in excess of $3,000.00 shall, whenever possible, be confirmed in writing. 
(e)	Public record of quotes. The purchasing director shall maintain a record of all quotes received, and such records shall be open to public inspection after award is made. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-186. - Formal bidding procedures. 
(a)	Bidding required for certain purchases. Except as otherwise provided in this division, when the estimated cost shall exceed $8,000.00 all supplies and professional and contractual services shall be purchased by formal, written contract (purchase order) from the lowest responsible and responsive bidder after due public notice inviting sealed written proposals; provided, however, the city council shall have the authority to waive execution of the formal bidding process in cases where it deems it advisable to do so. 
(b)	Notice inviting bids. 
(1)	Publication. Notice inviting bids shall be published once in at least one official newspaper having general circulation in the city and at least five working days preceding the day set for the receipt of bids. 
(2)	Scope. The newspaper notice required in this subsection shall include a general description of the supplies or professional or contractual services to be purchased, shall state where bid forms and specifications may be secured, and shall state the time and place for opening bids. 
(c)	Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the purchasing director, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to a return of their deposit where the purchasing director has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any deposit required by the purchasing director upon failure on his part to enter into a contract within ten days after the award. 
(d)	Sealed bids. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the purchasing division and shall be identified on the outside of the envelope as a sealed bid. 
(e)	Opening of bids. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the invitation to bid and shall be witnessed. 
(f)	Tabulation of bids. A tabulation of all bids received shall be made and shall be available for public inspection after award is made. 
(g)	Correction of bids. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after award and cancellation of awards or contracts based upon such bid mistakes shall be permitted in accordance with regulations promulgated by the purchasing director. After bid opening no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. Except as otherwise provided by regulation, all decisions to permit correction or withdrawal of bids or to cancel awards or contracts based upon bid mistakes shall be supported by a written determination by the purchasing director. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-187. - Award of contracts. 
(a)	Purchases of $5,000.00 or less. All contracts, when the sum is $5,000.00 or less, shall be awarded by the purchasing director. 
(b)	Purchases in excess of $5,000.00. All contracts in excess of $5,000.00 shall be awarded by the city council. All contracts over $8,000.00 shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder, by the city council or the council may delegate to the city manager the authority to award the contract to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder except as provided in subsections (c), (d) and (g) of this section or when otherwise inconsistent with general law. 
(c)	Blanket/price agreement contracts. All blanket/price agreement contracts shall be awarded by the purchasing director. 
(d)	Purchase of capital equipment. The city manager shall have the authority to award all contracts for capital equipment from the capital equipment list approved by the city council provided that: 
(1)	The final cost per item does not exceed the approved budget cost by more than ten percent; and 
(2)	The final cost per item does not exceed the approved budget cost by more than $5,000.00. 
If the final cost per item exceeds the ten percent or $5,000.00 cap, then the award shall be made in accordance with subsection (a) or (b) of this section. 
(e)	Local bidder preference. The city shall give local bidders preference on all the bids. 
(f)	Determination of bids . In determining the lowest responsible and responsive bidder, in addition to price, the city shall have the discretionary power to render decisions on and accept or reject bids or proposals on the basis of: 
(1)	The ability, capacity, skill and sufficiency of resources of the bidder to perform the contract and provide the requested materials or service. 
(2)	The bidder's ability to perform the contract within the time specified. 
(3)	The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder. 
(4)	The quality of performance and conduct of the bidder on previous contracts with the city or any other reference or party that the bidder has performed work or services. 
(5)	The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract. 
(6)	The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or professional or contractual services to the particular use required. 
(7)	The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service on the matter procured and the financial impact upon the city to receive future maintenance and services. 
(8)	The bidder's pecuniary ability and financial stability. 
(9)	The ability to meet the city's stated requirements for bonding and insurance in order to fully protect the interests of the city. 
(10)	Whether the bidder is in arrears to the city on a debt, is a defaulter on any bond or to any surety, and whether the bidder's taxes or assessments are delinquent. 
(11)	The proximity of bidder's labor force, equipment and business operation in relation to the city. 
(12)	Proportional amount of the work or services bidder intends to perform with its own organization as compared with the portion it intends to subcontract and the qualifications of subcontractors whom the bidder proposes to use. 
(13)	Whether the bidder submitted a bid or proposal that conforms to the requirements stated in the request for bids or proposal issued by the city. 
The city may conduct detailed examinations of bidders, including of bidders' personnel, place of business and facilities, compliance with federal, state, and local laws and all relevant licensing and permitting requirements, and other matters of responsibility germane to the procurement process. The city may, as it deems appropriate, review background items of bidders to ascertain that no civil or criminal cloud exists over the bidders and their personnel. The failure of a bidder to supply information in connection with an inquiry in a timely manner, at the city's discretion, may be grounds for determination of nonresponsibility with respect to the bidder. Until the final award and execution of a contract, the city reserves the right to reject any and all bids and proposals and to waive technical errors and irregularities as may be deemed best for the interests of the city. 
(g)	Consultants' Competitive Negotiation Act . When applicable, the city will procure professional services in accordance with F.S. § 287.055, the "Consultants' Competitive Negotiation Act." 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 2-188. - Change orders. 
(a)	The purchasing director shall have the authority to approve contract modifications, change orders and contract price adjustments totaling ten percent or less of the original contract, not to exceed $5,000.00 cumulatively. If the change order exceeds ten percent of the original contract, or if the cumulative total of all change orders shall exceed $5,000.00, then the approval shall be in accordance with section 2-187. 
(b)	The purchasing director shall, when any contract whose final cost is less than the award or less than the budgeted amount, have the authority to approve the contract modification, change order or price adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-189. - Rejecting bids; negotiation. 
(a)	Rejecting bids. The purchasing director shall have the authority to reject any and all bids. 
(b)	Negotiation. If no bid is received, the city council may authorize the purchasing director to purchase by negotiation, and the award shall be made in accordance with section 2-187. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-190. - Purchases—Exigent circumstances. 
If the city manager determines that an exigency exists, which is a pressing or urgent situation and in the judgment of the city manager a delay would be detrimental to the interests of the city, the city manager shall be authorized to direct the purchase of any supplies or professional or contractual services needed to protect the health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents and shall file with the city council a statement certifying the conditions and circumstances requiring such action for purchases over $5,000.00 at the next regular city council meeting. This provision shall apply to circumstances in which an exigency exists that, while potentially detrimental and injurious to the city, requires immediate action but does not otherwise warrant a declaration of emergency as provided for in article III, chapter 26 of this Code. Purchases made during an active declaration of emergency shall be made in accordance with article III, chapter 26 of this Code to the extent not otherwise prohibited by general law. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94; Ord. No. 08-10, § I, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 2-191. - Exceptions. 
(a)	Excepted supplies and services. The requirements for formal bidding and small purchase procedures shall be waived for the purchase of: 
(1)	Books, periodicals, software, printed materials, artwork, photographs, film, film strips, videotapes, disc or tape recordings or similar material where such materials are purchased directly from the producer or publisher, the owner of the copyright, an exclusive agent with the state, a governmental agency or a recognized educational institute; 
(2)	Insurance coverage or claims expenditures as provided in the insurance fund established by resolution of the city council, excepting, however, damage to city-owned property; 
(3)	Commodities from established state, PRIDE, government pricing or federal general services administration contracts; 
(4)	The purchase, lease or rental of real property; 
(5)	Certain professional services, design build, guaranteed maximum payment construction, and fast track construction, which shall be conducted in accordance with accepted industry practices, or as required by state law; 
(6)	Supplies and professional and contractual services from a single source upon certification by the purchasing director stating the conditions and circumstances requiring the purchase; this certification shall set forth the purpose, need and justification that the item or service is the only one that will produce the desired results; 
(7)	Public utility services; and 
(8)	Supplies or equipment where compatibility of equipment, accessories or replacement parts permits only one reasonable source of supply. 
(b)	Cooperative purchasing. The purchasing director shall have the authority to purchase from and joining with other units of governments in cooperative purchasing ventures when the best interest of the city would be served thereby, and same is in accordance with the city and state laws. 
(c)	Public auctions. The purchasing director shall have the authority to purchase supplies and capital equipment at public auction. 
(d)	Standardization. Where standardization is determined to be reasonable and desirable by the purchasing director, the purchase of supplies and certain contractual services may be by negotiation. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-192. - Unauthorized purchases. 
(a)	Except as provided in this division, it shall be unlawful for any city officer or employee to order the purchase of any materials, supplies, equipment or professional or contractual services or to make any contract within the purview of this division other than through the purchasing director. Any purchase order or contract made contrary to the provisions in this division shall not be approved, and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to any emergency purchase which is subsequently approved by the city manager upon justification by the using agency. 
(c)	No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-193. - Performance and payment bonds. 
Pursuant to state law, a vendor shall provide a bond to guarantee the full and faithful performance of his contract obligations and the payment of labor and materials expended pursuant to the contract whenever and in such amounts as is deemed necessary by the purchasing director. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-194. - Waiver of irregularities. 
The purchasing director shall have the authority to waive any and all irregularities in all purchases of $5,000.00 or less. The city council shall have the authority to waive any and all irregularities in all purchases in excess of $5,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-195. - Inventory management. 
The purchasing director shall have general supervision of all storeroom inventories. This responsibility shall not, however, relieve any agency of accountability for tangible personal property and other supplies under its control. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-196. - Surplus property. 
(a)	Reports. All using agencies shall submit to the purchasing director, at such times and in such forms as he shall prescribe, reports of property which is no longer used or which has become obsolete, worn out or scrap. 
(b)	Transfer. The purchasing director shall have the authority to transfer surplus property to other using agencies. 
(c)	Disposal. The purchasing director shall have the authority to dispose of all surplus property in any appropriate legal manner. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-197. - Inspection and testing. 
The purchasing director shall inspect, supervise the inspection of or cause to be inspected all deliveries of supplies or contractual services to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. 
(1)	Inspection by using agency. The purchasing director shall have the authority to authorize using agencies, having the staff and facilities for adequate inspection, to inspect all deliveries made to such using agencies under rules and regulations which the purchasing director shall prescribe. 
(2)	Tests. The purchasing director shall have the authority to require tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the purchasing director shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the city or any outside laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Sec. 2-198. - Conflict of interest. 
No employee of the city shall contract with or for any business with the city whereby he may derive income or benefits other than those provided as remunerations from the city for his employment. 
(Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-21-94)  
Secs. 2-199—2-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FEES AND FUNDS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Schedule of fees, app. A. 
 
Sec. 2-216. - Adoption of an additional assessment as court cost. 
(a)	The city council hereby assesses as authorized in F.S. § 943.25(13), an additional $2.00 as court costs, against every person convicted for violation of a state penal or criminal statute or violation of a municipal ordinance, where the offense occurred within the city limits. 
(b)	The city council hereby assesses as authorized in F.S. § 943.25(13), $2.00 on every bond estreature or forfeited bail bond related to such violation of state penal or criminal statute or violation of a municipal ordinance. 
(c)	No such assessment or deduction, as outlined above in subsections (a) and (b), shall be made against any person convicted for violation of any state statute or municipal ordinance relating to the parking of vehicles. 
(d)	All funds generated by this section shall be collected by the appropriate court and shall be remitted to the city for expenditure toward criminal justice education degree programs and training courses, including basic recruit training, pursuant to F.S. § 943.25(13). 
(Ord. No. 94-40, §§ 1—4, 10-19-94) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy additional court costs, F.S. § 943.25(13).  
Secs. 2-217—2-224. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - IMPACT FEES 
 
Sec. 2-225. - Short title, authority, applicability, and adoption of city impact fee study. 
(a)	Short title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "the City of DeBary Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(b)	Authorization. The DeBary City Council has the authority to adopt this article pursuant to article VIII of the Florida Constitution and F.S. ch. 125 and F.S. §§ 163.31801, 163.3201, 163.3202 and 380.06(16). 
(c)	Applicability. This article shall apply to the incorporated area of the city to the extent authorized by the Florida Constitution, Article VIII, Section 1(g) and as specifically provided herein. 
(d)	Incorporation of City of DeBary Impact Fee Study. The DeBary City Council has reviewed and accepted, and incorporates into this article by reference, the report prepared by Tindale-Oliver and Associates, Inc. titled The City of DeBary Impact Fee Study and dated October 9, 2006, which establishes the need for and appropriate amount of impact fees for capital government buildings and parks and recreation facilities necessary to serve new development. 
The City of DeBary Impact Fee Study is hereby adopted, as well as any updates or supplements thereto, including the assumptions, standards, and findings in the report and its amendments. 
(Ord. No. 26-06, § 1, 11-1-06)  
Sec. 2-226. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)	Implementation of comprehensive plan. This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the city comprehensive plan pursuant to F.S. § 163.3161 et seq., the Florida Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act. 
(b)	Contribution of proportionate share. This objective is accomplished by requiring all new impact-generating land development to contribute its proportionate share of the funds, land, or public facilities necessary to accommodate any impacts on city facilities having a rational nexus to the proposed land development for which the need is reasonably attributable to the proposed development. 
(c)	Allocation of fair share cost. This article is intended to be consistent with the principles for allocating a fair share of the cost of new city facilities to new users as established by the Florida Statutes, the Florida Supreme Court, and the District Courts of Appeal of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 26-06, § 2, 11-1-06)  
Sec. 2-227. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)	Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Building permit means that development permit issued by the County of Volusia before any building or construction activity can be initiated on a parcel of land. 
Capital park facilities mean capital improvements including land, land improvements, buildings, and equipment having a useful life of at least five years and a cost of at least $5,000.00 necessary for the provision of park and recreation services to new impact-generating development. 
Capital public building facilities mean capital improvements, including land, land improvements, equipment, buildings or other capacity-adding capital improvements with a cost of at least $50,000.00, which are necessary for the provision of public services to new impact-generating land development. 
Certificate of occupancy means that development permit issued by the County of Volusia after completion of the final inspection for building or construction activity. 
Commencement of impact-generating land development occurs upon any of the following events: 
(1)	The approval of a development of regional impact. 
(2)	The issuance of any permit to authorize building or construction of any kind on the property. 
(3)	The issuance of any certificate of occupancy. 
City facilities means the capital facilities for which impact fees are imposed pursuant to this article. 
DeBary City Council means the City Council of the City of DeBary, Florida. 
Existing impact-generating land development means the most intense use of land within the 12 months prior to the time of commencement of impact-generating land development. 
Fee payer means a person commencing impact-generating land development who is obligated to pay an impact fee in accordance with the terms of this article. 
Impact-generating land development is land development designed or intended to permit a use of the land which will contain more dwelling units or floor space than the then existing use of the land or the making of any material change in the use of any structure or land in a manner that increases the generation of vehicular traffic or the demand on city facilities. The type of proposed impact-generating land development shall be based on the proposed use of the land. 
Land shall have the same meaning as set forth in F.S. § 380.031(7). 
Person means an individual, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other entity. 
(b)	Rules of construction. In the construction of this article, the rules set out in this section shall be observed unless such construction is inconsistent with the manifest intent of the DeBary City Council. The rules of construction set out here shall not be applied to any section of this article which contains any express provisions excluding such construction, or where the subject matter or content of such section would be inconsistent with this section. 
(1)	Generally. All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this article shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the DeBary City Council may be fully carried out. Terms used in this article, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall have the meanings prescribed by the statutes of this state for the same terms. 
(2)	Text. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any figure, the text shall control. 
(3)	Statutory references. All references to state law in this article refers to the Florida Statutes, as amended. 
(4)	Computation of time. Periods of time defined by a number of days shall mean a number of consecutive calendar days, including all weekend days, holidays, and other business days; however, if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
(5)	Delegation of authority. City manager will delegate and authorize professional-level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
(6)	Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine and neuter. 
(7)	Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
(8)	Technical and nontechnical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
(9)	Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. The use of the plural number shall be deemed to include any single person or thing. 
(10)	Mandatory and discretionary terms. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
(11)	Tense. Words used in one tense (past, present or future) include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(12)	Written or in writing. The terms "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures whether by printing or otherwise. 
(13)	Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless a fiscal year is indicated. 
(Ord. No. 26-06, § 3, 11-1-06)  
Sec. 2-228. - Fee to be imposed. 
(a)	Fee obligation, determination and payment. 
(1)	General. After the effective date of this article, any person or governmental body who shall commence any impact-generating land development, except those exempted pursuant to subsection(a)(2), Exemptions, shall be obligated to pay an impact fee upon the commencement of impact-generating land development, pursuant to the fee schedule attached to this article as exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference. The fee shall be determined and paid to the city manager or a designee prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or any such approval as may be required to initiate an impact-generating land development. If the building permit or other approval is for less than the entire development, the fee shall be computed separately for the amount of development covered by the permit. If the fee is exacted for impact-generating land development that increases impact because of a change in use or the expansion of an existing use, the fee shall be determined by computing the difference in the fee schedule between the new impact-generating land development and the existing impact-generating land development. The obligation to pay the impact fee shall run with the land. 
(2)	Exemptions. The following development shall be exempt from the terms of this article. An exemption shall be claimed by the fee payer at the time of application for a building permit. 
a.	Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no additional dwelling units are created, the use is not changed or no additional impact will be made on the demand for city facilities. 
b.	The construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not increase the demand for city facilities above that produced by the principal building or use of the land. 
c.	The replacement of a residential building or structure of the same size and use, as long as no additional dwelling units are added as such is defined by section 201.00 of the Volusia County Zoning Ordinance as adopted by the City of DeBary Land Development Code. 
d.	The replacement of a nonresidential building or structure with a building of the same size and use is no increase in the demand for city facilities. 
e.	All public educational and ancillary plants constructed by a district school council or a community college district council of trustees, pursuant to F.S. § 1013.371(1)(a). 
f.	Charter school facilities, pursuant to F.S. § 1002.33(18)(d). 
(3)	Payment deferral. For commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential development, the landowner may delay payment by executing a noninterest-bearing promissory note payable to the city for the amount of the fee. The promissory note shall be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the impact-generating land development. If the building permit is for less than the entire development, the fee shall be computed separately for the amount of the development covered by the permit. The obligation to pay the impact fee shall run with the land. 
(4)	Dedication of land or facilities. Any land or facilities agreed to be dedicated to the city as a condition of development approval shall be dedicated by either easement or deed, at the discretion of the DeBary City Council, no later than the time at which impact fees are required to be paid under this section. 
(5)	Fee agreement. At any time prior to issuance of a building permit, the owner of property may enter into a fee agreement with the city providing for payment of the fee pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(6)	Administrative charges. Any administrative charges associated with the collection of fees shall be limited to actual costs. 
(b)	Establishment of fee schedule. 
(1)	Fee schedule. Any person who shall initiate any new impact-generating land development, except those exempted pursuant to subsection (a)(2), Exemptions, or those preparing an Individual Assessment pursuant to section 2-229, Individual Assessment, shall pay an impact fee as determined by the fee schedule attached to this article as exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference. 
(2)	Fee computation. 
a.	If a building permit is requested for mixed uses, then the fee shall be determined according to the above schedule by apportioning the space committed to uses specified on the schedule. 
b.	If the type of impact-generating land development for which a building permit is requested is not specified on the fee schedule, the city manager or designee shall determine the fee on the basis of the fee applicable to the most nearly comparable type of land use on the fee schedule, or if there is not a comparable land use, conduct an individual assessment pursuant to section 2-229, Individual Assessment. 
(3)	Three-year review. At least once every three years, the city manager shall recommend to the DeBary City Council whether any changes should be made to the impact fee schedule to reflect changes in the factors that affect the fee schedule. The purpose of this review is to analyze the effects of inflation on the actual costs of facilities, to assess potential changes in needs, to assess any changes in the characteristics of land uses, and to ensure that the fee charged new impact-generating land development will not exceed its pro rata share for the reasonably anticipated expansion costs of facilities necessitated by its presence. 
(Ord. No. 26-06, § 4, 11-1-06; Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-7-07)  
Sec. 2-229. - Individual assessment. 
(a)	Criteria for use of individual assessment. One, several, or all components of the impact fee shall be computed by the use of an Individual Assessment if: 
(1)	It is determined by the city manager or a designee that the type of impact-generation land development being commenced is not one of those types listed on the fee schedule in subsection 2-228(b)(1), Fee Schedule; or 
(2)	The potential fee payer chooses to have the amount of the fee determined by the use of an individual assessment; or 
(3)	The city manager or a designee concludes the nature, timing or location of the proposed impact-generating land development makes it likely to generate impacts costing substantially more to mitigate than the amount of the fee that would be generated by the use of the fee schedule. 
(b)	Preparation of individual assessment. 
(1)	The potential fee payer shall be responsible for preparation of the individual assessment if the potential fee payer chooses to conduct the analysis. The city manager or a designee shall be responsible for preparation of the individual assessment if the type of impact-generating land development being proposed is interpreted not to be one of those types listed in the fee schedule, or analysis of the proposed impact-generating land development concludes that the nature, timing or location of the proposed impact-generating land development make it likely to generate impacts costing substantially more than the amount of the fee generated by the use of the fee schedule. 
(2)	The person who prepares the individual assessment shall be a qualified professional in the preparation of impact analysis, and shall be approved by the city manager or a designee, on the basis of professional training and experience. If the city manager or a designee is responsible for preparation of the assessment, they may request the fee payer to prepare the individual assessment, and credit the cost of such preparation against the impact fee. 
(c)	Individual assessment standards. The individual assessments shall be in accordance with the following standards. 
(1)	City facilities other than capital road facilities. The individual assessment for any city facilities shall determine if the proposed impact-generating land development is designed or located so that the occupants of the development will use the particular city facility more or less than that projected in the fee schedule for the same city facility. The city manager or a designee will approve the methodology in writing prior to the applicant undertaking the individual assessment study. 
(d)	Individual assessment procedure. 
(1)	Submission of application. An individual assessment shall be undertaken through the submission of an application of assessment of fiscal impact for the facility component for which an assessment is requested. An application may be considered if the DeBary City Council concludes that the application submitted for any proposed impact-generating land development is interpreted as not being one of those types listed on the fee schedule, and for any proposed impact-generating land development for which it concludes the nature, timing, or location of the proposed development make it likely to generate impacts costing substantially more to mitigate than the amount of the fee that would be generated by the use of the fee schedule. 
(2)	Determination of completeness. Within 20 days of receipt of an application, the city manager or a designee shall determine if the application is complete. If it is determined that the application is not complete, a written statement shall be sent to the applicant, by mail, specifying the deficiencies. The application shall be deemed complete if no deficiencies are specified. The city manager or a designee shall take no further action on the application until it is deemed complete. 
(3)	Review of application. 
a.	Within 30 days of the date the application is determined complete, the city manager or a designee shall review the application and render a written decision on whether the fee of the impact-generating land development that is the subject of the assessment should be modified, and if so, what the amount of the impact fee should be. 
b.	If, on the basis of generally-recognized principles of impact analysis and the most recent and localized data, it is determined the data, information and assumptions used by the applicant to calculate the individual assessment for the particular city facility satisfies the requirements of this section and the standards in subsection (c), Individual assessment standards, the fee determined in the individual assessment shall be deemed the fee due and owing for the proposed impact-generating land development. The adjustment shall be set forth in a fee agreement which shall be entered into pursuant to subsection 2-229(a) 5, Fee agreement. If the independent fee calculation study fails to satisfy the requirements of this section, the fee applied shall be that fee established in the fee schedule pursuant to subsection 2-228(b)(1), Fee schedule. 
(e)	Appeal. 
(1)	Application. A potential fee payer affected by the decision on an individual assessment may appeal the decision to the DeBary City Council, by filing with the city manager or a designee within 30 days of the date of the written decision, a written notice stating and specifying briefly the grounds of the appeal. The city manager or a designee shall place the appeal on the DeBary City Council agenda for the next regularly-scheduled meeting. 
(2)	DeBary City Council's decision. The DeBary City Council, after a hearing, shall have the power to affirm or reverse the decision. In making its decision, the DeBary City Council shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law, and apply the standards in subsection (c), Individual assessment standards. If the DeBary City Council reverses the administrative decision, it shall direct the city manager or a designee to recalculate the fee in accordance with its findings. In no case shall the DeBary City Council have the authority to negotiate the amount of the fee or waive the fee. The decision of the DeBary City Council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 26-06, § 5, 11-1-06)  
Sec. 2-230. - Credits. 
(a)	General. 
(1)	Application. Any person who shall initiate any impact-generating land development may apply for a credit against any impact fee assessed for city facilities pursuant to this article for any contribution, payment, construction, or dedication of land accepted and received by the city for those capital facilities, including any contribution, payment, construction or dedication made pursuant to a development order issued by the city pursuant to its local development regulations, F.S. § 380.06, or any additional development requirement imposed by the Florida Land and Water Adjudicatory Commission on a development of regional impact. If the city increases the impact fee schedule pursuant to the terms of this article after a DRI development order is issued pursuant to F.S. § 380.06, the DRI developer may petition the city and the city shall modify the affected provisions of the development order to give the DRI developer credit for any contribution of land for a public facility, or construction, expansion or contribution of funds for land acquisition or construction or expansion of a public facility, or portion thereof, required by the development order towards the needs met by the impact fee. 
(2)	Amount of credit for each component. The credit provided for each component shall not exceed the total amount of the impact fees due and payable for the component for which the credit is proposed. 
(3)	Transferability. Credit for contributions, payments, construction or dedications of an impact fee component shall not be transferable to another component. Credit shall be transferable within the same component and within the same development. 
(b)	City facilities. 
(1)	General. For any credit against an impact fee, a proposed contribution, payment, construction or dedication may be credited under the following conditions: 
a.	A credit of 100 percent of the fair market value may be provided for any contribution, payment, construction or dedication for a city facility. 
b.	Any city facility proposed for contribution, construction, payment, or dedication, which is owned by an entity other than the city must be accepted and approved by that entity prior to the approval of a credit under this section. 
(2)	Establishment of fair market value. Credit shall be in an amount equal to fair market value of the land dedicated at the time of dedication, the fair market value of construction at the time of its completion, or the value of the contribution or payment at the time it is made. 
(c)	Credit agreement procedures. 
(1)	Submission of application. The determination of any credit shall be undertaken through the submission of an application for credit agreement, which shall be submitted to the city manager or a designee. 
(2)	Application contents. The application for credit agreement shall include the following information: 
a.	If the proposed application involves credit for the dedication of land: 
1.	A drawing and legal description of the land; 
2.	The appraised fair market value of the land at the date a building permit is proposed to be issued for the impact-generating land development, prepared by a professional real estate appraiser who is a member of the Member Appraisal Institute (MAI) or who is a member of Senior Residential Appraisers (SRA); and if applicable; 
3.	A certified copy of the development order in which the land was agreed to be dedicated. 
b.	If the proposed application involves construction: 
1.	The proposed plan of the specific construction prepared and certified by a duly qualified and licensed Florida engineer or contractor; and 
2.	The projected costs for the suggested improvement, which shall be based on local information for similar improvements, along with the construction timetable for the completion thereof. Such estimated cost shall include the cost of construction or reconstruction, the cost of all labor and materials, the cost of all lands, property, rights, easements and franchises acquired, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction, cost of plans and specifications, surveys of estimates of costs and of revenues, cost of professional services, and all other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of such construction or reconstruction. 
c.	If the proposed application involves a credit for any other contribution or payment: 
1.	A certified copy of the development order in which the contribution or payment was agreed; 
2.	If payment has been made, proof of payment; or 
3.	If payment has not been made, the proposed method of payment. 
(3)	Determination of completeness. Within five days of receipt of the proposed application for credit agreement, the city manager or a designee shall determine if the application is complete. If it is determined that the proposed application is not complete, the city manager or a designee shall send a written statement to the applicant outlining the deficiencies. No further action shall be taken on the proposed application until all deficiencies have been corrected or otherwise settled. 
(4)	Review and action. For applications for credit under all components of this article, the city manager or a designee, shall review the application within 20 days and grant the proposed credit if it meets the standards set forth in subsection (a) [or] (b), as applicable. 
(5)	Provisions in credit agreement. If the application for credit agreement is approved, a credit agreement shall be prepared and signed by the applicant and by the city. It shall specifically outline the contribution, payment, construction or land dedication, the time by which it shall be completed, dedicated, or paid, and any extensions thereof, and the dollar credit the applicant shall receive for the contribution, payment or construction. 
(d)	Appeal. 
(1)	General. An applicant affected by the decision of the city manager or a designee, on an application for credit agreement may appeal the decision to the DeBary City Council, by filing with the city manager or a designee within 30 days of the date of the written decision, a written notice stating and specifying briefly the grounds of the appeal. The city manager or a designee shall place the appeal on the DeBary City Council agenda for the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(2)	DeBary City Council's decision. The DeBary City Council, after a hearing, shall have the power to affirm or reverse the decision on an application for credit agreement. In making its decision, the DeBary City Council shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law, and apply the standards in subsection (a) or (b) whichever is applicable. If the DeBary City Council reverses the decision, it shall direct the city manager or a designee to readjust the credit in accordance with its findings. The decision of the DeBary City Council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 26-06, § 6, 11-1-06)  
Sec. 2-231. - Use of funds. 
(a)	Intent. Fees collected for City Facilities under this Ordinance are expressly and solely designated for the accommodation of impacts reasonably attributable to Impact-Generating Land Development. 
(b)	Establishment of trust fund and trust accounts. 
(1)	General. There is hereby established the city impact fee trust fund for the purpose of ensuring that the fees collected pursuant to this article are designated for the accommodation of impacts reasonably attributable to new impact-generating land development. The trust fund shall be divided into the following trust accounts: 
a.	Park benefit trust fund. 
b.	Public buildings benefit trust fund. 
(c)	Deposit and management of trust fund. 
(1)	City. Upon collection by the city, all impact fees shall be deposited into the appropriate trust account in the city impact fee trust fund. 
(2)	Investment of proceeds. All proceeds shall be invested ininterest-bearing accounts. All income derived from these investments shall be retained in the trust fund until transferred or spent, whichever is appropriate. Record of each trust fund and account shall be available for public inspection. 
(d)	Limitation on expenditure of fees in trust accounts. 
(1)	Generally. Proceeds collected pursuant to this article shall be spent only in accordance with this subsection and only on capacity-adding capital city facilities, the need for which is created by and the provision of which will substantially benefit new impact-generating land development. Impact fee proceeds shall not be appropriated for operation or maintenance costs or to correct existing deficiencies or needs not created by new impact-generating land development. 
(2)	Park component. Proceeds collected from the park component of the fee and all interest accrued on such funds shall be used for park capital facilities and for constructing park capital facilities. The city shall be guided by the standards of the city comprehensive plan. 
(3)	Government building component. Proceeds collected from the government building component of the impact fee and all interest accrued on such funds shall be used for capital public building facilities within the city. 
(e)	Annual recommendation for expenditure of fees. 
(1)	All fees. For all fee components, each year, at the time the annual budget is reviewed, the city manager or a designee shall propose appropriations to be spent from the individual trust accounts to the DeBary City Council. After review of the recommendations, the DeBary City Council shall either approve, modify, or deny the recommended expenditures of the trust account funds. Any amounts not appropriated from the trust accounts together with any interest earnings shall be carried over in the specific trust account to the following fiscal period. 
(Ord. No. 26-06, § 7, 11-1-06)  
Sec. 2-232. - Return of fees. 
(a)	General. Any fees collected shall be returned to the fee payer or a successor in interest if the fees have not been spent within seven years from the date the building permit for the development was issued, along with interest of five percent a year. Provided, however, that the DeBary City Council may by resolution extend for up to three years the date at which fees must be refunded. Such an extension shall be made upon a finding that within such three-year period, specific capital improvements are planned and evidenced by the adoption and incorporation into the city comprehensive plan, that these capital improvements shall be constructed within the next three years, that these improvements are reasonably attributable to the fee payer's impact-generating land development; and that the fees whose time of refund is extended shall be spent for these capital improvements. Fees shall be deemed to be spent on the basis of the first fee collected shall be the first fee spent. 
(b)	Procedure. The refund of fees shall be undertaken through the following process. 
(1)	General. A refund application shall be submitted within one year following the end of the seventh year from the date on which the building permit was issued on the proposed development. If the time of refund has been extended pursuant to subsection (a), General, the refund application shall be submitted within one year following the end of this extension. The refund application shall include the following information: 
a.	A copy of the dated receipt issued for payment of the fee; 
b.	A copy of the certificate of occupancy permit; 
c.	A copy of the receipt issued by the city for payment of the fee; and if applicable; 
d.	Evidence that the applicant is the successor in interest to the fee payer. 
(2)	Determination of completeness. Within 20 days of receipt of the refund application, the city manager or a designee shall determine if it is complete. If the city manager or a designee determines the application is not complete, a written statement specifying the deficiencies shall be sent by mail to the person submitting the application. Unless the deficiencies are corrected, the city manager or a designee shall take no further action on the refund application. 
(3)	Review and decision. When the city manager or a designee determines the refund application is complete, it shall be reviewed within 20 days. 
(4)	Standards. The refund application shall be approved if it is determined the fee payer or the fee payer's successor in interest has paid a fee which the city has not spent within the period of time permitted under this section. The refund shall include the fee paid plus interest of five percent a year. 
(5)	Appeal. Any fee payer or the fee payer's successor in interest may appeal the decision of a refund application by filing a petition with the DeBary City Council within 30 days of the decision. In reviewing the decision, the DeBary City Council shall use the standards established in subsection (b)(4), Standards. 
(Ord. No. 26-06, § 8, 11-1-06)  
Sec. 2-233. - Annual inflationary adjustments. 
On July 1, 2007, and on July 1 of each year thereafter, the amount of any development impact fee may be adjusted by ordinance of the DeBary City Council to reflect inflationary increases in the cost of providing city facilities. The DeBary City Council must base annual adjustments on the most recent data from the County of Volusia Property Appraiser, 20-city annual national average data from the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index, the Consumer Price Index, or the Florida Department of Transportation as applicable. The methodology set forth in the City of DeBary Impact Fee Study shall be used for the annual adjustment and all statutory procedures and notice requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 26-06, § 9, 11-1-06)  
Sec. 2-234. - Liberal construction, severability and penalty. 
(a)	Liberal construction. The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purposes in the interest of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience. 
(b)	Severability. If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed. 
(c)	Violation; remedies. A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in-lieu of any criminal prosecution, the city shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the provisions of this article 
(Ord. No. 26-06, § 10, 11-1-06)  
Secs. 2-235—2-249. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ARCHIVES AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 2-250. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
It is hereby declared that the management, preservation and availability of the city's records, both public and private, are in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of the public of and visitors to the City of DeBary. Therefore, this article is intended to: 
(1)	Effect and accomplish the identification, management, preservation, availability and study of public and private records; 
(2)	Safeguard the city's documentary history, heritage and unique attributes; and 
(3)	Foster civic pride, respect and understanding of the accomplishments of the past. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 1, 3-7-07)  
Sec. 2-251. - Scope of regulations. 
The records and information regulations established herein apply to only public records created and maintained by the city pursuant to F.S. ch. 119 and ch. 257, and rules 1B-24 and 1B-26, Florida Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 2, 3-7-07)  
Sec. 2-252. - Definitions. 
Active records. Frequently referenced records which still have sufficient administrative, fiscal, legal or historical value to warrant their continued storage in an easily accessible area. 
Archives. An organization or program dedicated to the preservation of records deemed to have historical significance. The program activities include appraisal, accessioning, arrangement, description, reference services, and preservation. 
Convenience (reference) copy. A duplicate of a record which is made for the convenience of other parties. 
Custodian. (as defined by rule 1B-24, F.A.C.). "The elected or appointed state, county, district, or municipal officer charged with the responsibility of maintaining the office having public records, or his or her designee." 
Disaster preparedness. The systematic identification of those records which are vital to an agency's purpose and the subsequent development of a plan to protect such records. 
Final disposition. The process of disposing of materials; in records management, final disposition most often refers to destruction or archival storage. 
General records schedule (as defined in rule 1B24, F.A.C.). "Retention requirements issued by the Division (of Library and Information Services) to establish disposition standards for public records common to specific agencies within the State of Florida which state the minimum time such records are to be kept." 
Inactive records. Those records which have lost some of their value or have been superseded by more current records, but which have not met their established retention. These records can be stored off-site until final disposition is warranted. 
Public records (as defined in F.S. ch. 119): "Public records include all documents. Papers, letters, maps, books, tapes, photographs, films, sound recordings, data processing software, or other material, regardless of physical form, characteristics, or means of transmission, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in connection with the official business by an agency." 
Record (master) copy. The official master copy of a particular record. The record copy may be an original or a duplicate. The office of record is generally where the records were originally created and filed. 
Record series. A group of records related, either as to form or content, which is arranged under a single filing system, or kept together as a unit because the records: 
(1)	Consist of the same form; 
(2)	Relate to the same subject; 
(3)	Result from the same activity; or 
(4)	Have certain physical characteristics (maps, blueprints, etc.). 
A record series may contain both forms and correspondence. Some examples are personnel files, vouchers and purchase orders. 
Records center. A facility especially designed and constructed for the low-cost and efficient storage and furnishing of reference service on semiactive records pending their ultimate disposition. 
Records inventory. The systematic categorization of records inside an agency; this is an inventory performed towards the development of retention periods for record series, or identification of record series described in the various general records schedules published by the Division of Library and Information Services. 
Records management. The application of systematic and scientific controls applied to recorded information required in the operation of an agency's business. It is a program instituted to achieve control over records from the time of their creation or receipt, through their organization and maintenance, and finally to their ultimate disposition. 
Records management liaison office (as defined in rule 1B-24, FAC). An individual designated by the agency that serves as a contact person to the Florida Department of State, Division of Library and Information Services and is assigned responsibilities by the custodian. The records management liaison officer (RMLO) shall also be responsible for implementing the records management program of the agency. The records management liaison officer (RMLO) shall create, implement, and have the power to enforce the policies and procedures for a comprehensive records management program as approved by the custodian. 
Records retention schedule (form LS5E105Reff1-01 as defined in rule 1B-24, FAC). "A standard approved by the Division (of Library and Information Services) for the agency's orderly retention, transfer, or disposition of public records taking into consideration their legal, fiscal, historical, and administrative values." 
Retention. The minimum time period necessary to retain records before they have met their administrative, legal, fiscal, or historical values, and are eligible for disposition. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 3, 3-7-07)  
Sec. 2-253. - DeBary Records Management and Archives Program established. 
It shall be the responsibility of the custodian to administer the city records management and archives program. Public records not in current use and identified as having archival value may be transferred to the city archives. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 4, 3-7-07)  
Sec. 2-254. - DeBary Records Management and Archives Program. 
The city may accept, through gift, loan or purchase, private records and manuscripts. Those papers and manuscripts accepted through gift or purchase will become the property of the city. In this regard the custodian, among other things that may be required for the proper and efficient management of the public records of the city, shall: 
(1)	Organize and administer the city records management program; 
(2)	Develop and circulate such policies and procedures as may be necessary and proper to implement and maintain the records management program; 
(3)	Advise and assist city departments in the preparation of records inventory and retention schedules; 
(4)	Approve the disposition of the city's public records in accordance with approved retention schedules; 
(5)	Maintain documentation on the disposition of public records; 
(6)	Serve as the city's records management liaison officer (RMLO) as defined in rule 1B-24, Florida Administrative Code. 
(7)	Organize and administer the city archives program; 
(8)	Identify and ensure the preservation of city archival records, requiring their transfer to the archives if deemed necessary. 
(9)	Promote educational and research use of the city archives by individuals, organizations, and other researchers. 
(10)	Accept from any person any papers, records, photographs, and similar materials, which in the judgment of the department warrant preservation in the city archives. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 5, 3-7-07)  
Sec. 2-255. - Creation of a fee schedule. 
It is hereby established that the city will follow F.S. ch. 119 in charging fees for copying the city's public records based on current statute limitations. The city will set and enforce a document fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 6, 3-7-07)  
Secs. 2-256—2-274. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Economic development advisory committee, § 2-76 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-275. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City manager means the City Manager of the City of DeBary, Florida. 
Designated development regions means community block grant target areas, Florida enterprise zones, as authorized under F.S. ch. 290 or community redevelopment areas, as authorized under F.S. ch. 163, pt. III. These regions have the greatest indicators of poverty, low median household or family incomes, low per capita incomes, high rates of unemployment and greater economic distress within the city. 
Industry clusters means a term used in market research, which includes industries, or businesses with similar labor, supplier, purchaser and other requirement characteristics. 
Jobs means full-time equivalent positions. Jobs shall not include temporary construction jobs involved with the construction of a project, or any jobs which are temporary in nature. 
Project means the relocation of an industry or business from outside of the city, or the expansion of an industry or business presently located within the city. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) code means the classification of industries by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Target industry or business means a selected group of industries, industry clusters or businesses selected and identified in the city overall economic development plan, and its annual update reports as approved by the city council. 
Value added jobs means any jobs which require the management, research, development, engineering, processing, fabrication, production and distribution of manufactured products, goods, parts, or components distribution of manufactured products, goods, parts, or components where raw materials, parts, components have been enhanced through a research, development, manufacturing, or production process whereby the value of the end products is greater than raw materials, parts and components required in the production process. The term "value added jobs" in a nonmanufacturing industry or activity includes the distribution and provision of services in which creation or development of intellectual property, products, or services is a principal job function. 
(Ord. No. 13-98, § 1, 6-3-98)  
Sec. 2-276. - Creation of the economic opportunity fund. 
(a)	The city has previously created an economic opportunity fund (EOF) for the purpose of advancing the development of value added jobs. Said fund is hereby ratified and continued in existence pursuant to the authority of this article. 
(b)	The city hereby creates a beautification matching grant program which application procedures and guidelines are attached to and herein incorporated as Exhibit "A". 
(Ord. No. 13-98, § 2, 6-3-98; Ord. No. 24-98, § 1, 1-6-99)  
Sec. 2-277. - Fund administration. 
(a)	General program management. The city manager shall manage the program established by this article, subject to overall policy direction, general oversight and final approval of all grant awards by the city council. Payment of eligible expenses shall be made by the city to or for the benefit of the applicant. The city manager shall enter into a contract with the applicant ensuring compliance with the terms of the award enforceable by the city manager. 
(b)	[Criteria for EOF expenditures.] The city manager shall recommend EOF expenditures to the city based on the criteria and guidelines set forth in this article: 
(1)	Application for projects requesting matching grant funds of $5,000.00 or less shall be submitted to the city's economic development advisory committee for their review and recommendation based on the grant program procedures and guidelines and sent to the city council for approval, denial or modification. 
(2)	After review the committee shall forward the project to the city council with a recommendation to approve, approve in part, approve with modification, or reject the proposed project. 
(3)	Reserved. 
(4)	The city manager will monitor the project at least annually and require such documentation as may be necessary to confirm compliance with the targeted hiring goal and determine the economic impact of the project. 
(c)	Annually, starting in June 1998, the city will administratively adjust the 1995 desired minimum annual salary of $14,714.00 or more per nonmanagement employee for 1995 using the most recently available "Florida Price Level Index" the "composite index" for the city produced by the Office of the Governor, Office of Planning and Budgeting. 
(Ord. No. 13-98, § 3, 6-3-98; Ord. No. 24-98, §§ 2, 3, 1-6-99; Ord. No. 06-07, §§ 2, 3, 2-7-07)  
Sec. 2-278. - Eligible uses, activities and industries. 
(a)	Economic opportunity fund money may be awarded by the city council for one or more of the following types of uses, activities, or industries: 
(1)	Manufacturing (SIC codes 20 through 39); 
(2)	Trucking and warehousing (SIC code 42); 
(3)	Wholesale trade (SIC codes 50, 51); 
(4)	Corporate headquarters; 
(5)	Regional/division headquarters; 
(6)	Research and development facilities; 
(7)	Motion picture production and services; motion picture distribution services (SIC codes 781, 782); 
(8)	Computer and data processing services (SIC code 737); 
(9)	Research and testing services (SIC code 873); 
(10)	Hotels and motels; 
(11)	Any other industry group, use, or activity, including the creation or development of intellectual property, products, services not listed in any of the above categories which can achieve the purpose and intent of this program as recommended by the city manager to the city for approval as is necessary on a case-by-case basis. In this case, uses, activities or industries not associated with manufacturing or distribution, may be required to demonstrate to the city manager that these products or services will be purchased primarily by businesses or consumers located beyond the borders of the city, thereby increasing earned income and wealth for the city. 
(b)	Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 13-98, § 4, 6-3-98)  
Sec. 2-279. - Eligible expenses. 
(a)	Economic opportunity fund money may be awarded for one or more of the following types of business expenses: 
(1)	Corporate or company relocation expenses defined as company assets, (excluding personnel) such as, but not limited to, machinery, equipment, file cabinets, furniture and the like, but not including moving and relocation expenses of company employees to the city. Eligible relocation expenses shall also include lease buyouts of existing leases of relocating companies. 
(2)	Payment of impact fees, permitting fees, and other fees imposed by government associated with growth management, environmental permitting, land development review and building permitting processes; 
(3)	Infrastructure costs (off-site and on-site); 
(4)	Leasehold improvements to interior and common areas; 
(5)	Loan interest paydowns for the acquisition of property, a finished site and its existing improvements, or the construction of new buildings and improvements; 
(6)	Partial reimbursement for the costs of construction of a new industrial or office building, or for partial reimbursement for the renovation of an existing industrial or office building; 
(7)	Partial payment of initial rental fees for a period not to exceed one year; 
(8)	Job training conducted by a third party for new hires, relocated employees resulting from a plant expansion or relocation; 
(9)	Employee hiring expenses; and 
(10)	Other types of expenses or city interdepartmental charges recommended by the city manager for approval consistent with the intent of this article as is necessary on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)	Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 13-98, § 5, 6-3-98)  
Sec. 2-280. - Program guidelines. 
(a)	The following guidelines may be employed by the city manager and the city in determining whether or not an award will be made: 
(1)	The targeted average annual benchmark per job created for grant awards is $1,500.00 per job. The $1,500.00 per-job benchmark is an average general guideline and will be used as such over a calendar year to evaluate the efficiency of the program. The city manager shall have considerable discretion for recommending grant awards for each individual applicant. 
(2)	No funds provided under this program shall be used to entice an applicant from one geographic area within the city to another geographic area within the city. This provision shall not apply to intracity relocation in which the expansion or reuse of a facility is not feasible on the existing site, or facility. 
(3)	Expansion or relocation will create at least one new job, paying an average of $14,714.00 or more, or as otherwise approved by the DeBary City Council, for nonmanagement employees, on an annual basis, with the company making health insurance benefits at a minimum available to its employees. Said job shall pay an average annual salary of 90 percent of the desired minimum of $14,714.00 or more within designated development regions. 
(4)	Expansion or relocation of a business will be completed within 18 months. 
(b)	No single award shall exceed the uncommitted funds available in a single year. Awards of more than ten percent of the fund may be awarded subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 13-98, § 6, 6-3-98)  
Sec. 2-281. - Bonus awards. 
(a)	Bonus awards may be made and are encouraged based on the unique benefits or circumstances of a given project as documented and recommended by the city manager in one of the following situations: 
(1)	The business is within the targeted industry groups, or clusters contained in the City's overall economic development plan. 
(2)	Proposed job growth exceeds 50 new jobs within 18 months of City Council approval. 
(3)	The average per-job salary or wage projected in a subject application is 125 percent or more of $14,714.00 or more. 
(4)	An initial capital investment in plant and equipment of at least $1,000,000.00. 
(5)	Projects designated under the Florida Enterprise Zone Program, as authorized under F.S. ch. 290; community redevelopment areas, as authorized under F.S. ch. 163, pt. III, or in designated development regions, as identified by a resolution of the city council. 
(b)	Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 13-98, § 7, 6-3-98)  
Sec. 2-282. - Comprehensive program evaluation. 
(a)	The city may authorize a comprehensive evaluation of the programs created pursuant to this article. Such an analysis may include, but not be limited to, its impact and benefit to the city economy. This may include an evaluation of the number and quality of jobs created, average annual salary or compensation per worker, annual payroll, private capital investment, impact on the local tax base and other indicators as may be useful for the purposes of the evaluation. 
(b)	Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 13-98, § 8, 6-3-98)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; alarm systems, § 26-31 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, F.S. ch. 561 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in F.S. chs. 561 through 565 are hereby adopted as the definitions for this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3-96, § 1, 3-6-96)  
Sec. 6-2. - Hours of sale. 
Alcoholic beverages may be sold, consumed, served, or permitted to be served or consumed in containers, by the drink or otherwise, in any place holding a state license within the territorial limits of the city by any person, vendor or distributor holding such license, on weekdays and Saturdays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on the following morning and between the hours of 12:00 noon on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. the following Monday. 
(Ord. No. 94-24, § I, 4-6-94; Ord. No. 94-34, § 2, 7-6-94) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of hours of sale, F.S. §§ 562.14, 562.45(2).  
Sec. 6-3. - Exception to hours of sale. 
Nothing contained in section 6-2 shall apply to beverages served upon any dining, club, parlor, buffet or observation car operated on any railroad, but such beverages may be sold only to passengers upon such cars and must be served for consumption thereon. 
(Ord. No. 94-24, § II, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 6-4. - Extended hours of sale. 
The hours of sale for alcoholic beverages that may be sold, consumed, served or permitted to be served or consumed shall be extended as follows: 
(1)	From 7:00 a.m. December 31, (New Year's Eve) until 3:00 a.m. January 1, New Year's Day. 
(2)	From 7:00 a.m. July 4 until 3:00 a.m. July 5. 
(3)	From 7:00 a.m. Labor Day until 3:00 a.m. the following morning. 
(Ord. No. 94-24, § III, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 6-5. - Possession of open containers. 
It is unlawful within the incorporated limits of the city for any person to purchase, use, offer for sale, possess, consume or carry in any cup, glass, can or other open or unsealed container, any alcoholic beverage on the public streets, sidewalks, alleys or rights-of-way or in or upon any parking area or other area outside of and adjacent to the licensed premises of a vendor of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 3-96, § 2, 3-6-96) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; streets, § 42-36 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Possession of open containers of alcohol in vehicles prohibited, F.S. § 316.1936.  
Sec. 6-6. - Outside service and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
No outside alcohol service or consumption shall be permitted outside of a building of a vendor or distributor of alcoholic beverages within the city limits unless expressly permitted by the Land Development Code as a permitted or special exception use or as permitted by a city approved special event permit with temporary license/permit from the Department of Business and Professional Regulation Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco. 
(Ord. No. 04-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Secs. 6-7—6-30. - Reserved.  
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement, § 2-86 et seq. 
State Law reference— Livestock at large, F.S. ch. 588; cruelty to animals and related matters, F.S. ch. 828. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, adopted July 3, 2013 , amended and restated former Art. II, §§ 10-31—10-54, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 4-96, § 1, 3-7-96; Ord. No. 22-06, §§ 1—4, 11-1-06. 
State Law reference— Local animal control ordinances, F.S. § 828.27. 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult animal means any dog, cat, bird, snake or other domesticated animal over the age of six months. 
Animal for the purpose of enforcement by animal control officers acting pursuant to this article shall mean dogs, cats, birds, snakes, or other domesticated animals. 
Animal control board means the DeBary Special Master. 
Animal exposed to rabies means any animal bitten by or that has associated with any animal determined by the county health officer or the animal control officer to be infected with rabies. 
Animal quarters means the premises and all buildings, pens, yards and their appurtenances used for the keeping of dogs and cats. 
Approved standard means the standard by which a dog is judged for conformation by the appropriate national or international breeders' organization. 
At large shall mean any animal not under restraint (whether licensed or unlicensed) and off the premises of the owner. 
Canine hobby breeder means a person other than a pet dealer who breeds a single breed of dog to conform to an approved standard of competition. The owner of a hobby breeder facility must be in good standing and have registration privileges intact with the appropriate national animal registry. The owner must have three years' documented experience in show clubs and participation in show trials. 
Cruelty means any act of neglect, torture, or torment that causes unjustifiable pain and/or suffering of an animal. 
Dangerous dog shall be defined by F.S. ch. 767. 
Dog under restraint shall mean any canine secured by a leash, chain, rope, tether or cable and trolley; securely and humanely confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion; caged or tethered in the open bed of a pickup truck; or confined within a house, building, fence, crate, pen or other enclosure. 
Exotic animal shall mean any species of animal not indigenous to the State of Florida. Ownership and possession of such animals shall be prohibited unless it is in compliance with F.S.§ 372.65. A violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with F.S.§ 372.65. 
Hobby breeder facility means kennels operated by a canine hobby breeder that conform to the standards set out in this article under section 10-54. 
Impounding or holding facility means any one or combination of a pet shop, kennel, cattery or humane society facility or any facility or place the county or city may so designate. 
Licensed veterinarians means all veterinarians actively engaged in the practice of that profession in the state, who are duly registered and licensed as such by the state, and who are authorized to vaccinate dogs and cats against rabies and to execute certificates of vaccination. 
Owner means any person possessing, harboring, keeping or having control or custody of an animal or, if the animal is owned by a person under the age of 18, that person's parent or guardian. 
Pet dealer means any person who in the ordinary course of business engages in the sale of more than two litters, or 20 dogs or 20 cats, per year, whichever is greater, to the public. Such definition includes breeders of animals who sell such animals directly to a consumer. 
Proper enclosure of a dangerous dog, while on the owner's property, means a dangerous dog is securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top to prevent the dog from escaping over, under, or through the structure and shall also provide protection from the elements. A dangerous dog warning sign shall be posted on such pen or enclosure. 
Public nuisance animal means any animal to which any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)	Animals found at large more than twice in a calendar year; 
(2)	An animal that damages the property of anyone other than its owner; 
(3)	Animals that are dangerous animals; 
(4)	Animals that cause unsanitary conditions of enclosures or surroundings as determined by the county health officer; 
(5)	Animals that are diseased animals dangerous to human health; 
(6)	Animals or birds which cause excessive or prolonged and disturbing noises interfering with the peace and quietude of the neighboring property, providing a neighbor wishing to lodge a complaint for the purpose of enforcement of this code has filed a sworn statement with either the animal control officer or the police department describing the disturbance; 
(7)	Animals that have been determined to be strays; or 
(8)	Is a female animal that is not confined within a building, structure, cage or not under restraint during her estrous cycle. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones, multiple bites, or disfiguring lacerations requiring sutures or reconstructive surgery. 
Stray (used as a noun) means any unlicensed and unattended animal. 
Unprovoked means that the victim who has been conducting himself or herself peacefully and lawfully has been bitten or chased in a menacing fashion or attacked by a dog. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-32. - Penalty. 
A violation of this article is a civil infraction which carries a maximum civil penalty not to exceed $500.00. If a person who has committed such a civil infraction does not contest a citation issued to him or her, the civil penalty shall be less than the maximum civil penalty. 
Any expenses imposed on the owner of an animal by operation of this article which remain unpaid as of the time of judicial handling shall be ordered paid as a part of the court's disposition. The city also may seek payment of outstanding expenses as restitution in any companion or related criminal prosecution. In the event of a violation of F.S. ch. 767 or F.S. § 828.29, the owner shall be subject to applicable criminal penalties in addition to any civil penalties. Further, nothing herein shall relieve the owner of civil liability for injuries or damages which result from actions or inactions that are violations of the provisions herein. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-33. - Jurisdiction; persons authorized to enforce article. 
This article may be enforced by either animal control officers or law enforcement officers of the city and any entity which contracts with the city to enforce this article and the animal control laws of the state. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-34. - Animal control officers. 
(a)	Animal control authority. The authority and primary responsibility for enforcement of this article and the animal control laws of the state is hereby delegated to the entity designated by the city council, and each animal control officer who is certified according to the laws of the state. Each animal control officer so certified shall have complete police and law enforcement power to enforce this article and the provisions of state law, rules and regulations relating to animal control. 
(b)	Definition. For purposes of this section, the term "animal control officer" means any individual employed, contracted with or appointed by the animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this article or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensure of animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of animals, and includes any state or local law enforcement officer or other employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments that involve the seizure and impoundment of any animal. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-35. - Interference with animal control officer or humane society personnel. 
(a)	No person shall interfere with, hinder, resist or obstruct the animal control officer or humane society personnel in the lawful performance of their duties as set forth in this article. 
(b)	No person shall, without proper authority, release, remove or attempt to release or remove any animal from the custody of the animal control officer or humane society personnel. 
(c)	No person shall tear down, burn, deface, destroy or otherwise injure an impounding facility or enclosure. 
(d)	Any person found in violation of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-36. - Impoundment. 
(a)	Animals subject to impoundment. 
(1)	Any unrestrained or unlicensed animal required to be licensed may be impounded by the animal control officer. 
(2)	Any animal creating a public nuisance as defined in this article may be impounded by the animal control officer, except that hunting dogs shall be exempt from the terms of subsections (1) and (6) of the definition of the term "public nuisance animal" in section 10-31 when engaged in a hunt or not under restraint as a result of a hunt during legally declared hunting seasons, as designated from year to year by the state game and freshwater fish commission. 
(3)	Any dog for which a final determination has been made that there is sufficient cause to deem the dog as dangerous whose owner fails to comply with the requirements of F.S. § 767.12, or its successor and subsections 10-38(f) and (g) of this article or its successor within the time period provided therein. The dog shall remain impounded until the owner complies with all of the provisions of subsections 10-38(f) and (g) of this article. Should the owner continue to fail to comply with subsections 10-38(f) and (g) of this article and the referenced statute for a period of 14 days from the date of the impoundment, then the animal control authority may seek injunctive relief to enjoin the return of the dangerous dog to its owner and such other relief as the court deems appropriate. 
(b)	Redemption of impounded animals. 
(1)	Except for animals impounded pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this section, where an impounded animal bears an indicium of ownership, the animal control officer shall notify the owner or keeper of said animal's impoundment by direct conversation, telephone message, written notice which is posted at the owner's address, or sent to the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. Said animal shall only be required to be held for the owner for three working days from the date of notification to the owner. At the expiration of said three days, if no owner has appeared to claim the impounded animal, said animal shall be deemed unowned and may be disposed of as provided in subsection (c) of this section. An owner of an animal impounded shall pay the impoundment fee before the animal will be released to the owner. 
(2)	Animals impounded pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this section may only be redeemed upon full compliance with this article as demonstrated satisfactorily to the appropriate animal control officer or pursuant to a court's order and upon payment of all impoundment fees. 
(3)	Working day shall mean a day in which the impounding facility is open for normal operating activities. 
(c)	Disposition of impounded animals. Any unclaimed animal shall become the property of the city, and may be humanely destroyed, transferred to a humane society or placed in the custody of some person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner who will agree to comply with all of the provisions of this article. 
(d)	Impounding facilities. The impounding facility shall be that which the city may construct and operate impounding or holding facilities or contract with organizations with such facilities to provide adequate animal impounding for the area. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-37. - Methods of enforcement; investigations; public nuisance, complaint against owner. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful and prohibited for animal(s) to be a public nuisance. 
(b)	When an animal has been determined by the animal control officer to be a public nuisance, or in violation of this chapter of the code, the animal control officer or law enforcement agency may issue a notice of violation to the owner who is in violation of this chapter. The notice of violation shall: 
(1)	Issue a notice of violation to the person who is in violation of this article. Such notice of violation shall state the date and time of the issuance of the notice, the name and address of the person in violation, the date of the offense, the nature of the offense committed, a description of the animal involved, and a demand that the offense be abated within 24 hours after the time period stated on the issuance of the notice. If the person shall fail to abate the offense, then the animal control officer may issue a citation to the person; and/or 
(2)	Impound the animal involved. Such animal may be redeemed as provided in subsection 10-36(b) unless said animal is impounded pursuant to subsection 10-36(a)(3); and/or 
(3)	Issue a citation to the person who is in violation of this article. Such a citation may be contested in the proper county court. If a person fails to pay the civil penalty or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, the court may issue an order to show cause upon the request of the city manager or his or her designee. This order shall require such a person to appear before the court to explain why action on the citation has not been taken. If any person who is issued such an order fails to appear in response to the court's directive, that person may be held in contempt of court. 
(c)	Certain aggravated violations of this article which result in the unprovoked biting, attacking or wounding of a human being or domestic animal; violations resulting in the destruction or loss of personal property; second or subsequent violations of local animal cruelty laws; or violations resulting in the issuance of a third or subsequent citation to a person will require a mandatory court appearance. 
(d)	Investigations. The animal control officer may request the owners of an animal to exhibit the animal, and, if applicable, the license of such animal. 
(1)	It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep the following records: 
a.	Accurate and detailed records of the licensing, impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into his or her custody; 
b.	Accurate and detailed records of all reported bite cases and investigations; 
c.	Accurate and detailed records on all money collected and expended in the operation of the functions of his or her office; and 
d.	Accurate records of all rabies certificates. 
(2)	All records required by this section shall be subject to inspection by the city. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-38. - Classification of dogs as dangerous; exemption; notice and hearing requirements; confinement of animal; appeals of classification; certification of registration; unlawful acts; penalties; confiscation; destruction; appeals of confiscation and destruction. 
(a)	The provisions of F.S. §§ 767.10 through 767.16, or their successor, which apply to dangerous dogs, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference in addition to the establishment of hearing procedures for cases involving the dangerous dog classification. 
(b)	The animal control authority shall investigate reported incidents involving any dog that may be dangerous and shall, if possible, interview the owner and require a sworn affidavit from any person, including any animal control officer or enforcement officer, desiring to have a dog classified as dangerous. Any animal that is the subject of a dangerous dog investigation, that is not impounded with the animal control authority, shall be humanely and safely confined by the owner in a securely fenced or enclosed area pending the outcome of the investigation and resolution of any hearings related to the dangerous dog classification. The address of where the animal resides shall be provided to the animal control authority. No dog that is the subject of a dangerous dog investigation may be relocated or ownership transferred pending the outcome of an investigation or any hearings related to the determination of a dangerous dog classification. In the event that a dog is to be destroyed, the dog shall not be relocated or ownership transferred. 
(c)	A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was unlawfully on the property or, while lawfully on the property, was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or its owner or a family member. No dog may be declared dangerous if the dog was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault. 
(d)	After the investigation, the animal control authority shall make an initial determination as to whether there is sufficient cause to classify the dog as dangerous and shall afford the owner an opportunity for a hearing in front of the animal control board prior to making a final determination. The animal control authority shall provide written notification of the sufficient cause finding, to the owner, by registered mail, certified hand delivery, or service in conformance with the the statutory provisions relating to service of process. To request a hearing, the owner shall file a written request for the hearing at the animal control division within seven calendar days from the date of receipt of the notification of the initial determination that there is sufficient cause to classify the dog as dangerous. If requested, the hearing shall be held by the animal control board as soon as possible, but not more than 21 calendar days and no sooner than five days after receipt of the request from the owner. On each case submitted before the animal control board, the animal control officer or law enforcement officer who issued the citation shall be in attendance. All testimony shall be under oath and recorded. Testimony will be taken from the animal control authority, alleged violator and any other witnesses. At the conclusion of the hearing, the animal control board shall issue findings of fact, based on the evidence of record, and conclusions of law and shall issue a determination whether the dog is classified as a dangerous dog. If the owner fails to request a hearing within the seven-day period, then the initial determination made by the animal control authority shall automatically become final, and the dog then shall be deemed classified as a dangerous dog under F.S. 767.12, or its successor. 
(e)	If a final determination is made that there is sufficient cause to deem a dog as dangerous, the animal control authority shall provide written notification to the owner by registered mail, certified hand delivery or service in conformance with the statutory provisions relating to service of process, and the owner has the right to file a written request for a hearing in the county court of Volusia County to appeal the classification within ten business days after receipt of the written determination of dangerous dog classification. Failure to file the appeal timely waives the owner's right to do so. Pending a resolution of the appeal, the dog shall continue to be confined in a proper enclosure of a dangerous dog as defined in section 10-31. The owner shall be responsible for payment of all fees, boarding costs and other related expenses incurred by the city during the period a dog is quarantined or impounded under F.S. § 767.12. 
(f)	Within 14 days after the animal control authority has made a final determination that a dog be classified as dangerous, the owner of the dangerous dog shall obtain a certificate of registration for the dog from the animal control authority. If the owner appeals to the county court, as prescribed in 10-38 and the dangerous dog classification is upheld by the county court, the owner shall, within fourteen (14) days of the court's order so holding, obtain a certificate of registration for the dog from the animal control authority. The owner shall be required to renew the certificate annually. To obtain a certificate of registration or a renewal thereof the owner shall be at least 18 years of age and shall present to the animal control authority sufficient evidence of: 
(1)	A current certificate of rabies vaccination for the dog. 
(2)	A proper enclosure to confine a dangerous dog as defined in section 10-31. 
(3)	The posting of the premises with a clearly visible warning sign at all entry and exit points that informs both children and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property using the words "BAD DOG" or other suitable warning. 
(4)	Permanent identification of the dog, such as a tattoo on the inside thigh or electronic implantation. 
(5)	A certificate from a veterinarian that the dog has been spayed or neutered. 
(g)	The owner shall immediately notify the animal control authority when a dog that has been classified as dangerous: 
(1)	Is loose or unconfined. 
(2)	Has bitten, attacked, severely injured, or killed a human being or domestic animal or livestock as defined in F.S. § 585.01 or its successor. 
(3)	Is sold, given away, or dies. 
(4)	Is moved to another address. 
Prior to a dangerous dog being sold or given away, the owner shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner to the animal control authority. The new owner must comply with all of the requirements of this article and F.S. §§ 767.10—767.16. If the dangerous dog is moved from this jurisdiction to another within the state the owner shall advise the new owner that the animal control authority in the new jurisdiction shall be notified. The owner of a dog classified as dangerous who comes into the City of DeBary and brings the dangerous dog into the city shall immediately notify the animal control division that the dog is in the city. 
(h)	If a dog that has previously been declared dangerous attacks or bites a person or a domestic animal without provocation, the dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by an animal control authority, placed in quarantine, if necessary, for the proper length of time, or impounded and held for ten business days after the owner is given written notification under F.S. § 767.12. Thereafter the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner unless the owner requests a hearing during this ten-day time period. To request a hearing, the owner shall file a written request for the hearing at the animal control division within seven calendar days from the date of receipt of the notification of confiscation and intent to destroy. Failure to file the appeal timely waives the owner's right to do so. If requested, the hearing shall be held as soon as possible, but not more than 21 calendar days and no sooner than five days after receipt of the request from the owner. Within 14 days after the hearing at which the animal control authority has made a determination that a dog be confiscated and destroyed, the owner of the dog to be confiscated and destroyed has the right to file a request for hearing with the county court of Volusia County. Failure to file the appeal timely waives the owner's right to do so. If the owner appeals to the county court and the animal control authority's determination that the owner's dog be confiscated and destroyed is upheld by the county court, thereafter the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner unless the owner takes further action in a court of law that would prevent such destruction. The owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other related fees as may be required to humanely and safely keep the animal during any appeal procedure together with other related expenses, including euthanasia, which may be incurred by the city during the period a dog is quarantined or impounded under this article or F.S. § 767.13. 
(i)	If the owner files a request for hearing with the animal control authority or thereafter appeals the animal control authority's decision, the dog shall be held and may not be destroyed during the hearing or appellate process. 
(j)	It is unlawful for the owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under control of a competent person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person or animal. The owner may exercise the dog in a securely fenced or enclosed area that does not have a top, without a muzzle or leash, if the dog remains within his or her sight and only members of the immediate household or persons 18 years of age or older are allowed in the enclosure when the dog is present. When being transported, such dogs must be safely and securely restrained within a vehicle. 
(k)	Hunting dogs are exempt from the provisions of this article when engaged in any legal hunt or training procedure. Dogs engaged in training or exhibiting in legal sports such as obedience trials, conformation shows, field trials, hunting/retrieving trials, and herding trials are exempt from the provisions of this article when engaged in any legal procedures. However, such dogs at all other times in all other respectsshall be subject to this and local laws. Dogs that have been classified as dangerous shall not be used for hunting purposes. 
(l)	This article does not apply to dogs used by law enforcement officials for law enforcement work. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-39. - Duty of animal owners to be responsible owners. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or anyone having any animal in his or her possession or custody, to exercise reasonable care and to take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property and animals from injuries or damage which might result from his or her animal's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness or ferocity. 
(b)	In the event that the owner or keeper of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure that all provisions of this article are complied with. 
(c)	Any person found in violation of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-40. - Rabies vaccination of dogs cats and ferrets. 
(a)	Required. Annually, every owner of any adult dog, cat, or ferret within the city shall have such cat or dog vaccinated against rabies, by a licensed veterinarian of his choice, pursuant to F.S. 828.30. 
(b)	Certificate of vaccination. Upon vaccination, the veterinarian administering the vaccine shall execute and furnish to the owner of the animal, as evidence thereof, a certificate of inoculation. 
(c)	Penalty. Any person found in violation of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-41. - Licensing of dogs, cats and ferrets. 
(a)	Required. Except for those exempted in this article, every dog, cat and ferret shall be licensed annually. Every owner shall be issued a county license receipt and tag by the animal control officer or any licensed veterinarian or humane society who agrees to collect the fee for the license certificate and license tag. 
(b)	Duration. Any license issued shall become null and void one year from the date of rabies vaccination. 
(c)	Payment of fee; issuance of tag. Upon paying a license fee to be recommended by the animal control board and established by resolution of the city council, the animal control officer, veterinarian or humane society shall issue a serially numbered county license tag, bearing the year of issuance, to be attached to the collar or harness of the animal. License fees shall not be required for seeing eye dogs or governmental working dogs. 
(d)	Animals exempt from wearing license tag. Racing greyhounds; hunting dogs, while engaged in a hunt; show dogs; or dogs engaged in obedience or K-9 training, while under the command or presence of the owner, trainer or other responsible custodian directly related to the racing, hunting, show or training activities, respectively, are exempt from wearing the license tag, if tattooed. A dog having an identifying tattoo registered with the animal control officer is also exempt from the requirement of wearing a license tag. 
(e)	Duplicate tag. In the event of loss or destruction of the original tag, the owner of the domesticated animal may obtain a duplicate tag from the animal control officer at the established fee for same. 
(f)	Animals exempt from licensing. The licensing provisions of this article shall not apply to greyhounds kept, maintained or brought into the city for the purpose of racing at licensed greyhound tracks; to animals used as part of entertainment acts when properly controlled; to animals remaining in the city for a period of less than 30 days; or to purebreds kept, maintained or brought into the city for the purposes of training; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the demand for proof of vaccination done in another state or county; and failure to provide such proof upon demand shall require such animal to be vaccinated under the provisions of this article. 
(g)	Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-42. - Rabies control. 
(a)	Report of animals infected with or showing symptoms of rabies. It shall be the duty of the owner or of any person knowing of an animal infected with or showing suspicious symptoms of rabies or any unusual behavior to report the same immediately to the county health officer or the animal control officer. 
(b)	Duties of county health officer. 
(1)	The county health officer or animal control officer shall enforce the applicable state statutes and the applicable rules of the state department of health and rehabilitative services. 
(2)	Whenever the county health officer or animal control officer is informed that an animal has bitten or scratched a person or is suspected of having or showing suspicious symptoms of rabies or other infectious or contagious disease, the county health officer or animal control officer may capture such animal, alive, if possible, and quarantine it under observation for a period of at least ten days from the date of bite or scratch. 
(3)	The quarantine shall be in the holding facility designated by the county or, at the owner's request and with approval of the county health officer or animal control officer, in a licensed veterinary hospital. Quarantined animals shall be released only upon approval of the county health officer or animal control officer. The owner shall bear the cost of the care, feeding and maintenance of a quarantined animal. 
(4)	If a quarantined animal dies, the county health officer, the animal control officer, the bite victim and the owner of the animal shall be notified by the operators of the quarantine facility; and the head of the animal shall be forwarded to one of the state board of health laboratories for pathological examination. 
(5)	In the event rabies exists in any given area to the extent that circumstances indicate necessity of quarantine and if such quarantine is ordered by the county health officer or animal control officer, the following requirements shall be enforced by the county health officer or animal control officer in the area of quarantine: 
a.	All animals, vaccinated as well as unvaccinated, must be confined to their owners' premises and will be permitted to be away from the premises only when under proper restraint as required in section 10-31. Confinement to owners' premises may be by fence, cage or chain attached to a stake or animal run. 
b.	All animals found not under proper restraint are to be impounded. Animals may be released to their owners or agents upon payment of impounding fees. No animals will be released from the holding facility except to owners or agents. Unvaccinated animals which have been impounded will not be released to the owners or agents until such animals have been vaccinated or until arrangements have been made with the animal control officer to vaccinate the animals. Animals will not be adopted during a quarantine period. 
(6)	The owner of any dog or cat vaccinated with an approved antirabies vaccine within the preceding 12 months, except such dog or cat exempted from the vaccination in subsection 10-40(a) after receiving approval of the county health officer or animal control officer, may have such dog or cat quarantined and confined in a place other than the places specified in subsection (b)(3) of this section. However, if at any time during the quarantine it is determined by the county health officer or animal control officer that the quarantine is not properly maintained in order to ensure isolation of the animal, this exemption shall be void, and the animal shall be impounded at the owner's expense. 
(7)	Quarantined animals may, with the county health officer's or animal control officer's permission, be quarantined at or on the owner's property. 
(8)	Any animal subject to quarantine shall not be vaccinated before the quarantine period has expired. 
(c)	Penalty. Any person found in violation of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-43. - Restraint of animals while on property of owner. 
(a)	Required. It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or anyone having any animal in his or her possession or custody, to ensure that: 
(1)	The animal is kept under restraint; 
(2)	Reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, possessor or custodian; and 
(3)	The animal is: 
a.	Securely and humanely confined within a house, building, fence, crate, pen or other enclosure; 
b.	Humanely secured by chain, cable and trolley, rope or tether of sufficient strength to prevent escape; or 
c.	Leashed or otherwise controlled by a responsible person at any time it is not secured as provided for in subsection (a)(3)a. or b. of this section. 
(b)	Dangerous animals. In addition to the requirements in subsection (a) of this section, an owner who maintains any dangerous dog as defined in F.S. § 767.11(1), or its successor, out-of-doors must fence a portion of his or her property with a perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter fence, the dangerous dog must be humanely confined inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides and the sides must be either buried two feet into the ground, sunk into a concrete pad, or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate to the kennel must be locked. 
(c)	Penalty. Any person found in violation of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-44. - Restraint of animals while off property of owner. 
(a)	Required. It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal or anyone having an animal in his or her possession to keep the animal under restraint and control at all times while the animal is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor or custodian. For the purpose of this section, an animal is deemed under control when it is: 
(1)	Securely confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion; 
(2)	Caged or tethered in the open bed of a pickup truck; 
(3)	Securely and humanely confined within a house, building, fence, crate, pen or other enclosure with the property owner's consent; 
(4)	Humanely secured by a chain, cable and trolley, rope or tether of sufficient strength to prevent escape with the permission of the owner of the property where the restraint is being used; or 
(5)	Leashed or otherwise controlled by a responsible person at any time it is not secured as provided for in subsection (a)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section. 
(b)	Penalty. Any person found in violation of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-45. - Warning signs on premises where guard dogs or dangerous dogs are kept. 
(a)	All owners, keepers or harborers of any guard dog or dangerous dog shall display in a prominent place on their premises, and at each entrance or exit to the area where such dog is confined, a sign easily readable by the public using the words "BAD DOG." 
(b)	Any person found in violation of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-46. - Nuisance animals. 
Any owner whose animal is determined to be a public nuisance is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-47. - Animals transported into city for sale or gift; sale of animals at outdoor markets. 
(a)	Each animal transported into the city for sale and each animal offered in the city for sale or gift shall be subject to the provisions of F.S. § 828.29, or its successor. 
(b)	Any person found in violation of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-48. - Female dogs and female cats in heat. 
(a)	The owner of female dogs or cats shall confine such animals when they are in heat in such a manner as to make such animals inaccessible to any male dog or cat, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(b)	Any person who violates this provision, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care and control, is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-49. - Disposition of dead animals. 
(a)	When any animal dies on public or private property, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of such animal or the owner of such private property to remove and dispose of such animal immediately pursuant to state codes. Should the owner not be aware of such animal's presence, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)	When any dead animal shall be found upon public property, the owner of such animal shall remove and dispose of such animal upon notification by the animal control officer or any other law enforcement officer, so as not to constitute a nuisance. If the owner of such animal shall fail to do so within a reasonable time, the city shall remove and dispose of such animal and charge the cost of such removal and disposal to the owner of such animal, if known. 
(2)	When any dead animal shall be found upon private property, the owner of such animal or the owner of such property shall immediately remove and dispose of such animal, upon notification by the animal control officer or any other law enforcement officer. 
(b)	Any person found in violation of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-50. - Removal of animal waste. 
(a)	The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his or her animal on public walks, recreation areas or private property other than his or her own. 
(b)	Any person found in violation of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-51. - Duties of driver when vehicle strikes animal. 
(a)	Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop as soon as safely possible and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner. In the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the local humane society. 
(b)	Any person who violates any provision of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-52. - Disposal of live animals to be used for experimentation or vivisection prohibited. 
(a)	Live animals may not be disposed of to any school, college, university, person, firm, association, laboratory or corporation for experimentation or vivisection purposes, or to any person providing, selling or supplying dogs and cats and other animals to any school, college, university, person, firm, association or corporation for experimentation or vivisection purposes. 
(b)	Any person who violates any provision of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-53. - Selling or obtaining dogs or cats for purpose of human or animal consumption. 
(a)	Dogs or cats may not be obtained, sold or purchased in the city for the purpose of human or animal consumption. 
(b)	Any person who violates any provisions of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-54. - Canine hobby breeders. 
(a)	Generally. 
(1)	License required; fee. No person shall establish or maintain a hobby breeder facility without first obtaining an annual license from the animal control authority. The license fee for such facility will be set by resolution of the city council and not based on the number of adult dogs maintained at the facility. 
(2)	Sale of animals. The offspring of the dogs bred at a canine hobby breeder facility to enhance or perpetuate a given breed may be sold by the owner. Such sales shall not be considered commercial breeding for the purpose of this article provided that such sale is not the primary function of the facility. 
(3)	Permitted animals; identification of animals. There shall be only one species and one breed of dog bred or kept at any individual licensed canine hobby breeder facility. There shall be no more than two) litters or 20 puppies, whichever is greater, produced per canine hobby breeder facility per year. Dogs maintained at a licensed canine hobby breeder facility are exempt from the individual licensing provisions of this article except as otherwise provided in this article. For protection and identification, all dogs will be identifiable by either a tattoo or implant device. An implant scanner must be on the premises if using an implant device. At no time will the total number of adult dogs exceed the following limitations: 
a.	Miniature or toy breeds, 15 animals. 
b.	Standard or large breeds, ten animals. 
(4)	Return of animals by new owners. If a new owner becomes unable or unwilling to continue ownership and responsibility for a dog, the license holder shall assist in placement of the dog. If no suitable placement can be found within six months, the license holder shall accept return of the dog if healthy and shall become fully responsible for its care. 
(b)	Indoor facilities. 
(1)	A source of heat and mechanical ventilation shall be available at the facility for use as necessary in preventing extremes in temperatures. Buildings must be maintained with temperatures, ventilation and lighting suitable for each breed housed. 
(2)	The kennel facility must provide adequate shelter from the elements and be kept clean and dry. Food must be fresh, wholesome, palatable, nutritionally adequate and offered to each dog at least once daily. Water must be fresh and available at all times. Dogs shall be provided proper and necessary veterinary care. Canine hobby breeder facility owners must live on the premises. 
(3)	The interior building surfaces of any indoor housing facilities shall be constructed and maintained so that they are impervious to moisture and can be readily sanitized. 
(4)	Cages, kennels and runs must have enough space for dogs to lie down, stand, sit and stretch without touching the sides or top. Dogs shall be exercised a minimum of 30 minutes twice daily. 
(5)	Concrete floors and runs must have a resting board, and cages must have bedding. 
(6)	All hobby breeder facilities shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect the dogs from injury. Appropriate measures must be taken to control and restrict the entrance of rodents. 
(7)	Dog housing areas shall be illuminated during the daylight hours provided sunlight will not shine directly into the cages. 
(8)	All cages shall be constructed of impervious porous materials. All cages shall have floors of either solid construction or metal grid construction. Cages having metal grid floors can be used provided the grid size is smaller than the pads of the feet of the dogs confined therein. No cages shall be enclosed entirely by solid walls. Stack cages must have solid floors. 
(9)	If drains are used, they shall be properly constructed and kept in good repair to avoid foul odors. 
(c)	Outdoor facilities. 
(1)	Shelter. Sufficient shade shall be provided to afford all dogs protection from direct sunlight. Sufficient cover shall be provided to protect all dogs from rain. Shelter shall be provided for all dogs when the ambient temperature falls below 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Sufficient clean bedding material or other means of protection from the weather elements shall be provided when the ambient temperature falls below that temperature to which the dogs are acclimated. 
(2)	Cleaning of enclosures. Excreta shall be removed from enclosures as often as necessary to prevent contamination of the dogs contained therein and to reduce disease hazards and odors. When a hosing or flushing method is used for cleaning an enclosure commonly known as a cage, any dog contained therein shall be removed from such enclosure during the cleaning process, and adequate measures shall be taken to protect the dogs in other such enclosures from being contaminated with water and other waste. A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate any excess water. 
(3)	Sanitation of enclosures required. Prior to the introduction of dogs into empty enclosures previously occupied, such enclosures shall be sanitized. Enclosures for dogs shall be sanitized often enough to prevent an accumulation of debris or excreta or a disease hazard; provided, however, such enclosure shall be sanitized at least once every two weeks. 
(4)	Method of sanitation. Cages, rooms and hard-surfaced pens or runs shall be sanitized by washing them with hot water and soap or detergent or by washing all soiled surfaces with a detergent solution followed by a safe and effective disinfectant, or by cleaning all soiled surfaces with live steam. Pens or runs using gravel, sand or dirt shall be sanitized by removing the soiled gravel, sand or dirt and replacing it as necessary. 
(5)	Maintenance of buildings and grounds. Premises, buildings and grounds, shall be kept clean and in good repair in order to protect the dogs from injury and to facilitate the prescribed husbandry practices set forth in this subsection. Premises shall remain free of accumulations of trash. 
(6)	Pest control. An effective program for the control of insects, ectoparasites and avian and mammalian pests shall be established and maintained. 
(7)	Distance of animal facilities from adjoining property. No runs, exercise areas or other facilities for the keeping of dogs will share common property lines. All such facilities shall be double fenced and located a minimum of ten feet from adjoining property lines. 
(d)	Inspections and enforcement. The animal control authority shall give the hobby breeder a 24-hour advance notice of the annual inspection by the animal control authority of the hobby breeder facilities. However, no notice is required for routine investigations of complaints. Any alleged violations of this article will be investigated by the animal control authority and will be considered by the animal control board if supported by competent and substantial evidence. Upon conviction the animal control board shall recommend appropriate measures up to and including revocation of license. 
(e)	Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section is subject to the penalties prescribed in section 10-32. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-55. - Limit on number of animals. 
There shall be a limit of four adult dogs and/or cats or combination thereof per household. Puppies and kittens are not to be included in this limit calculation until they reach six months of age at which time they are considered adults. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Sec. 10-56. - Humane care. 
Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or responsible for caring for, confining, or impounding an animal to fail to provide the animal with proper shelter, protection from the weather or humanely clean conditions as prescribed within this section. 
(1)	Indoor standards. The following standards shall apply to the sheltering of animals within a fully enclosed structure: 
a.	The ambient temperature shall be maintained in a range that ensures that the animal will not suffer from heat stress (heat stroke or hyperthermia), nor from cold stress (frost bite or hypothermia). 
b.	Indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated by natural or mechanical means to provide clear and fresh air to the animal. 
(2)	Outdoor standards. The following standards shall apply to the sheltering of animals outdoors or within a structure which is not fully enclosed: 
a.	Animals shall have sufficient shelter for refuge and protection from the elements and sufficient shad by natural or artificial means to protect the animal from direct sunlight. 
b.	An outdoor housing facility shall be provided that is an artificial structure with at least three sides, a bottom, and a roof. The structure shall provide refuge and protection from the elements, be of sufficient size to allow the animals to sit, stand and lie in a normal manner and turn about freely and must allow for an exchange of fresh air. 
(3)	Food and water. No animal shall be deprived of sufficient good and wholesome food and fresh water. Provisions shall be made available and refreshed daily, be suitable for the species and age of the animal and maintain a reasonable level of nutrition. Water shall be made available to the animal at all times. 
(4)	Medical care. No animal shall suffer from the following untreated conditions: open sores, lacerations, broken or dislocated bones, eye injury or infection, abnormally low body weight, nasal discharge caused by infection, poisoning, animal bites or life threatening trauma or injury. Proof that the animal is under medical supervision shall be a defense under this section. 
( Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 7-3-13 )  
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Adoption of the standard fire prevention code and life safety code, § 34-1. 
State Law reference— Minimum mandatory building and construction standards, F.S. ch. 553. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Fees. 
Fees for permits and other related charges under this chapter during the period of time that the county shall provide such services through interlocal agreement between the county and the city shall be set by resolution of the county council.  
Sec. 14-2. - Penalties for violation. 
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section 1-15. The city, in addition to other remedies set forth herein, shall have the right to equitable or injunctive relief or such other legal or equitable remedy provided by law.  
Sec. 14-3 - Certificate of competency required. 
No person or firm shall engage in business as a construction contractor, mechanical contractor and/or plumbing contractor as defined in this article in the city without having a valid certificate of competency and license issued by the county or being certified by the state as defined in F.S. ch. 489. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-4. - Rules of construction. 
(a)	Rules and definitions; generally. The rules set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction is inconsistent with the manifest intent of this chapter. The rules of construction and definitions set out here shall not be applied to any section of this chapter which contains any express provisions excluding such construction, or where the subject matter or content of such section would be inconsistent with this section. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the building official or some other officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the building official or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize professional-level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
Generally. All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this article shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the administration of the jurisdiction may be fully carried out. Terms used in this article, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall have the meanings prescribed by the statutes of this state for the same terms. 
Interpretation. Interpretations of this chapter shall be made by the building official. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean calendar month. 
Text. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any figure, the text shall control. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures whether by printing or otherwise. 
(b)	Words not defined. Words not defined herein shall have the meaning stated in the Florida Statutes or other nationally recognized codes, or other documents, manuals or standards adopted elsewhere in this chapter. Words not defined in those documents shall have the meaning stated in the Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised. In case of a conflict in definitions or codes, the appropriate definition (or code) to be applied shall be the one applicable to the trade in question. In case of a conflict between different parts of this chapter; conflicts within the same code; or conflicts between codes; the more stringent requirements shall be applicable. 
(c)	Words defined. 
Abandon or abandonment: 
(1)	Termination of a construction project by a contractor without just cause or proper notification to the owner including the reason for termination. 
(2)	Failure of a contractor to perform work without just cause for 90 days. 
(3)	Failure to obtain an approved inspection within 180 days from the previous approved inspection. 
Appraised value. For the purpose of this section, appraised value is defined as either: 
(1)	One hundred twenty percent of the assessed value of the structure as indicated by the property appraiser; or 
(2)	The value as indicated in a certified appraisal from a certified appraiser. 
Assessed value. The value of real property and improvements thereon as established by the property appraiser. 
Authorized agent. A person specifically authorized by the holder of a certificate of competency to obtain permits in his stead. 
Board. The board of adjustment and appeals, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
Building component. An element or assembly of elements integral to or part of a building. 
Building shell. The structural components that completely enclose a building, including, but not limited to, the foundation, structural frame, floor slabs, exterior walls and roof system. 
Building system. A functionally related group of elements, components and/or equipment, such as the electrical, plumbing and mechanical systems of a building. 
Certification. The act or process of obtaining a certificate of competency from the state or municipality through the review of the applicant's experience and financial responsibility as well as successful passage of an examination. 
Certificate of competency (certificate). An official document evidencing that a person is qualified to engage in the business of contracting, subcontracting or the work of a specific trade. 
Certificate of experience. An official document evidencing that an applicant has satisfied the work experience requirements for a certificate of competency. 
Certificate of occupancy (C.O.). An official document evidencing that a building satisfies the requirements of the jurisdiction for the occupancy of a building. 
Certified contractor. Any contractor who possesses a certificate of competency issued by the Department of [Business and] Professional Regulation of the state. 
Change of occupancy. A change from one building code occupancy classification or subclassification to another. 
Commercial building. Any building, structure, improvement or accessory thereto, other than a one- or two-family dwelling. 
Cumulative construction cost. The sum total of costs associated with any construction work done to a building or structure either at one time or at different times within a specified period of time. 
Demolition. The act of razing, dismantling or removal of a building or structure, or portion thereof, to the ground level. 
Examination. An exam prepared, proctored and graded by a recognized testing agency unless otherwise implied in context or specifically stated otherwise. 
FCILB. The Florida Construction Industry Licensing Board. 
Imminent danger. Structurally unsound conditions of a structure or portion thereof that is likely to cause physical injury to a person entering the structure; or due to structurally unsound conditions, any portion of the structure is likely to fall, be carried by the wind, or otherwise detach or move, and in doing so cause physical injury or damage to a person on the property or to a person or property nearby; or the condition of the property is such that it harbors or is inhabited by pests, vermin, or organisms injurious to human health, the presence of which constitutes an immediate hazard to people in the vicinity. 
Inspection warrant. A court order authorizing the official or his designee to perform an inspection of a particular property named in the warrant. 
Intensification of use. An increase in capacity or number of units of a residential or commercial building. 
Interior finish. The preparation of interior spaces of a commercial building for the first occupancy thereof. 
Licensed contractor. A contractor certified by the state or the local jurisdiction who has satisfied all state or local requirements to be actively engaged in contracting. 
Market value. As defined in floodplain regulations of this code. 
Owner's agent. A person, firm or entity authorized in writing by the owner to act for or in place of the owner. 
Permit. An official document authorizing performance of a specific activity regulated by this chapter. 
Permit card or placard. A document issued by the jurisdiction evidencing the issuance of a permit and recording of inspections. 
Qualifying agent, primary. A person who possesses the requisite skill, knowledge, experience and certificate of competency, and has the responsibility to supervise, direct, manage, and control the contracting activities of the business organization with which he is associated; who has the responsibility to supervise, direct, manage and control construction activities on a job for which he has obtained a permit; and whose technical and personal qualifications have been determined by investigation and examination and is evidenced by his possession of a certificate of competency. 
Qualifying agent, secondary. A person who possesses the requisite skill, knowledge, experience and certificate of competency, and has the responsibility to supervise, direct, manage and control construction activities on a job for which he has obtained a permit, and whose technical and personal qualifications have been determined by investigation and examination and is evidenced by his possession of a certificate of competency. 
Reciprocity. To accept a verified affidavit from any municipality or county of the state that the applicant has satisfactorily completed a written examination in its jurisdiction equal in content with the examination required by this chapter. 
Registered contractor. A contractor who has registered with the Department of [Business and] Professional Regulation of the state pursuant to fulfilling the competency requirements of the local jurisdiction. 
Registration. The act or process of registering a locally obtained certificate of competency with the state, or the act or process of registering a state issued certificate of competency with the municipality. 
Remodeling. Work which changes the original size, configuration or material of the components of a building. 
Residential building. Any one- or two-family building or accessory. 
Roofing. The installation of roof coverings. 
Spa. Any constructed or prefabricated pool containing water jets. 
Specialty contractor. A contractor whose services do not fall within the categories specified in F.S. § 489.105(3). 
Start of construction. 
Site. The physical clearing of the site in preparation for foundation work including, but not limited to, site clearing, excavation, dewatering, pilings and soil testing activities. 
Building. The removal, disassembly, repair, replacement, installation or assembly of the building, structure, building system or building components in whole or parts thereof. 
Stop-work order. An order by the building official or his designee which requires the immediate cessation of all work and work activities described in the order. 
Structural component. Any part of a system, building or structure, load-bearing or nonload-bearing, which is integral to the structural integrity thereof, including but not limited to walls, partitions, columns, beams and girders. 
Structural work or alteration. The installation or assembling of new structural components into a system, building or structure. Also, any change, repair or replacement of any existing structural component of a system, building or structure. 
Substantial completion. Where the construction work has been sufficiently completed in accordance with the applicable city, state and federal codes, so that the owner can occupy or utilize the project for the use for which it is intended. 
Value. Job cost. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-5. - Permitting and inspection. 
The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan by the jurisdiction under the requirements of this code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-6. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)	General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code, and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. 
(b)	Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this code. If such building or premises are occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code. 
(c)	Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)	Revocation of permits. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any provisions of this code. 
(e)	Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this code in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(f)	Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this code. 
(g)	Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system or for the public safety, health and general welfare not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-7. - Mobile home setup and installation. 
(a)	Any mobile home setup or placement contractor or subcontractor engaged in the operation of locating, setting or placing a mobile home on any authorized mobile home lot within the city shall hereby be registered or properly licensed with the city. When obtaining a permit the contractor or subcontractor shall engage and utilize a city-approved electrician, plumber, mechanical or gas contractor for each installation. 
(b)	It shall be the responsibility of any mobile home setup or placement contractor or subcontractor to assure that the mobile home situated and tied down on any approved lot shall adhere to all city and state requirements regarding tiedowns, setbacks and proper hookups. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07) 
State Law reference— Mobile home tie-down and installation requirements, F.S. § 320.8325  
Sec. 14-8. - Sand and soil retention on construction sites. 
(a)	A temporary, solid, nonporous fence measuring at least six feet high shall be placed around the perimeter of all construction sites in the city prior to any construction, excavation and demolition in order to prevent the migration and movement of loose sand, soil and construction debris from such construction sites to neighboring properties or adjoining roads as a result of high winds and heavy rains. Fencing shall also be sufficiently high to be above any sand level on the property. The fence will be constructed of concrete, properly braced plywood, stockade or board and batten fences. The design engineer or architect shall certify that the fence will withstand 110-mile-per-hour wind loads. Fences will be painted tan with no advertisement. Street addresses will be placed on the fence near the entrance of the construction site. Plastic fabric material or snow fencing is prohibited. Those sections of fence that must be removed to allow entry or exit of equipment or materials will be replaced as soon as possible and in any event replacement shall be completed prior to the end of the same workday that the fence was removed. 
(b)	The method of compliance shall be demonstrated to the building official or his designee prior to the issuance of a permit. The building official may waive the requirement of this section if windblown sand, soil or debris is not a potential problem, i.e., construction does not include site work exposing sand or the property is surrounded sufficiently by heavy vegetation to preclude drifting or blowing sand, soil or debris. 
(c)	Where permitted construction is not in compliance with the provisions of this section, the code administrator shall issue a stop-work order prohibiting further construction until compliance with this section is demonstrated. In periods of emergency or severe weather, the code administrator may require or take emergency, temporary measures to prevent the movement or migration of sand, soil or construction debris, etc., onto neighboring properties or adjoining streets, and charge the permittee the reasonable cost of taking such measures. 
(d)	These requirements for sand fences shall in no way relieve the owners of vacant properties from providing sand fences as described above or vegetation to prevent migration of sand, soil, debris, etc., to adjacent properties or streets. Property owners are responsible for maintaining the property so as not to create a nuisance or unsightly condition to occur on either his property or adjacent properties. The requirement for fencing and the standards for fence construction affect all construction sites. 
(e)	Required sand fencing shall be removed when vegetation or other sand and soil stabilization is sufficient, as determined by the development code administrator, to adequately control migration and movement of sand.  
Secs. 14-9—14-30. - Reserved  
ARTICLE II. - ADOPTION OF BUILDING AND OTHER TECHINCAL CODES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-07, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 2007, amended art. II in its entirety and enacted the provisions set out herein. The former art. II, titled Local Supplement to the Florida Building Code, Administration, derived from Ord. No. 03-02, § II, adopted Feb. 6, 2002. 
State Law reference— Florida Building Codes Act, F.S. § 553.70 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, maintenance and repair of buildings, including permits and penalties, that certain code known as the Florida Building Code, published by the Florida Building Commission, except as amended in this article. Copies of the subject code have been and now are filed in the office of the city clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out in length in this section, and the provisions contained therein shall control within the limits of the town. 
All permits issued by the City of DeBary or County of Volusia, (as acting agent), for new construction of residential and commercial projects shall be governed by the time limitations as described in the Florida Building Code BOAF Model Administration Code, Chapter 1 Administration, Section 104.5 Conditions of the Permit. 
In particular, subsection 104.5.1 provides the following: 
104.5.1 Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 6 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 6 months after the time the work is commenced. Failure to obtain an approved inspection within 180 days of the previous approved inspection shall constitute suspension or abandonment. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each, may be allowed by the building official for the permit, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated prior to the expiration date. The building official shall record the extension of time granted. 
In addition to subsection 104.5.1 of the BOAF Model Administration Code Chapter 1, all permits (inclusive of all extensions) for new construction of residential and commercial projects shall be null and void two years and one day after date of issuance and shall be deemed noncompliant. The expiration date will appear on the permit. No work shall be performed under a noncompliant permit. Any person performing work under a non-compliant permit shall be in violation of this section and will be sent a notice to appear before the city code enforcement board. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-32. - Permit fees. 
The building permit fees shall be as presently established or as hereafter amended by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-33. - Local administrative changes to the Florida Building Code. 
The following administrative amendments to the Florida Building Code are hereby adopted and shall apply within the city ( underlined language are additions, stricken through language are deletions, provisions not referenced are not being modified by this section): 
Section 104.10.1 Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The Building Official shall coordinate with the Floodplain Administrator to review requests submitted to the Building Official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 117. 
Section 107.6.1 Building permits issued on the basis of an affidavit. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), the authority granted to the Building Official to issue permits, to rely on inspections, and to accept plans and construction documents on the basis of affidavits and plans submitted pursuant to Section 105.14 and Section 107.6, shall not extend to the flood load and flood resistance construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
117 Variances in flood hazard areas. 
117.1 Flood hazard areas. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the variance procedures adopted in the local floodplain management article shall apply to requests submitted to the Building Official for variances to the provisions of Section 1612.4 of the Florida Building Code, Building or, as applicable, the provisions of R322 of the Florida Building Code, Residential. This section shall not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
Modify Sec. R322.2.1 as follows: 
R322.2.1 Elevation requirements. 
1.	Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas not designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation or 12 inches above the crown of all adjacent roads, whichever is higher. 
2.	Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot (305 mm), or to the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
3.	In areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), buildings and structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM plus 1 foot , or at least 3 feet 2 feet (610mm) if a depth number is not specified, or 12 inches above the crown of all adjacent roads, whichever is higher. 
4.	Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, or 12 inches above the crown of all adjacent roads, whichever is higher. 
Exception: Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation, including basements whose floors are not below grade on all sides, shall meet the requirements of Section R322.2.2. 
Modify Sec. R322.3.2 as follows: 
R322.3.2 Elevation requirements. 
1.	All buildings and structures erected within coastal high-hazard areas shall be elevated so that the lowest portion of all structural members supporting the lowest floor, with the exception of mat or raft foundations, piling, pile caps, columns, grade beams and bracing, is: 
1.1	Located at or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot, the design flood elevation, or 12 inches above the crown of all adjacent roads, whichever is higher, if the lowest horizontal structural member is oriented parallel to the direction of wave approach, where parallel shall mean less than or equal to 20 degrees (0.35 rad) from the direction of approach, or 
1.2	Located at the base flood elevation plus 2 feet 1 foot (305mm) , or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher, if the lowest horizontal structural member is oriented perpendicular to the direction of wave approach, where perpendicular shall mean greater than 20 degrees (0.35 rad) from the direction of approach. 
2.	Basement floors that are below grade on all sides are prohibited. 
3.	The use of fill for structural support is prohibited. 
4.	Minor grading, and the placement of minor quantities of fill, shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios and walkways. 
Exception: Walls and partitions enclosing areas below the design flood elevation shall meet the requirements of Sections R322.3.4 and R322.3.5. 
(Ord. No. 02-14 , § 2, 2-5-14)  
Secs. 14-34—14-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 14-41. - Adopted. 
There are hereby adopted by the city the terms and conditions set forth and embraced within the Florida Building Code as to the regulation of electrical systems, copies of the subject code being on file in the office of the city clerk. The terms and conditions set forth within the booklet are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out in length in this section and the provisions contained therein shall control within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-42. - Temporary power. 
(a)	The building official may permit temporary connecting of any system of wiring, either during the course of construction or for temporary light, heat, power or advertising, provided that no temporary connection shall be for a period of time over 30 days or such time as shall be specified in writing by the electrical inspector. Construction power shall be a minimum of 70 amps 220 volts and shall provide one 50-amp three-wire 200-volt single phase receptacle and one 15-amp 110-volt three-wire receptacle. These receptacles shall have separate and proper overload protection. 
(b)	The building official may give special permission to connect and furnish electric current to any wiring, apparatus, or fixtures for a period of not exceeding 30 days, if, in his opinion, such wiring, apparatus or fixtures are in such condition that current may be safely connected therewith, and there exists an urgent necessity for such use. 
(c)	The building official may issue special permits for the installation and use of temporary wiring and/or equipment as permitted by subsection (b) of this section, provided that the use of such temporary wiring and/or equipment shall be limited to a period of not more than 30 days after the date of the permit. If reasonable necessity is established for an extension of time in the use of such temporary wiring and/or equipment, the permit for such use may be extended by the electrical inspector for an additional period of 30 days from its original date of expiration, but permission for the use of such temporary installation shall in no case be extended for a greater period of time than 90 days after the date of issuance of the original permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-43. - Permit fees. 
The building permit fees shall be as presently established or as hereafter amended by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-44. - Insurance. 
Any master electrician entering into an agreement with any person for consideration either for a fixed contract price or a cost-plus basis or for anything of value or for a supervising fee or for a management fee or for a commission to supervise the installation of electrical wiring apparatus of equipment, for light, heat, power or advertising as covered by the terms and provisions of this article, shall be held and considered to be carrying on the business of electrical contracting and shall be required to furnish sufficient insurance in the amount of $100,000.00 general liability for each person, plus $300,000.00 for each accident. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Secs. 14-45—14-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 14-51. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, maintenance and repair of plumbing, including permits and penalties, that certain code known as the Florida Building Code, as published by the Florida Building Commission. Copies of the subject code are filed in the office of the city clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section, and the provisions contained therein shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-52. - Permit fees. 
The building permit fees shall be as presently established or as hereafter amended by resolution of the council 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Secs. 14-53—14-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISON 4. - GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city that certain code known as the Florida Building Code, as published by the Florida Building Commission. Copies of the subject code are filed in the office of the city clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out a length in this section, and the provisions contained therein shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-62. - Permit fees. 
The building permit fees shall be as presently established or as hereafter amended by resolution of the council 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Secs. 14-63—14-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SWIMMING POOL CODE 
 
Sec. 14-71. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city that certain code known as the Florida Building Code, as published by the Florida Building Commission. Copies of the subject code are filed in the office of the city clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section, and the provisions contained therein shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-72. - Permit fees. 
The building permit fees shall be as presently established or as hereafter amended by resolution of the council 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-73. - Above-ground pool safety barrier. 
All pools constructed above ground are required to have an additional barrier around the pool area to ensure compliance with the swimming pool code as adopted. Such additional requirements may include a fence around property, (fencing must meet barrier requirements), screen enclosure of the pool area, etc. In either case the barrier must be approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-74. - Permits. 
There is hereby established a permit for the installation of residential solar water heaters and residential solar swimming pool heaters. Said permit may be issued only to licensed residential solar water heating contractors and/or specialty structure contractors, except that a homeowner may pull his permit for the installation of a solar water or pool heater and/or construction of their own specialty structure on his own home for the personal, noncommercial use, provided that the homeowner actually performs the work and is solely responsible therefor, and provided that the work done shall conform with all applicable codes and ordinances pertaining to construction within the county. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Secs. 14-75—14-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT CODE 
 
Sec. 14-81. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city that certain code known as the Unsafe Building Abatement Code, being the 1985 (seventh) edition thereof, as published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. Copies of the subject code are filed in the office of the city clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section, and the provisions contained therein shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Secs. 14-82—14-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - EXCAVATION AND GRADING CODE 
 
Sec. 14-86. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city that certain code known as the Standard Excavation and Grading Code, being the 1975 edition thereof, as published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. Copies of the subject code are filed in the office of the city clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section, and the provisions contained therein shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-87. - Amendments. 
The Standard Excavation and Grading Code adopted by this article is amended in the following respects: 
Section 102, Permits Required, is amended to read as follows: 
No person, firm, corporation, or entity shall do any grading or excavation without having first obtained a grading or excavation permit from the building official except for the following: 
(1)	Grading in an isolated, self-contained area if there is no danger apparent to private or public property. 
(2)	An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining walls or other structures authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such structure. 
(3)	Cemetery graves. 
(4)	Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations. 
(5)	Excavation for wells or tunnels or utilities. 
(6)	Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineering or engineering geologists. 
(7)	Violation of the requirements of this section shall, in addition to the penalties provided for in this code, subject the violator to cancellation of any building permit previously issued. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-88. - Fees. 
Fees under the Standard Excavation and Grading Code shall be as presently established or as hereafter amended by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-89. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article [division] shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties designated in section 1-11. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-90. - Stop-work orders; emergency measures. 
Any construction, excavation or grading which is not in compliance with the provisions of this article [division], the Standard Excavation and Grading Code, shall be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the chief building official which prohibits further construction until compliance with such provisions is demonstrated. In periods of emergency or severe weather, the chief building official may take temporary measures to remove and alleviate any hazards created by violations of such provisions and charge the applicant, permittee or owner the reasonable costs of taking such emergency measures. 
(a)	Possession and display of permit. A copy of the permit shall be kept in the possession of any operator of earth-moving or bulldozing equipment and shall be displayed to any police officer of the town or other town official upon request. 
(b)	Enforcement. Every police officer or other official of the city who shall observe any operation subject to this section being commenced shall immediately request the operator to display the permit required by this section. If the operator fails to so display the permit, then the work shall be immediately halted until compliance with this section is made. If the operator or any other person acting under or on behalf of the project proponent shall nevertheless continue the project without complying with this section, the operator shall be cited by the officer for violation. 
(c)	Removing or damaging protected tree. If any person shall, with knowledge of the requirements of this section (to the extent that the state or county forester shall deem it probable that it will die) [damage or remove] any protected tree, he shall pay a penalty of $500.00 for each such protected tree damaged or removed and shall be required to replace such tree to the satisfaction of the forester. In addition, the chief building official shall stay all additional work on the land until such fine be paid and replacement be made. 
(d)	Penalty. Violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 in addition to the penalties provided in subsection (e) when applicable. 
(e)	Surveying and other predevelopment activities. No motorized land clearing equipment shall be used for surveying and other predevelopment activities. Survey operations are restricted to handheld brush and tree removal equipment methods. 
(f)	Maximum extent of excavation and grading. Excavation and grading shall be restricted to a maximum of ten percent of the mean elevation within a 25-foot radius of center. This is to ensure that the least amount of soil removal is accomplished and that maximum dune and natural contour occur to provide protection from storms and high water. Deviation from this requirement in areas of severe elevation differentials will be addressed during the subdivision review process. Any such deviation from this requirement in the event of severe elevation differentials must be approved by a vote of at least four members of the town council during the subdivision review process. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-92. - Demonstration of compliance; excavation and grading prohibited on certain days. 
(a)	No excavation or grading shall be permitted nor shall any excavation or grading permit be issued for single-family residential property unless a building permit for single-family construction has been issued and the applicant demonstrates, with competent evidence, that the excavation, grading and construction will not result in the movement of sand, soil, refuse, litter, discarded building materials and unused building materials onto neighboring properties or adjoining public roads, sidewalks or bike paths. 
(b)	No excavation or grading shall be permitted nor shall any excavation or grading permit be issued for any other property within the town unless the applicant demonstrates, with competent evidence, that such excavation, grading and construction will not result in the movement of sand, soil, refuse, litter, discarded building materials and unused building materials onto neighboring properties or adjoining public roads, sidewalks or bike paths or the applicant demonstrates, with competent evidence, a satisfactory method of retaining sand, soil, refuse, litter, discarded building materials and unused building materials on the site of excavation, grading or construction which prevents movement of these materials onto neighboring properties or adjoining public roads, sidewalks or bike paths. The applicant must comply with the site plan review requirements of the land use and development code (part III of this volume), where applicable. 
(c)	No excavation and grading, regardless of whether or not a permit is required for such excavation and grading, shall be permitted in the city on Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-93. - Stabilization and protection of land during road development and construction. 
(a)	All future and existing road cuts must be stabilized to prevent erosion of the dune system and prevent destruction of or damage to existing vegetation. If road development and construction requires cuts through existing dune structures or the natural contours of land, the cut areas of the land must be stabilized and protected with retaining walls or other suitable construction methods approved by the town and in accordance with sound and accepted environmental standards. 
(b)	If road development and construction results in the filling of land areas beyond the extent of the platted right-of-way, the developer must take adequate measures and precautions to protect, and replace when necessary, existing natural vegetation in accordance with sound environmental and engineering standards. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Secs. 14-94, 14-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - HOUSING CODE 
 
Sec. 14-96. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the town that certain code known as the Standard Housing Code, being the 1994 edition thereof, as published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. Copies of the subject code are filed in the office of the town clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section, and the provisions contained therein shall be controlling within the limits of the town. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-97. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 14-98. - Adopted. 
Except as added to, deleted, modified, or amended herein, the city hereby adopts, as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of DeBary, the most current edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition, First Printing, as prepared, edited, and published by the International Code Council, Inc. and incorporates the same by reference as if fully set forth herein. Copies of such property maintenance code, together with this division, shall be made available for reference in the office of the City Clerk of the City of DeBary. 
(Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Sec. 14-99. - Amendments. 
Certain sections and portions of sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition, as adopted in section 14-98 of this Code, are hereby amended, deleted, modified, or added as stated herein and shall have full force and effect as if set therein: 
(1)	Section 101.1.1. is hereby added, shall be entitled "Adoption," and shall read as follows: These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of DeBary, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)	Section 103.5, entitled "Fees," is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(3)	Section 302.4 , entitled "Weeds," shall remain numbered and titled as such, but the content thereof is deleted, and the following text shall be substituted therefor: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of ten (10) inches. 
(4)	Section 304.14 , entitled "Insect Screens," shall remain numbered and titled as such, but the content thereof is deleted, and the following text shall be substituted therefor: Year-round, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any other areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged, or stored, shall be supplied with approved, tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
(5)	Section 602.3 , entitled "Heat Supply," shall remain numbered and titled as such, but the content thereof is deleted, and the following text shall be substituted therefor: Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases, or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from November 1 st to March 30 th sufficient to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
(6)	Section 602.4 , entitled "Occupiable Work Spaces," shall remain numbered and titled as such, but the content thereof is deleted, and the following text shall be substituted therefor: Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period of November 1 st to March 30 th sufficient to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit during the period the spaces are occupied. 
(7)	Supplemental code . The provisions of this code shall be supplemental to all other codes and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Sec. 14-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNLICENSED CONTRACTORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-07, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 2007, amended art. III in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. III derived from ord. No. 03-00, § I, adopted March 1, 2000. 
 
Sec. 14-101. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of F.S. §§ 489.127(1), 489.13, 489.132(1), or 489.531(1). 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Secs. 14-102—14-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSED CONTRACTORS BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-07, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 2007, amended art. IV in its entirety and enacted the provisions set out herein. The former art. IV, titled Licensed Contractors, derived from Ord. No. 04-00, § 1, adopted April 5, 2000. 
 
Sec. 14-111. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a city building trades board, which shall be composed of: 
(1)	One construction contractor, who must be a general residential or building contractor; 
(2)	One master electrician; 
(3)	One master plumber; 
(4)	One mechanical contractor or a class A air conditioning contractor; 
(5)	One architect registered in the state, or if no such person is willing to serve, then any person licensed by F.S. ch. 489, part I or II; 
(6)	One engineer registered in the state, or if no such person is willing to serve, then any person licensed by F.S. ch. 489, part I or II; and 
(7)	Three representatives who have never been members or practitioners of a profession regulated by the board or members of any closely-related profession. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-112. - Term of office. 
(a)	Terms. The initial appointments to the board shall be as follows: 
(1)	Three members appointed for a term of one year. 
(2)	Three members appointed for a term of two years. 
(3)	Three members appointed for a term of three years. 
Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for a term of three years. Board appointments shall be made by the city council. No elected official or employee of the city shall be appointed to serve on the board. A member may be reappointed upon approval of the city council. 
(b)	Vacancies. In the event of a vacancy on the board, the city council shall appoint a new member to serve out the remainder of the term. If any member fails to attend two of three successive meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chairman, the board shall declare the member's office vacant, and the city council shall promptly fill such vacancy. The members shall serve in accordance with ordinances of the city council, and may be suspended and removed for cause as provided by law for the removal of members of boards. 
(c)	Subsequent terms. Upon expiration of the initial terms, all members may then be appointed to serve one additional three-year term. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-113. - Qualifications of members. 
All members of the building trades board must be residents of the city. Except for those members as provided in subsection 14-101(7), qualifications of the individuals appointed to the board shall be as follows: 
(1)	Construction contractor must meet the requirements of this article. 
(2)	Master electrician must meet the requirements of this article. 
(3)	Master plumber must meet the requirements of this article. 
(4)	Mechanical contractor must meet the requirements of this article. 
(5)	The architect must be a registered architect under the laws of the state. 
(6)	The engineer must be a registered engineer under the laws of the state. 
(7)	The class A air conditioning contractor must meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-114. - Code administration manager. 
The code administration manager, as designated by the city manager, shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of the building trades board and shall interpret the various trade codes adopted by the city for the benefit of the members of the board and public. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-115. - Powers and duties; meetings; required vote. 
(a)	The powers, authority and duties of the building trades board are limited to the incorporated areas of the city. 
(b)	The board shall meet at least four times each year. However, upon request of the city, or at such other times as may be necessary, the chairman of the board may call a hearing of the board. Hearings may also be called by written notice signed by at least three members of the board or the board may set a schedule of hearings for a given year. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings of this board, and all hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. 
(c)	The board shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary at the January meeting to serve for the ensuing year. The chairman may be elected to succeed himself. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records of its official actions. 
(d)	Five members of the board shall constitute a quorum at any meeting, and a majority vote of the board shall be required to enable the board to take disciplinary action against a contractor as provided in this article. A majority vote of those board members present shall be required for all other official actions of the board. 
(e)	The board shall promulgate rules and regulations for the conduct of its meetings and hearings. 
(f)	The board shall have the duty of determining the eligibility of applicants to take required examinations upon which certificates of competency are based and to issue certificates of competency upon proper qualification of applicants. 
(g)	The board is authorized to enforce the applicable provisions of this article against registered contractors. 
(h)	[The board is authorized to] subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may be served by the department of public safety (sheriff's office) of the city. 
(i)	[The board is authorized to] subpoena evidence to its hearings. 
(j)	[The board is authorized to] take testimony under oath. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-116. - Removal of members. 
The city council may remove any member of the building trades board for misconduct, incompetency or neglect of duty; provided such member so accused shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council and at least ten days' notice of hearing shall be given to the member. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-117. - Notice of noncompliance. 
(a)	Upon receiving a written or oral complaint from a governmental agency or any city agency for reasonable cause to believe that a locally licensed or registered contractor has violated the duties and provisions of this article, Florida Statutes, or any adopted building code, growth management services may initiate an investigation. It is the policy of the city that the purpose of regulation is to protect the public by attaining compliance with the policies established in law. Fines and other penalties are provided in order to ensure compliance; however, the collection of fines and the imposition of penalties are intended to be secondary to the primary goal of attaining compliance with this article. It is the intent of the city council that growth management services charged with enforcing this article shall issue a notice of noncompliance as its first response to a minor violation of this article in any instance in which it is reasonable to assume that the violator was unaware of such a law or ordinance, or unclear as to how to comply with it. A violation of this article is a "minor violation" if it does not result in economic or physical harm to a person or adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare or create a significant threat of such harm. 
(b)	A "notice of noncompliance" is a notification by growth management services, which is issued to the locally licensed or registered contractor that is subject to article IX. A notice of noncompliance should not be accompanied with a fine or other disciplinary penalty. It should identify the specific ordinance that is being violated, provide information on how to comply with this article, and specify a reasonable time for the violator to comply with this article. Failure of said licensee to take action correcting the violation within a set period of time would then result in the institution of further disciplinary proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-118. - Administrative complaint. 
(a)	If the investigation determines that a violation of this article has occurred and there is sufficient evidence to prosecute, growth management services shall file an administrative complaint with the board. If an administrative complaint is filed, the board shall hold a public hearing to determine if disciplinary action should be taken against the contractor and if so, specify the action. Each administrative complaint shall provide, as a minimum, the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the alleged violator being charged; 
(2)	A clear statement of the violations charged; 
(3)	A clear statement of the factual basis for the charges; and 
(4)	A recommendation to the board for action to be taken against the local license or registration. 
Copies of contracts, drawings or specifications may be attached as an exhibit to the complaint. 
(b)	Upon the filing of an administrative complaint, the alleged violator will be notified that the board will conduct a public hearing to investigate the allegations in the complaint by certified mail, return receipt requested; by hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer/investigator, or by leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with some person of his family above 18 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice, or by publication in accordance with F.S. § 120.60(5). The alleged violator shall be given at least ten days' written notice prior to the date of the public hearing. Said notice shall state the date, time and place of said hearing and that the alleged violator is responsible for making his/her own arrangements for preserving the testimony given at the hearing. 
(c)	Each contractor holding a license or registration from the city shall be responsible for keeping his/her current mailing address on file with the building official. The building official shall be responsible for timely mailing, delivering or publishing a notice of hearing to the contractor. 
(d)	The building official shall provide clerical and administrative personnel to the board as may reasonably be required. 
(e)	Each case before the board shall be presented by the building official or other city staff. At the hearing, the board shall proceed to hear evidence and testimony on the cases before the board. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The board shall take testimony from the building official or city staff, the alleged violator and other witnesses called by either the city staff or the alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. After hearing evidence and/or testimony on the case, the board shall issue its order, findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with the powers granted in this article. the board, building official, or his duly authorized representative, or the alleged violator may request a postponement or continuance of a scheduled public hearing. 
(f)	The board may take any of the following actions against any certificate holder or registrant: require financial restitution to a consumer for financial harm directly related to a violation of a provision of this article, or impose suspension or revocation of the registration or certificate of competency, or impose an administrative fine not to exceed $5,000.00 per violation, or a combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-119. - Orders imposing disciplinary action. 
(a)	Orders imposing disciplinary action against a contractor shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)	A clear statement of the violations charged; 
(2)	A clear statement of the factual basis for the charges; 
(3)	Evidence that the contractor was given notice of the charges, and of an opportunity to appear and present evidence and testimony regarding the charges; 
(4)	Findings of fact made by the board; 
(5)	Conclusions of law which demonstrate that the facts alleged constitute violations of this article; 
(6)	A statement of the penalty and any reasonable investigative and legal costs imposed against the locally licensed or registered contractor; 
(7)	A recommendation by the board to the construction industry licensing board or the electrical contractors licensing board, as the case may be, for action to be taken against the state registration; 
(8)	A clear statement informing the contractor of the right to appeal the action against the license, registration or certificate of competency, and of the right of the contractor to challenge the recommendation to the construction industry licensing board or the electrical contractors licensing board, as the case may be. 
(b)	The board's recommendation to the construction industry licensing board or the electrical contractors licensing board, as the case may be, for purposes of any challenge to said recommendation, shall be considered to have been issued upon receipt by the board. Recommendations by the board and challenges shall be mailed to the construction industry licensing board or the electrical contractors licensing board, as the case may be. The board shall submit copies of the following documents to the construction industry licensing board or the electrical contractors licensing board, as the case may be, along with the following: 
(1)	The administrative complaint; 
(2)	Minutes or a transcript of the hearing; 
(3)	Any exhibits considered by the board; and 
(4)	If a challenge is filed, upon request of the construction industry licensing board, electrical contractors licensing board or the department of business and professional regulation, proof of service, or, if not perfected, proof of attempts to obtain service. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-120. - Investigative and legal costs. 
The board may assess reasonable investigative and legal costs for the prosecution of the violation against the violator. For the purpose of this article, reasonable investigative and legal costs shall include the cost of any consultation with an expert witness for the prosecution of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-121. - Penalties cumulative and consecutive. 
Where several of the above violations shall occur in one or several cases being considered together, the penalties shall normally be cumulative and consecutive. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-122. - Exemptions. 
The exemptions contained in F.S. §§ 489.103, and 489.503, shall apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-123. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Board means the city building trades board. 
Building code means the building code of the city. 
Building maintenance engineer means a person who possesses the qualifications of a journeyman plumber and who is regularly employed to maintain or make necessary repairs to the plumbing fixtures installed, contained and used in or upon buildings or premises owned or occupied or controlled by the person or firm by whom employed. 
Building official means the code administration manager of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
Certificate means a certificate of competency issued by the code administration manager as provided in this article. 
Construction contractor means any person who, for compensation, undertakes to, or submits a bid to, or does himself or by others, construct, repair, alter, remodel, add to, subtract from, or improve any building or structure, including related improvements to real estate for others or for resale to others, and who is responsible for substantially the entire project. Construction contractors are subdivided into three classifications as follows: 
(1)	General contractor , whose scope of operation is unlimited as to the height and complexity of design in the construction he undertakes, who has shown evidence of possessing the necessary knowledge and experience and has been granted a general contractor's certificate of competency as provided in this article. 
(2)	Building contractor , whose services are limited to construction of commercial buildings and single- or multiple-dwelling residential buildings, neither to exceed three stories in height, and accessory use structures in connection therewith or those whose services are limited to remodeling, repair or improvement of any size building if the services do not affect the structural members of the building. 
(3)	Residential building contractor , whose services are limited to construction, remodeling, repair or improvement of one-, two- or three-family unit residences not exceeding two stories in height and accessory use structure in connection therewith. 
Contracting means, except as exempted in this article, engaging in business as a contractor. 
City means the territory in the city, within the corporate limits of the City of DeBary. 
Electrical code means the electrical code of the city. 
Electrical construction includes and governs all work and materials used in installing, maintaining and extending a system of electrical wiring for light, heat, power or advertising, and all appurtenances thereof or all apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith, inside or attached to any building or structure, lot or premises; provided, however, that none of the provisions of this article shall apply to the replacement of lamps or the connection of portable devises to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed. 
Firm means any type of organization, including co-partnership, corporation, company, association and individual. 
H. H. Block & Associates examination used throughout this article shall mean "Experior." 
Journeyman electrician means a person who possesses the necessary qualifications, training and technical knowledge to install electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment for light, heat, power or advertising as covered in this article under the supervision of a licensed master electrician. 
Journeyman installer means a person who possesses the necessary qualified training and technical knowledge to install, extend, alter, repair, maintain or remove any mechanical apparatus, or any device in connection therewith, for air conditioning, heating, ventilation, refrigeration and incinerator, and who is qualified under the terms and provisions of this article and shall have capacity of doing mechanical work under the supervision of a mechanical contractor according to the plans and specifications furnished to him in accordance with the rules and regulations governing mechanical installations within the limits of this article or the mechanical code. 
Journeyman plumber means a person who performs the manual work of installing plumbing under the direction of a master plumber and/or plumbing contractor. 
License means the occupational license issued by the county as a prerequisite of engaging in business. 
Master electrician means a person who possesses the necessary qualifications, training and technical knowledge to plan, lay out and supervise the installation of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment for light, heat, power or advertising as covered by the terms and provisions of this article. 
Master plumber and plumbing contractor means a person who assumes responsible charge and direction or other persons in the installation of plumbing. 
Mechanical code means the mechanical code of the city. 
Mechanical contractor. There shall be five classes of mechanical contractors as follows: 
(1)	Mechanical contractor means any person whose services are unlimited in the execution of contracts requiring the experience, knowledge and skill to install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend or design, when not prohibited by law, central air conditioning, refrigeration, heating and ventilating, including duct work in connection with a complete system only to the extent such duct work is preformed by the contractor as is necessary to make complete an air distribution system, boiler and unfired pressure vessel systems, lift station equipment and piping, and all appurtenances, apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith, and to install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend or design, when not prohibited by law, piping, insulation of pipes, vessels and ducts, pressure and process piping, pneumatic control piping, gasoline tanks and pump installations and piping for same, standpipe, airlines, vacuum line piping, oxygen lines, nitrous oxide piping, ink and chemical lines, fuel transmission lines, and installation of a condensate drain from an air conditioning unit to an existing safe waste or other approved disposal other than a direct connection to a sanitary system. The scope of the work for such contractor shall also include any excavation work incidental thereto, but shall not include any work such as liquefied petroleum or natural gas fuel lines within buildings, potable water lines or connections thereto, sanitary sewer lines, swimming pool piping and filters, or electrical power wiring. 
(2)	Class A air conditioning contractor means any person whose services are unlimited in the execution of contracts requiring the experience, knowledge and skill to install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend or design, when not prohibited by law, central air conditioning, refrigeration, heating and ventilating, including duct work in connection with a complete system only to the extent such duct work is performed by the contractor as is necessary to make complete an air distribution system, boiler and unfired pressure vessel systems, and all apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith, and to install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter or design, when not prohibited by law, piping, pneumatic control piping and installation of a condensate drain from an air conditioning unit to an existing safe waste or any other approved disposal other than a direct connection to a sanitary system. The scope of the work for such contractor shall also include any excavation work incidental thereto, but shall not include any work such as liquefied petroleum or natural gas fuel lines within buildings, potable water lines or connections thereto, sanitary sewer lines, swimming pool piping and filters, or electrical power wiring. 
(3)	Class B air conditioning contractor means any person whose services are limited to 25 tons cooling and 500,000 BTU heating in any one system, in the execution of contracts requiring the experience, knowledge and skill to install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend or design, when not prohibited by law, central air conditioning, refrigeration, heating and ventilating, including duct work in connection with a complete system only to the extent such duct work is performed by the contractor as is necessary to make complete an air distribution system being installed under this classification, and to install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend or design, when not prohibited by law, piping insulating of pipes, vessels and ducts, and installation of condensate drain from an air conditioning unit to an existing safe waste or other approved disposal other than a direct connection to a sanitary system. 
(4)	Class C air conditioning contractor means any person whose business is limited to the servicing of air conditioning, heating or refrigeration systems, including duct alterations in connection with those systems he is servicing. 
(5)	Class D sheet metal contractor means a contractor whose services are unlimited in the sheet metal trade and who has the experience, knowledge and skill necessary for the manufacture, assembling, handling, erection, installation, dismantling, conditioning, adjustment, alteration, repair, servicing or designing, when not prohibited by law, of ferrous or nonferrous metal work of U.S. No. 10 gauge or its equivalent or lighter gauge and of other materials used in lieu thereof and of air handling equipment and reinforcement of same and including the balancing of air-handling systems. 
Owner-occupier means a person having a vested interest in the property who either occupies or intends to occupy the premises and who improves the premises for his own use. 
Plumbing means the practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and the public or private water supply systems within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of stormwater, liquid waste or sewage, and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal or other acceptable terminal. Plumbing does not include the installation, alteration, repair or maintenance of automatic sprinklers and their related appurtenances. 
Plumbing code means the plumbing code of the city. 
Residential solar water heating contractor means a specialty contractor whose contracting business consists of the execution of contracts requiring the skill, knowledge, ability and experience to size, install, alter, repair, maintain, relocate, replace or use residential domestic potable solar water heating systems, to include solar heating panels and all appurtenances, apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith. 
The scope of work of a residential solar water heating contractor is limited to solar domestic hot water systems for one-family, two-family or three-family residences not exceeding two stories in height and solar swimming pool heaters for residential swimming pools. The connection to potable water supplies is limited to state-certified residential solar water heating contractors. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to restrict or limit in any manner the legal authority of duly-licensed mechanical contractors, class A and B air conditioning contractors, or plumbing contractors to install residential solar water heating systems. 
Responsible managing employee or official means any agent, officer or employee of a construction contractor, electrical contractor, mechanical contractor and/or plumbing contractor who has authority to make administrative decisions, to hire, promote, transfer, lay off, disciple or discharge other employees, or effectively to recommend such action, or to superintend work in progress, and who is available for consultation in the technical and administrative phases of his principal's business when there is no work in progress. 
Specialty structure contractor means a contractor whose services are limited to the execution of contracts requiring the experience, knowledge and skill necessary for the fabrication, assembling, handling, erection, installation, dismantling, adjustment, alteration, repair, servicing and design work when not prohibited by law, in accordance with accepted engineering data and/or according to manufacturers' specifications, in the aluminum metal, vinyl and fiberglass screening material construction trade. 
(1)	The scope of work of a specialty structure contractor shall include and be limited to screened porches, screened enclosures, pool enclosure, performed panel-post and beam roofs, mobile home panel roof-overs, residential glass window enclosures, vinyl panel window enclosures, single-story self-contained aluminum utility storage structure (not to exceed 500 square feet), siding, soffit, fascia and gutters. All work shall comply with all plans, specifications, codes, laws and regulations applicable 
(2)	The scope of such work shall include masonry concrete work and be limited to foundations, slab and block kneewalls incidental to the aluminum and allied materials construction work. The specialty structure contractor, whose services are limited, shall not perform any work that alters the structural integrity of the building, including, but not limited to, roof trusses, lintels, load bearing walls and foundations. 
(3)	The specialty structure contractor shall subcontract, with a licensed qualified contractor in the field concerned, all other work incidental to that which is defined in this section but which is the work of a trade other than that of a specialty structure contractor. Nothing in this article shall be constructed to limit or infringe upon the scope of work of any specialty structure contractor certified pursuant to F.S. §§ 489.105(3) and 489.113(6). 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 14-124—14-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 14-131. - Purpose; certification by state. 
(a)	The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)	Set forth the qualifications for a person or firm, other than state certified contractors, to engage in the business as a construction contractor, electrical contractor, mechanical contractor and/or plumbing contractor as defined in this article within the incorporated areas of the city. 
(2)	Require the state certification of residential solar water heating contractors to perform work within the city, pursuant to F.S. ch. 489 and rule 21E-15.12 Florida Administrative Code. Residential solar water heating contractors who, as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, have a 1988-89 county occupational license for this trade and are registered with the state, may continue to engage in the trade without becoming state certified; except that only state certified residential solar water heating contractors are qualified to connect to a potable water supply. 
(3)	Require the state certification of specialty structure contractors to perform work within the city pursuant to F.S. ch. 489, and rule 21E-15.015, Florida Administrative Code. Specialty structure contractors who, as of the effective date of the ordinance, have a 1988-89 county occupational license for this trade and are registered with the state, may continue to engage in the trade without becoming state certified. If the contractor should have his occupational license or state registration suspended or revoked, or should the holder fail to renew, then the contractor must become state certified to engage in the occupation. 
(b)	The board will no longer issue new certificates of competency; all construction contractors, mechanical contractors and/or plumbing contractors wishing to engage in the business of construction contracting, mechanical contracting and/or plumbing contracting must be certified by the state, pursuant to F.S. ch. 489, or its successor, with the following exceptions: 
(1)	Construction contractors, mechanical contractors and/or plumbing contractors who as of October 1, 1981, have a current county certificate of competency for 1981-82 and are registered with the state and have a current county occupational license for 1981-82 may continue to engage in the construction contracting classification for which they are certified upon making application for renewal pursuant to section 14-122. 
(2)	As of October 1, 1981, construction contractors, mechanical contractors, and/or plumbing contractors who have active and valid certificates of competency from cities outside the county or counties other than Volusia County who are state registered and who meet the requirements of reciprocity, may be granted an initial certificate of competency until September 30, 1983. 
(c)	All roofing contractors and swimming pool contractors, as defined by F.S. ch. 489, operating within the city, must hereafter be certified by the state before conducting their trade. 
(d)	Any person who desires to become a state-certified residential solar water heating contractor or state certified specialty structure contractor shall apply to the construction industry licensing board of the state department of professional regulation in writing to take and pass the certification examination. A person shall be entitled to take the certification examination if the person: 
(1)	Is 18 years of age; 
(2)	Is of good moral character; and 
(3)	Meets eligibility requirements according to one of the criteria established in F.S. §§ 489.111(2)(c)1, 489.111(2)(c)2 or 489.111(2)(c)3. 
(e)	If the contractor should have his occupational license or state registration suspended or revoked, or should the holder fail to renew, then the contractors must become state certified to engage in the occupation. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-132. - Issuance of occupational license; qualifications; fee. 
(a)	Before an occupational license shall be granted to a construction contractor, electrical contractor, mechanical contractor and/or a plumbing contractor by the county, he shall be required to produce the following: 
(1)	A certificate of competency as issued by the code administration manager, or certification by the state. 
(2)	A certificate signed by a qualified agent of a casualty or liability company or other proof of compliance with the workers' compensation law. 
(b)	Revocation or suspension of a previously-issued certificate of competency shall immediately nullify the occupational license granted under this article. 
(c)	The occupational license fee to be paid to the county shall be in the amount fixed by resolution of the county council, after due public notice and hearing thereof. 
(d)	Roofing contractors and swimming pool contractors who have been issued a county occupational license for the fiscal year 1979-1980 and who are registered by the state pursuant to F.S. ch. 489 may continue to pursue their trade for as long as they maintain their state registration. Any loss of the state registration by whatever means shall require the contractor to become state certified if he wished to continue the pursuit of his trade. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-133. - Exemptions from licensing requirements. 
(a)	Private residences. An owner-occupier may secure a building permit for and perform and supervise work in connection with construction of his own private residence for his own occupancy, or the maintenance of, addition to, alteration of or repair of his own private residence; provided that the work to be done shall conform with the building code, electrical code, mechanical code, plumbing code and other ordinance as pertaining to building and construction within the city; and provide further that no owner-occupier shall be permitted to construct more than one home per calendar year unless he shall be licensed as a construction contractor as defined in this article. The construction of more than one residence by an individual owner in any 12-month period shall be constructed as construction contracting. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit an owner-occupier from obtaining a building permit for the maintenance, repair or addition to his own existing residential property more than one time during any calendar year. 
(b)	Commercial buildings. The owner of a commercial building may make alteration and/or repairs to such building without being licensed as required in this article, provided that no structural changes are involved which would require an expert knowledge of construction in the interest of the public safety; provided further that such alterations and/or repairs meet each and every requirement of the building code and other ordinances pertaining to building construction within the city, and provided such alteration and/or repair does not exceed $5,000.00 each. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-134. - Appeals. 
If any person feels aggrieved at a decision of the board or of the building official in refusing to grant such person the right to take an examination or grant a license, building permit or certificate of competency under this article, such person may appeal to the city council within ten days of such decision. The city council shall have the sole authority to act on the appeal. Any decision of the building official pertaining to this article may be appealed to the construction board of adjustments and appeals pursuant to the Standard Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-135. - Disciplinary proceedings. 
The following acts shall constitute grounds for disciplinary action: 
(1)	Attempting to procure or obtaining a certificate of competency, or registration to practice a trade by fraud, bribery or fraudulent or willful misrepresentation. 
(2)	Being convicted or found guilty of, or entering a plea of nolo contendere to, regardless of adjudication, a crime in any jurisdiction which directly relates to the practice of contracting or the ability to practice contracting. 
(3)	Making or filing a report or record which the certificate holder or registrant knows to be false, willfully failing to file a report or record required by state, county or federal law, willfully impeding or obstructing such filing, or inducing anther person to impede or obstruct such filing. Such reports or records shall include only those which are signed in the capacity of a certified contractor. 
(4)	Violating F.S. ch. 633, or the rules of the state fire marshal. 
(5)	Practicing on a revoked, suspended, inactive, or delinquent certificate of competency or registration. 
(6)	Willfully or deliberately disregarding and violating the applicable building codes or laws of the state or county thereof. 
(7)	Performing any act which assists a person or entity in engaging in the prohibited unregistered practice of contracting, if the certificate holder or registrant knows or has reasonable grounds to know that the person or entity was unregistered. 
(8)	Knowingly combining or conspiring with an unregistered person by allowing his or her certificate of competency, or registration, to be used by the unregistered person with intent to evade the provisions of this article. When a certificate holder or registrant allows his or her certificate or registration to be used by one or more business organizations without having any active participation in the operations, management, or control of such business organizations, such act constitutes prima facie evidence of an intent to evade the provisions of this article. 
(9)	Acting in the capacity of a contractor under any certificate of competency or registration issued hereunder except in the name of the certificate holder or registrant as set forth on the issued certificate of competency or registration, or in accordance with the personnel of the certificate holder or registrant as set forth in the application for the certificate of competency or registration, or as later changed as provided in this article. 
(10)	Committing mismanagement or misconduct in the practice of contracting that causes financial harm to a customer. Financial mismanagement or misconduct occurs when: 
a.	Valid liens have been recorded against the property or a contractor's customer for supplies or services ordered by the contractor for the customer's job; the contractor has received funds from the customer to pay for the supplies or services; and the contractor has not had the liens removed from the property, by payment or by bond, within 75 days after the date of such liens; 
b.	The contractor has abandoned a customer's job and the percentage of completion is less than the percentage of the total contract price paid to the contractor as of the time of abandonment, unless the contractor is entitled to retain such funds under the terms of the contract or refunds the excess funds within 30 days after the date the job is abandoned; or 
c.	The contractor's job has been completed, and it is shown that the customer has had to pay more for the contracted job than the original contract price, as adjusted for subsequent change orders, unless such increase in cost was the result of circumstances beyond the control of the contractor, was the result of circumstances caused by the customer, or was otherwise permitted by the terms of the contract between the contractor and the customer; or 
d.	The contractor fails, within 18 months, to pay or comply with a repayment schedule of judgment obtained against the contractor or a business qualified by the contractor and relating to the practice of contracting. 
(11)	Failing in any material respect to comply with the provisions of this article or violating a rule or lawful order of the board. 
(l2)	Being disciplined by the city for an act that is a violation of this article. 
(13)	Abandoning a construction project in which the contractor is engaged or under contract as a contractor. A project may be presumed abandoned after 90 days if the contractor terminates the project without just cause or without proper notification to the owner, including the reason for termination, or fails to perform work without just cause for 90 consecutive days. 
(14)	Signing a statement with respect to a project or contract falsely indicating that the work is bonded; falsely indicating that payment has been made for all subcontracted work, labor, and materials which results in a financial loss to the owner, purchaser, or contractor; or falsely indicating that workers' compensation and public liability insurance are provided. 
(15)	Failing to affix a registration or certification number as required by F.S. § 489.521(7). 
(16)	Committing fraud or deceit in the practice of contracting. 
(17)	Committing incompetency or misconduct in the practice of contracting. 
(18)	Committing gross negligence, repeated negligence, or negligence resulting in a significant danger to life or property. 
(19)	Proceeding on any job without obtaining applicable growth management services permits and inspections. 
(20)	Intimidating, threatening, coercing, or otherwise discouraging the service of a notice to owner under F.S. ch. 713, part I, or a notice to contractor under F.S. ch. 255 or ch. 713, part I. 
(21)	Failing to satisfy within a reasonable time, the terms of a civil judgment obtained against the licensee, or the business organization qualified by the licensee relating to the practice of the licensee's profession. 
(22)	Practicing beyond the scope of a certificate of registration. 
For the purpose of this article, construction is considered to be commenced when the contract is executed and the contractor has accepted funds from the customer or lender. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-136. - Vehicle signs. 
All trades requiring certificates of competency under this article are required to have signs denoting the contractor's or company's name on company service or installation vehicles in four-inch letters. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any service or installation vehicle in the capacity of electrical contractor, mechanical contractor and/or plumbing contractor unless the vehicles are identified with the name of the company or contractor in letters a minimum of four inches high. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-137. - Contents of application. 
Applications for the examination for certificates of competency shall be made to the building official in writing for each examination, on forms prescribed by the board, which shall be designed to include the following information: 
(1)	A statement of the general nature of the applicant's contracting business. 
(2)	The applicant's name and address; 
(3)	A record of the previous experience of the applicant in the field of electrical contracting, mechanical contracting and/or plumbing contracting. 
(4)	Whether the applicant has ever been licensed or had a professional or vocational license refused or revoked, or has surrendered or failed to renew a license when either informal or formal complaints against him were made. 
(5)	Proof that the applicant meets eligibility requirements according to the following criteria: 
a.	Applicants for journeyman electrician shall submit satisfactory evidence that they have had a minimum of four years of experience or education in the electrical construction trade that is acceptable to the board. Four years of experience shall be experience gained through working with an electrical contracting company engaged in electrical construction. 
b.	Applicants for a journeyman installer shall submit satisfactory evidence that they have had a minimum of three years of active experience as a workman who has learned his trade by serving an apprenticeship or as a skilled workman who is eligible to command the rate of a mechanical in his particular trade. 
c.	Applicants for a journey plumber shall submit satisfactory evidence that they have had a minimum of four years continuous full-time experience in the plumbing trade, under a competent master plumber. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Sec. 14-138. - Duties of building official on receiving application. 
The building official or his duly-authorized representative shall review and either accept or reject the application within ten working days of receipt of said application. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-07)  
Secs. 14-139—14-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLES VI—VIII. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 14-146—14-195. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note following Art. II of this chapter.  
ARTICLE IX. - PROPERTY NUMBERING SYSTEM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42. 
 
Sec. 14-196. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building means a building which is clearly incidental or subordinate to and customarily utilized in connection with a principal building located on the same lot. 
Building front means that area of a building which faces the public or private way pursuant to which the building is numbered. 
Grid system means a series of designated north-south parallel lines intersecting a second set of east-west parallel lines within a one-square-mile area, i.e., section, as indicated on the official property numbering maps. 
Numbering system means a uniform method of assigning and coordinating the addresses of buildings and properties based on a designated grid system contained in the official property numbering maps. 
Occupant means any person who is occupying or leasing a building or other property for a period exceeding 30 days. 
Owner means any and all persons who own the fee title to, or have an undivided interest in, any building or property which is subject to the provisions of this article. 
Principal building means any structure which is designed, built or used for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind for any residential, commercial or industrial purpose. 
Private way means any officially named thoroughfare used for vehicular traffic which is not included in the definition of the term "public way" and which is not maintained by the city or county. This term shall include but is not limited to roadways or driveways in apartment, condominium, commercial or industrial complexes which have been named and signed in accordance with county policy and F.S. § 316.077. 
Public way means that area of an officially named public road or right-of-way, either paved or unpaved, which is intended for vehicular traffic, excluding service entrances or driveways. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-6-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-197. - Penalty. 
Violations of this article are punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 14-198. - Purpose. 
This article is promulgated for the purpose of providing a uniform numbering system for the assignment of address numbers to buildings with access from officially named public and private ways in the city, in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 14-199. - Uniform system adopted. 
A uniform system of numbering buildings, as shown on the maps identified by the title "Property Numbering Maps" and filed in the office of the county planning department, is hereby adopted for use in the city. These maps and all explanatory matter thereon and related thereto are hereby adopted, incorporated in this article by reference, and made a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 14-200. - Administration; assignment of numbers. 
(a)	The county planning department shall be responsible for coordinating and maintaining the numbering system established by this article. Such department, and such other county agencies or departments as are designated by the county manager, shall issue building numbers in conformity with the uniform numbering system established in section 14-199. Should an existing building have, exhibit or be addressed by a number in conflict with the uniform numbering system, the planning department shall give notice to those owners or occupants whose building number is in conflict with the uniform numbering system. The notice shall be delivered to the owner and occupant by the United States Postal Service, by posting same in a conspicuous place on the building, or by hand delivery. The notice shall include a notification of a change of address which shall contain the new building number assigned to the building in accordance with the provisions of this article and shall direct the owner or the occupant to post the newly assigned building number on said building or property in accordance with section 14-201. The planning department shall, upon request and without charge, assign a number to each unnumbered building located in the city if a building has not been assigned a number pursuant to the uniform numbering system. 
(b)	The assignment by the county development coordination department and posting by the owner or occupant of the assigned number shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit for any such building. 
(c)	The planning department shall duly record and keep records of all numbers assigned under this section. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 14-201. - Posting of numbers. 
All buildings in the city shall have their assigned building numbers properly displayed, whether or not mail is delivered to such buildings or property. It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of each building in the city to post the assigned building number on the property in the following manner: 
(1)	The building (address) number shall be affixed to the front of the building, or to a separate structure in front of the building, such as a mailbox, post, wall, fence, etc., in such a manner so as to be clearly visible and legible from the public or private way on which the building fronts. 
(2)	Numerals shall be Arabic and shall not be less than three inches in height and one-half inch in width. 
(3)	The numerals shall be of a contrasting color with the immediate background of the building or structure on which such numerals are affixed. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 14-202. - Annexed land or other property becoming part of city. 
Whenever a parcel of land, a subdivision, or any part thereof, becomes part of the city by annexation or otherwise, it shall be the responsibility of the planning department to review the building, i.e., address, numbers of such property and determine whether such numbers, their posting, and the method of numbering for such annexed portion conform to the designated grid system and the uniform numbering system established by this article. If the number, posting or method of numbering do not conform with the county's grid system and the uniform numbering system, the planning department, or such other county agency or department as the city council may designate, shall give notice of such nonconformance to the owners or occupants of the affected building or property. Nonconforming includes but is not limited to a number out of sequence, odd or even number on the wrong side of the street, and rural box numbers. The notice shall be delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested, by posting said notice in a conspicuous place on the building, or by hand delivery. Said notice shall include a notification of a change of address which shall contain the new building number assigned to the building or property in accordance with the provisions of this article. Said notice shall further direct the owner or the occupant to post the newly assigned building number contained in the change of address on said building or property in accordance with section 14-201. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-6-94)  
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement, § 2-86 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited, § 6-5; license and regulations regarding canine hobby breeders, § 10-54 et seq.; property numbering system, § 14-196 et seq.; alarm systems, § 26-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate businesses, professions and occupations, F.S. § 166.221; authority to tax certain businesses, F.S. ch. 205. 
 
ARTICLE I. - BUSINESS TAX RECEIPTS 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Business tax receipt not to be construed as waiver of applicable law. 
Local business taxes imposed pursuant to this article merely constitute fees charged by the city for the privilege of conducting lawful business within the city's jurisdictional boundaries. Issuance of a local business tax receipt to a person or entity shall not be construed as an authorization or consent to conduct or participate in any business or activity other than the business for which such receipt was issued or any business, enterprise or activity which is unlawful, nor shall such issuance be interpreted as a waiver of any applicable zoning or use restrictions or other limitations, regulations and prohibitions imposed by the city, county, or state. In no event shall the issuance of a local business tax receipt be interpreted as or declared a zoning or use authorization or vested rights determination. The city reserves the right to cross-check business tax receipt applications with the city's planning and zoning and code enforcement departments for compliance purposes; however, business tax receipt recipients remain responsible for ensuring that their businesses are compatible with all applicable provisions of the Land Development Code, Code of Ordinances and all other laws, regulations, and restrictions. The issuance of a business tax receipt shall not prevent or otherwise estop the city from enforcing the Land Development Code, Code of Ordinances, and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations against the business tax receipt recipient and the premises from which they conduct or intend to conduct business. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Sec. 18-2. - Persons subject to tax. 
A local business tax is hereby levied on: 
(1)	Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office in the city, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within the city; 
(2)	Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within the city; 
(3)	Any person who does not qualify under the provisions of subsection (1) or (2) above and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce, if such local business tax is not prohibited by section 8 of article I of the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Sec. 18-3. - Exemptions. 
All persons exempt by the laws of the state from paying local business taxes shall be issued local business tax receipts without payment of the prescribed fee. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Sec. 18-4. - Appointment of business tax inspector. 
The neighborhood improvement officer is appointed to serve as the business tax inspector authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Sec. 18-5. - Business tax year; business taxes for less than a year. 
The local business tax year shall begin on October 1 of each year and end on September 30 of the succeeding year. On the latter date all local business tax receipts shall expire. Local business taxes shall not be prorated for any fractional portion of any year, except as otherwise provided herein. Receipts issued after April 1 shall expire on September 30 of the same year but shall be taxed at one-half the amount of the local business tax established pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Sec. 18-6. - Tax schedule. 
In accordance with the requirement that the city adopt a local business tax rate structure and classifications that are reasonable and based upon the rate structure and classifications prescribed by adjacent local governments, the city hereby adopts the local business tax rate structure and classifications set forth in exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Sec. 18-7. - Delinquency; delinquency penalty. 
Local business tax receipts not renewed by October 1 of any year shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an additional five percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty charged pursuant to this section shall not exceed 25 percent of the local business tax for the delinquent establishment. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Sec. 18-8. - Display or possession required. 
Every person engaged in a business, occupation, or profession subject to the provisions of this chapter, which business, occupation or provision is conducted at or from a fixed place, shall have the local business tax receipt conspicuously displayed at such place of business. A person or entity not operating from a fixed place of business shall keep the local business tax receipt issued thereto upon his person at all times while engaged in the business, occupation, or profession for which such receipt is issued. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Sec. 18-9. - False statements in application. 
The making of any material false statement in connection with an application for a local business tax receipt shall be deemed fraud and render any receipt issued in reliance on such statement null and void. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Sec. 18-10. - Illegal occupations not to be issued a business tax receipt. 
No local business tax receipt shall be issued if it appears from the application or other evidence that the applicant intends to engage in a business, trade, profession or occupation under the auspices of such tax receipt that involves a violation of applicable law or any local ordinances, rules, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Sec. 18-11. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)	Any receipt issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked for good cause, including, but not limited to, a violation of this article or one or more violations of this Code, the Land Development Code, or other applicable laws, rules or regulations arising from the operation of a business under a local business tax receipt issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)	Any receipt holder required to maintain licensing by the state or by any agency thereof whose state license is suspended or revoked shall, immediately upon such suspension or revocation, also have its/his/her local business tax receipt issued hereunder suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Sec. 18-12. - Appeals. 
An appeal of a decision to refuse issuance of a local business tax receipt or revoke or suspend a local business tax receipt must be made in writing and filed with the city manager within ten days of receipt of written notice of such refusal, revocation or suspension. The written petition for appeal shall set forth the reasons and evidentiary basis as to why the city's decision should be overturned or otherwise modified. Appeals shall be reviewed by the city council at a regular or special meeting within 60 days of the city manager's receipt of a timely filed petition. Appellate proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as provided in section 1-7 (Interpretations and Appeals), excepting section 1-7(c)(2) of the Land Development Code for the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Sec. 18-13. - Implementation. 
Any local business tax receipt for the 2010-2011 year issued by Volusia County prior to the effective date of this article [Dec. 5, 2010) shall remain valid through September 30, 2011; however, as of the effective date of this article, all business tax receipt applications and renewals must be applied for and processed through the city pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-15-10)  
Secs. 18-14—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LATE-NIGHT BUSINESSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Convenience business security, F.S. § 812.1701 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means the person, corporation, partnership, joint venture or group enterprise legally responsible for the day-to-day operation of the late-night business, store or operation. 
Late-night business, store or operation means a place of business that is primarily engaged in the retail sale of groceries, or both groceries and gasoline, and that is open for business at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. The term "late-night business" does not include: 
(1)	A business that is solely or primarily a restaurant. 
(2)	A business that always has at least five employees on the premises after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. 
(3)	A business that has at least 10,000 square feet of retail floor space. 
The term "late-night business" does not include any business in which the owner or members of his family work between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
Owner means the person, corporation, partnership, joint venture or other group enterprise or legal entity having lawful possession of the premises upon which the late-night business, store or operation is operated. The owner of a late-night business, store or operation may have only a lease-hold interest in the property upon which the late-night business, store or operation is located, but still be deemed the owner of the late-night business, store or operation, notwithstanding the fact that the owner does not have a fee simple ownership in the property. 
(Ord. No. 94-23, § I, 3-23-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 812.171.  
Sec. 18-32. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 94-23, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 18-33. - Purpose and intent; jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article are based upon evidence and testimony related to the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; to be in the public interest and to make reasonable distinctions between the various forms of businesses, stores and operations either affected or not affected by this article and the hours of operation of those businesses, stores or operations. Late-night business establishments which stay open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. are more likely to be robbed because they are frequently the only establishments open during those hours, and, due to the nature of the business, cash must be kept on the premises. In order to reduce the incidence of lost property, injury or loss of life due to robbery, the city council finds it necessary to enact this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 94-23, § I, 3-23-94) 
State Law reference— Intent, F.S. § 812.172.  
Sec. 18-34. - Late-night business security. 
(a)	Every late-night business shall be equipped with the following security devices and standards: 
(1)	A security camera system capable of recording and retrieving an image to assist in offender identification and apprehension. 
(2)	A drop safe or cash management device for restricted access to cash receipts. 
(3)	A lighted parking lot illuminated at an intensity of at least two footcandles per square foot at 18 inches above the surface. 
(4)	A conspicuous notice at the entrance which states that the cash register contains $50.00 or less. 
(5)	Window signage that allows a clear and unobstructed view from outside the building and in a normal line of sight of the cash register and sales transaction area. 
(6)	Height markers at the entrance of the late-night business which display height measures. 
(7)	A cash management policy to limit the cash on hand at all times after 11:00 p.m. 
(b)	A late-night business shall not have window tinting that reduces exterior or interior view in a normal line of sight. 
(c)	Every late-night business shall be equipped with a silent alarm to law enforcement or a private security agency, unless application for an exemption is made to and granted by the state attorney general. 
(d)	If a murder, robbery, sexual battery, aggravated assault, aggravated battery, or kidnapping or false imprisonment, as those crimes are identified and defined by Florida Statutes, occurs or has occurred at a late-night business since July 1, 1989, and arises out of the operation of the late-night business, that late-night business shall implement at least one of the following security measures: 
(1)	Provide at least two employees on the premises at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.; 
(2)	Install for use by employees at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. a secured safety enclosure of transparent polycarbonate or other material that meets at least one of the following minimum standards: 
a.	American Society for Testing and Materials Standard D3935 (classification PC110 B 3 0800700) and that has a thickness of at least 0.375 inches and has an impact strength of at least 200 foot pounds; or 
b.	Underwriters' Laboratory Standard UL 752 for medium power small arms (level one), Bullet Resisting Equipment; 
(3)	Provide a security guard on the premises at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.; 
(4)	Lock the business premises throughout the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m., and only transact business through an indirect pass-through trough, trapdoor, or window; or 
(5)	Close the business at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. 
(e)	For purposes of this section, any late-night business that by law implemented any of the security measures set forth in subsection (d)(1) through (d)(5) and has maintained such measures as required by the state department of legal affairs without any occurrence or incidence of the crimes identified by subsection (d) for a period of no less than 24 months immediately preceding the filing of a notice of exemption, may file with the state department a notice of exemption from these enhanced security measures. In no event shall this exemption be interpreted to preclude full compliance with the security measures set forth in subsection (d) should any occurrence or incidence of the crimes identified by subsection (d) cause subsection (d) to be statutorily applicable. The state department of legal affairs will provide notice to any late-night business to which a subsection (d) incident has previously occurred. In no event shall the city incur any liability for the regulation and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-23, § I, 3-23-94) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 812.173.  
Sec. 18-35. - Training of employees. 
As provided in F.S. § 812.174, the owner or principal operator of a late-night business shall provide proper robbery deterrence and safety training by an approved curriculum to its retail employees within 60 days of employment. Existing retail employees shall receive training. 
(Ord. No. 94-23, § I, 3-23-94) 
State Law reference— Training of employees, F.S. § 812.174.  
Secs. 18-36—18-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PHOTOGRAPHY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City equipment is any tangible property, other than real property, purchased by public funds and utilized in the normal course and scope of providing governmental service by the city. 
City facility is any public street, sidewalk, place or building owned or controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city to include, but not be limited to, city park and recreation facilities and the city hall. 
Film commissioner is the city manager. 
Photography is the commercial taking or making of a motion picture, television, videotape, or still production utilizing city facilities. This term shall include, and a production permit shall be required for, such productions on private property not at a studio involving the erection of tents or other temporary structures or involving the use of pyrotechnics, explosives, or other incendiary devices. 
Production permit, also referred to herein as permit is the permit required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 4, 4-6-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-52. - Findings. 
The city council finds as follows: 
(1)	The motion picture and television industry contributed over $260 million, statewide, to the Florida economy in 1992. 
(2)	The state department of commerce recognizes a turnover ratio of 3.57 on such expenditures thereby producing a quadrupling economic impact. 
(3)	The motion picture and television industry is an environmentally desirable industry for the city without requiring community investment for infrastructure improvements. 
(4)	The motion picture and television industry is a service industry requiring only the cooperation of the communities in which it chooses to work. 
(5)	The climate, diversity of locations, and local talent, both behind the cameras and in front, lend themselves to film and television production in the state's east central coastal area. 
(6)	The emergence of the motion picture and television industry in east central Florida will also create additional employment opportunities and serve to broaden the economic base of our community. 
(7)	The creation of a central coordination agency with standard permit formal and a "one-stop" permitting process will enhance the community effort to attract film and television endeavors to our area. 
(8)	The city council has the power to grant film permits based upon its responsibility to protect the health and welfare of its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 2, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 18-53. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article are to establish a one-stop permitting process for motion picture and still photography on public property owned or controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city, to provide a means whereby acts otherwise prohibited by this Code may be allowed during such productions, and to provide for an exemption from other city code permit requirements in recognition of the economic impact of the motion picture and television industry. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 3, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 18-54. - Duties of film commissioner. 
The film commissioner, under the direction of the city council, is hereby authorized to act as the agent for the city in the receipt and processing of applications for productions permit. After review and approval by the applicable city department and final approval by the film commissioner, the permit will be issued. With regard to motion photography production, no other city permits shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 5, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 18-55. - Protection of public safety; exemption from other city code requirements. 
(a)	If, in the opinion of the film commissioner, crowd control is necessary, the film commissioner shall require as a prerequisite the approval of the director of the county department of public safety (sheriff) or his/her designee, upon such conditions as the director may provide. 
(b)	If, in the opinion of the film commissioner, the proposed use of pyrotechnics or other special effects shall be of such a character or in such a location as to create any risk to persons or property, the film commissioner shall require as a prerequisite the approval of the county division of fire safety management, upon such conditions as the division may provide. 
(c)	Once a production permit has been issued, and notwithstanding any other provisions of the Code to the contrary, no other city permit or license shall be required for any of the activities forming a part of the production. 
(d)	Other ordinances of the city, insofar as certain acts are required or prohibited, may be suspended by the film commissioner in connection with the conduct of a production pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 8, 4-6-94)  
Secs. 18-56—18-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 18-71. - Required. 
(a)	No person shall advertise, engage in, participate in, and/or start any motion and still photography production on or upon any city facility or utilizing city equipment unless a production permit shall first have been obtained from the film commissioner. Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided for by law. 
(b)	Applications for such permits shall be made in writing at least five days in advance of the date of the filming. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 6(a), (c), 4-6-94)  
Sec. 18-72. - Application. 
(a)	Any person seeking the issuance of a production permit shall file an application with and on forms provided by, the film commissioner prior to commencement of production. The application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the applicant. 
(b)	The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Location of the production. 
(2)	Duration and type of the production. 
(3)	Proof of general liability insurance coverage with the city named as an additional insured as commensurate with the scope of the production. 
(4)	Special effects to be utilized, especially incendiary or explosive devices. In addition, the application shall list the person in charge (pyrotechnician) of such special effects together with his/her qualifications and licensure by the applicable federal and/or state agencies. 
(5)	Proposed utilization of city equipment. 
(6)	Necessity for closures of public streets or sidewalks and for what duration. 
(7)	A written summary or explanation of the portion of the production to be shot within incorporated areas of the city. 
(8)	Number and type of vehicles and/or equipment and number of personnel to be on location with the production. 
(9)	An agreement to pay for extraordinary services provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 7, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 18-73. - Suspension of permit. 
Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the production permit once issued shall be grounds for immediate suspension of the production until such time as the noncompliance is remedied. The suspension shall be initially communicated orally, followed by a written suspension order. Continued failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the production permit may result in revocation of the permit. Continuation of the production in violation of the suspension and/or revocation shall be punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 6(b), 4-6-94)  
Sec. 18-74. - Reimbursement of costs for extraordinary services. 
The receipt of any permit shall reimburse the city for the direct cost of extraordinary services rendered in connection with a production. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to, charges for personnel (whether city employees or contracted services) and/or equipment committed in support of the production which are outside the normal scope of government services. Based on the information contained in the permit application, an estimate of these costs shall be provided to the applicant prior to the issuance of the permit. The applicant agrees to pay in advance the city for any services provided by them at their usual rates. The film commissioner will provide coordination and advise the applicant of estimated costs. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 9, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 18-75. - Indemnification. 
Applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all claims, damages, losses, proceedings, penalties costs and expenses, including court costs, expert witness fees and attorneys fees and expenses, and causes of action of every kind and nature arising out of or connected with the issuance of any permit and the activities authorized hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 10, 4-6-94)  
Secs. 18-76—18-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT  
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-101. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "DeBary Adult Entertainment Code", "adult entertainment code", or "code". 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-102. - Authority. 
This article is enacted under the home rule of power of the City of DeBary, in the interest of the health, peace, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city and under the authority of the City of DeBary, hereafter the "city", to regulate the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages under the Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-103. - Scope. 
This adult entertainment code shall be effective throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-104. - Purpose. 
The intent of the City Council of the City of DeBary, hereinafter "city council" in adopting this article is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations for the adult entertainment industry that will protect the health, safety, property values, and general welfare of the people, businesses, and industries of the city. It is not the intent of the city council to legislate with respect to matters of obscenity. These matters are regulated by federal and state law, including F.S. ch. 847. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-105. - Findings of facts. 
Based on evidence and testimony presented at public hearings before the city council and on the findings incorporated in: the United States Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986), Jacksonville Ordinance Code, Chapter 410, Ord. 77-257-256, Section 1, the Los Angeles Municipal Code, Section 12.70, Ord. 156509 (1982), the Detroit Zoning Ordinance, 66,0000, Ord. 742-G, Section 1, 10-24-72, and "A Summary of a National Survey of Real Estate Appraisers Regarding the Effect of Adult Bookstores on Property Values," conducted by the Division of Planning, Department of Metropolitan Development, Indianapolis, January 1984, and the findings of fact set out in Section 3-5 of the Adult Entertainment Code of Orange County, Florida, a county in Central Florida, the city council hereby finds: 
(a)	Establishments exist or may exist within the city and other nearby cities or counties in Central Florida where books, magazines, motion pictures, prints, photographs, periodicals, records, novelties and/or devices which depict, illustrate, describe or relate to specified sexual activities are possessed, displayed, exhibited, distributed and or sold. 
(b)	Establishments exist or may exist within the city and other nearby cities or counties in Central Florida: 
(1)	Where the superficial tissues of one person are manipulated, rubbed, stroked, kneaded, and/or tapped by a second person, accompanied by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas; 
(2)	Where dancers, entertainers, performers, or other individuals, who, for any form of commercial gain, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area; or 
(3)	Where straddle dancing or private modeling occurs. 
(c)	Establishments exist or may exist within the city and other nearby cities or counties in Central Florida where sexually oriented services are offered for commercial or pecuniary gain in the form of commercial physical contact or escort services. The workers of such sexually oriented businesses engage in physical contact or touching with customers, including acts of prostitution, or encourage or entice customers to engage in acts of lewdness. 
(d)	The activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) occur at establishments which operate primarily for the purpose of making a profit and, as such, are subject to regulation by the city in the interest of the health, safety, economy, property values, and general welfare of the people, businesses, and industries of the city. An industry important to the community's economic welfare is tourism by persons seeking to bring children to visit attractions who wish to stay in a community with a family atmosphere not dominated by commercialized sexual themes. 
(e)	When the activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) are present in establishments, other activities which are illegal, unsafe, or unhealthful tend to accompany them, concentrate around them, and be aggravated by them. Such other activities include, but are not limited to, prostitution, pandering, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, exposing minors to harmful materials, possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and property. 
(f)	When the activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) are competitively exploited in establishments, they tend to attract an undesirable number of transients, blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring businesses, lower real property values, promote the particular crimes described above, and ultimately lead residents and businesses to move to other locations. 
(g)	The establishments in which the activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) occur often are constructed, in part or in whole of substandard materials, maintained in a manner reflecting disregard for the health and safety of the occupants, and have exterior appearance and/or signage which depreciates the value of adjoining real property and otherwise contributes to urban decline. 
(h)	The activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) sometimes occur in establishments concurrent with the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages which concurrence leads to a further increase in criminal activity, unsafe activity, and disturbances of the peace and order of the surrounding community and creates additional hazards to the health and safety of customers and workers and further depreciates the value of adjoining real property harming the economic welfare of the surrounding community and adversely affecting the quality of life, commerce, and community environment. 
(i)	The concurrence of the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages with the activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) leads to a further increase in criminal activity, unsafe activity, and disturbances of the peace and order of the surrounding community. 
(j)	The concurrence of the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages with the activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) creates additional hazards to the health and safety of persons in attendance and further depreciates the value of adjoining real property harming the economic welfare of the surrounding community and adversely affecting the quality of life, tone of commerce, and community environment. In order to preserve and safeguard the health, safety, property values, and general welfare of the people, businesses, and industries of the city it is necessary and advisable for the city to regulate the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages at establishments where the activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) occur. 
(k)	Physical contact or touching within establishments at which the activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) occur between workers exhibiting specified anatomical areas and customers poses a threat to the health of both and promotes the spread of communicable and social diseases. 
(l)	In order to preserve and safeguard the health, safety, and general welfare of the people, businesses and industries of the city, it is necessary and advisable for the city to regulate the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages at establishments where the activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) occur. 
(m)	Workers of establishments at which the activities described in subsections (a), (b), and (c) occur engage in a higher incidence of certain types of unhealthy or criminal behavior than workers of other establishments, including, but not limited to prostitution and lewdness in violation of F.S. ch. 796, operating without an occupational license and operating unlicensed massage parlors and cosmetology businesses. 
(n)	In order to preserve and safeguard the health, safety, and general welfare of the people, businesses, and industries of the city, it is necessary and advisable for the city to regulate the conduct of owners, managers, operators, agents, workers, entertainers, performers, and customers at establishments where the activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) occur. 
(o)	The potential dangers to the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city posed by permitting an establishment at which the activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) occur to operate without first meeting the requirements for obtaining a license under this article are so great as to require the licensure of such establishments prior to their being permitted to operate. 
(p)	Requiring operators of establishments at which the activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) occur to keep records of information concerning workers and certain recent past workers will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects, and by making it difficult for minors from working in such establishments. 
(q)	Prohibiting establishments at which the activities described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) occur from operating within set distances of educational institutions, religious institutions, residences, areas zoned or designated for residential use, and parks, at which minors are customarily found, will serve to protect minors from the adverse affects of the activities that accompany such establishments. 
(r)	Straddle dancing does not contain any element of communication, and is therefore conduct rather than expression. 
(s)	Straddle dancing in establishments poses a threat to the health of the participants and promotes the spread of communicable and social diseases. 
(t)	Physical contact or touching between workers of sexually oriented businesses and customers poses a threat to the health of both, and promotes the spread of communicable and sexually transmissible diseases. 
(u)	The practice of not paying workers at sexually oriented businesses and requiring them to earn their entire income from tips or gratuities from their customers who are predisposed to desire or want sexual activity has resulted in high incidence of prostitution and crimes related to lewdness. 
(v)	Sexually oriented businesses involve activities that are pure conduct engaged in for the purpose of making a profit, rather than speech or expressive activity, and therefore are subject to and require increased regulation to protect the health, welfare and safety of the community. 
(w)	Requiring sexually oriented businesses to post a listing of services provided and restrict services to those listed as well as maintain worker records will discourage incidents of criminal behavior such as lewdness and prostitution, thereby further safeguarding the health of both workers and customers and assisting in the facilitation of the identification of potential witnesses or suspects if criminal acts occur. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this adult entertainment code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Adult bookstore: 
(a)	Shall mean an establishment which sells or rents, or offers for sale or rent adult material. 
(b)	This definition is not intended to apply, and it is an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this article regarding operating an adult bookstore without an adult entertainment license, if the alleged violator demonstrates that at the establishment: 
(1)	Admission to all or any part of the establishment is not restricted to adults only; and 
(2)	All adult material is accessible only by workers ("accessible" meaning that the item, material, good or product can be touched, picked up or handled by a customer, or is displayed so that substantially more than its name or title is visible); and 
(3)	Each month, the gross income from the sale and rental of adult material comprises less than ten percent of the gross income from the sale and rental of materials and goods or services at the establishment; and 
(4)	The individual items of adult material offered for sale and rental comprise less than 25 percent of the total individual unused items publicly displayed at the establishment as stock in trade in each of the following categories: books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, videotapes, slides, computer digital graphic recordings, other visual representations, compact discs, audio recordings, other audio matter, and they compromise [comprise] less than 25 percent of the total individual used items publicly displayed as stock in trade in each of the categories described above; and 
(5)	The floor area used to display adult material comprises less than ten percent of the total floor area used to display all material and goods at the establishment. 
Adult booth shall mean a small enclosure inside an adult entertainment establishment accessible to any person, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access. The term "adult booth" includes, but is not limited to, a "peep show" booth, or other booth used to view "adult material" but does not include a restroom or a foyer through which the public enters or exits the establishment. 
Adult entertainment establishment shall mean an adult theater, an adult bookstore, an adult performance establishment, an escort service, or a physical contact parlor, operated for commercial or pecuniary gain. ("Operated for commercial or pecuniary gain" shall not depend upon actual profit or loss. Also, "operated for commercial or pecuniary gain" shall be presumed where the establishment has an occupational license.) An establishment with an adult entertainment license is presumed to be operated for commercial or pecuniary gain. An establishment with an adult entertainment license shall be presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. 
Adult material shall mean any one or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(a)	Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videotapes, slides, computer digital graphic recordings, or other visual representations, or compact discs, audio recordings, or other audio matter, which have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(b)	Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, excluding bona fide birth control devices. 
Adult motel shall mean any motel, hotel, boardinghouse, rooming house or other place of temporary lodging which includes the word "adult" in any name it uses or otherwise advertises the presentation of films, motion pictures, videotapes, slides or other photographic reproductions, which have as their primary or dominate theme matters depicting, illustrating, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "adult motel" is included within the definition of "adult theater". 
Adult performance establishment shall mean as follows: 
(1)	An establishment where a worker: 
(a)	Engages in a private performance, acts as a private model, or displays or exposes any specified anatomical areas to a customer; 
(b)	Wears and displays to a customer any covering, tape, pastie, or other device which simulates or otherwise gives the appearance of the display or exposure of any specified anatomical areas; 
(c)	Offers, solicits, or contracts to dance or perform with a customer in consideration for or accepts any tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that customer; or 
(d)	Dances or performs with or within three feet of a customer in consideration for or accepts any tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that customer. 
(2)	This definition is not intended to apply, and it is an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this article regarding operating an adult performance establishment without a license, if the alleged violator demonstrates either (1) that the establishment is a bona fide private club whose membership as a whole engages in social nudism or naturalism as in a nudist resort or camp, or (2) that the predominant business or attraction of the establishment is not the offering to customers of a product, service, or entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and the establishment and its advertising is not distinguished by an emphasis on or the promotion of matters or persons depicting, describing, displaying, exposing, simulating or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater shall mean any establishment which has adult booths where adult material may be viewed or any establishment which has an auditorium, rooms, or an open-air area where persons may view films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult motels and adult booth or peep show arcades are considered to be adult theaters. 
Alcoholic beverage shall mean a beverage containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight. It shall be prima facie evidence that a beverage is an alcoholic beverage if there is proof that the beverage in question was or is known as beer, wine, whiskey, moonshine whiskey, moonshine, shine, rum, gin, tequila, bourbon, vodka, scotch, scotch whiskey, brandy, malt liquor, or by any other similar name or names, or was contained in a bottle or can labeled as any of the above names, or a name similar thereto, and the bottle or can bears the manufacturer's insignia, name, or trademark. Any person who, by experience in the handling of alcoholic beverages, or who by taste, smell, or drinking of such alcoholic beverages has knowledge of the alcoholic nature thereof, may testify as to his opinion about whether such beverage is an alcoholic beverage. 
Conviction shall mean a determination of guilt resulting from a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether imposition of sentence was suspended. 
Customer shall mean any person, excluding worker or operator, who does any of the following: 
(1)	Is present at an establishment, regardless of whether that person has given any consideration or spent any money for goods or services; or 
(2)	Has paid, or has offered, agreed, been solicited, or had someone else offer or agree on that person's behalf, to pay any consideration, fee, gratuity, or tip to an adult entertainment establishment or to an operator or worker of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Department shall include and mean the following divisions of the Volusia County Government: the growth management group including the planning and zoning activities and the code administration activity, the property appraiser, the public protection services center, including the fire service group, the office of the sheriff, including the respective director, workers, officers and agents thereof; "department" shall also mean and include the city manager of the city or his designee. 
Educational institution shall mean a premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes and/or courses of study required for eligibility to certification by, accreditation to, or membership in the State Department of Education of Florida, Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. The term "educational institution" includes a premises or site upon which there is a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of learning. The term "educational institution" also includes a premises or site upon which there is a vocational institution, professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community college, junior college, four year college or university. 
Escort shall mean any person who, for commercial or pecuniary gain, compensation, or tips agrees to or offers to go to a place, including a business, hotel, motel, residence, or conveyance, to do any of the following acts: 
(1)	Act as a companion or date for, or converse with, a customer; 
(2)	Engage in physical contact with another person; 
(3)	Provide private adult entertainment; 
(4)	Engage in private modeling or lingerie modeling; 
(5)	Display specified anatomical areas, strip naked or go topless; or 
(6)	Engage in a specified sexual activity. 
Nothing in this definition shall be construed to legalize conduct prohibited by this article or other law. 
Escort service , also known as an escort agency, shall mean a person, business, establishment or place, operated for commercial or pecuniary gain, which does any of the following: 
(1)	Advertises as an "escort service" or "escort agency" or otherwise offers or advertises that it can furnish escorts, private dancers, or private models; or 
(2)	Offers or actually provides, arranges, dispatches, or refers workers to act as an escort for a customer. 
Exception: It is an affirmative defense that a business is not an escort service if a person seeking to invoke this defense can demonstrate that the business is a bona fide dating or matching service which arranges social matches or dates for two persons who each wish to meet a compatible companion when neither of said person solicits, accepts, or receives any financial gain or any monetary tip, consideration, or compensation from any person for the meeting or date. 
Establishment shall mean any site or premises, or portion thereof, upon which any person, corporation, or business conducts activities or operations for commercial or pecuniary gain, including any place, site or premises from where an escort service dispatches or refers workers to other locations or at which an escort service receives business calls from customers. 
Law enforcement officer shall mean an officer who is on official duty for a law enforcement agency including, but not limited to, the police department of the city or the Office of the Sheriff of Volusia County. 
Licensee shall mean any person, partnership, or corporation whose application for an adult entertainment establishment has been granted and who owns, operates or controls the establishment. 
Nudity shall mean to display or expose at an adult entertainment establishment less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, less than completely and opaquely covered areola and nipple of the human female breast, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Operated for commercial or pecuniary gain shall mean any business or attempt to generate income and shall not depend upon actual profit or loss. An establishment which has an occupational license shall be presumed to be "operated for commercial or pecuniary gain." 
Operator shall mean any person who engages in or performs any activity necessary to, or which facilitates, the operation of an adult entertainment establishment, including but not limited to, the licensee, manager, owner, doorman, bouncer, bartender, disc jockey, sales clerk, ticket taker, or movie projectionist, dispatcher, receptionist, or attendant. 
Park shall mean a tract of land within a city or unincorporated area of a county which is kept for ornament or recreation and which is maintained as public property. 
Physical contact shall mean to manipulate, wash, scrub, stroke or touch, for commercial or pecuniary gain, another person's body, directly or indirectly (through a medium using any object, instrument, substance or device). 
Exception: It is an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this article regarding engaging in physical contact if the alleged violator can establish membership in one of the following classes of persons or businesses and the activity alleged to be physical contact is part of the bona fide practice of the profession or business of the person, which overlaps into the field regulated by this article: 
(1)	A person licensed as a massage therapist or apprentice massage therapist pursuant to F.S. ch. 480, if providing massage services only in a massage establishment licensed under F.S. ch. 480; 
(2)	A person licensed under the laws of Florida to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropody, naturopathy, or podiatry, or persons licensed as a physician's assistant or holding a drugless practitioner's certificate; 
(3)	A nurse registered under the laws of Florida; 
(4)	A barber or beautician licensed under the laws of Florida; 
(5)	A cosmetologist licensed under the laws of Florida; 
(6)	A person performing services in any hospital, clinic, nursing home or sanitarium licensed under the laws of Florida; 
(7)	An instructor, coach, or trainer employed by, or on behalf of, any bona fide professional, Olympic or sanctioned amateur athletic team, governmental entity or any bona fide state, county, or private educational institution; or 
(8)	A physical therapist licensed under the laws of Florida. 
Physical contact parlor shall mean a business, establishment, or place operated for commercial or pecuniary gain, where any worker engages in physical contact, or any business or establishment for which any portion is set aside, advertised, or promoted as a place where physical contact occurs, including a "body scrub salon" or "relaxation salon." 
Pre-existing shall mean as follows: 
(a)	When used together with the term "adult entertainment establishment," "religious institution," "educational institution," "commercial establishment that in any manner sells or dispenses alcohol for on-premises consumption," or "residence" the word "pre-existing" shall mean: 
(1)	The establishment, institution, or residence is already being lawfully used or lawfully occupied; or 
(2)	A building permit for the establishment, institution, or residence has been lawfully issued, all fees associated with the permit have been paid, and the permit has not expired; or 
(3)	An application or plan to allow the establishment, institution, or residence to be constructed, used, or occupied has been filed and is undergoing review or is approved, with or without conditions. 
(b)	When used with the term "park," the word "pre-existing" shall mean: 
(1)	The park is already being used; or 
(2)	The park site has been approved or otherwise designated by the appropriate governing body. 
Private model shall mean any worker who, for commercial or pecuniary gain, offers, suggests, or agrees to engage in a private performance, modeling, or display of lingerie, bathing suits, undergarments, or specified anatomical areas to the view of a customer. 
Private performance shall mean modeling, posing, or the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by a worker of an adult entertainment establishment to a customer, while the customer is in an area not accessible during such display to all other persons in the establishment or, while the customer or worker is in an area which is private or in which the customer or worker is totally or partially screened or partitioned during such display from the view of persons outside the area. 
Public nudity shall mean to display or expose at an adult entertainment establishment less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(a)	Human genitals or pubic region; 
(b)	The cleavage of the human buttocks; 
(c)	The areola or nipple of the human female breast. 
Religious institution shall mean a premises or site which is used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious activities. 
Sexually oriented business shall mean an escort service or a physical contact parlor, regardless of whether such business is licensed under this article. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(a)	Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(1)	Human genitals or pubic region; or 
(2)	Any part of the human buttocks; or 
(3)	That portion of the human female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of the areola (the colored ring around the nipple). This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
(b)	Human male genitals in a discernibly erect or turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(c)	Any simulation of the above. 
Specified criminal act shall mean: 
(a)	A violation of division 5 of this article; or 
(b)	Any offense under the following chapters of the Florida Statutes: F.S. ch. 794 regarding sexual battery, ch. 796 regarding prostitution, ch. 800 regarding lewdness and indecent exposure, and ch. 847 regarding obscene literature; or 
(c)	An offense under an analogous statute of a state other than Florida, or an analogous ordinance of another county or city. 
Specified sexual activity shall mean: 
(a)	Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, erection or tumescence; or 
(b)	Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast; or 
(c)	Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sapphism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or urolagnia; or 
(d)	Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (a), (b), or (c). 
Straddle dance , also known as a "lap dance", "face dance," or "friction dance" shall mean either of the following acts: 
(a)	The use by a worker of any part of his or her body to touch the genital or pubic area of a person while at the establishment, or the touching of the genital or pubic area of any worker to another person while at the establishment. It shall be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether the worker is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area. It shall also be a straddle dance regardless of whether the touch or touching is direct or indirect (through a medium). 
(b)	The straddling of the legs of a worker over any part of the body of a person other than another worker at the establishment, regardless of whether there is a touch or touching. 
Worker shall mean a person who works, performs, or provides services at an adult entertainment establishment, irrespective of whether said person is paid a salary or wage. Worker includes, but is not necessarily limited to, independent contractor, subcontractor, lessee, or sublessee who works or performs in or for an adult entertainment establishment. An "operator," as defined by this article, is deemed a type of worker. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-107. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article may be enforced by: 
(a)	A suit brought by the city council in the circuit court to restrain, enjoin, or prevent a violation of this article; or 
(b)	Enforcement proceedings by the department; or 
(c)	Criminal prosecution as provided in division 5, section 18-201 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-108. - Responsibilities of departments. 
Ultimate responsibility for the administration of this article is vested in the city council. The city manager of the city, or his designee shall be otherwise responsible for the administration of this article. The responsibilities of the departments are as follows: 
(a)	The city manager or his designee is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling adult entertainment licenses for proposed and existing adult entertainment establishments as set out in division 2 of this article. 
(b)	The office of the sheriff is responsible for verifying information contained on an application made pursuant to section 18-139 [18-132], for inspecting proposed, or existing adult entertainment establishments in order to ascertain compliance with applicable criminal statutes and ordinances, including those set forth at division 5 of this article, for determining whether adult entertainment license applicants have been convicted of a felony or a specified criminal act within the previous five years, and for enforcing applicable criminal statutes and ordinances, including those set forth at division 5 of this article. 
(c)	The code administration activity/building inspection section and permitting section is responsible for inspecting any proposed establishment or existing adult entertainment establishment in order to ascertain compliance with division 4 of this article and all applicable building codes, statutes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(d)	The public safety service center/fire service group is responsible for inspecting any proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment in order to ascertain compliance with division 4 of this article and all applicable fire codes, statutes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(e)	The city manager or his designee is responsible for inspecting any proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment in order to otherwise ascertain compliance with division 4 of this article and all applicable health codes, statutes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(f)	The growth management group/zoning activity is responsible for ascertaining whether the location of proposed adult entertainment establishments complies with all distance, zoning, and location requirements of division 3 of this article, applicable portions of division 4 of this article, and all applicable zoning regulations in the city and whether existing adult entertainment establishments are in compliance with division 3 and division 4 of this article and all applicable zoning regulations and land use laws. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-109. - Appeals. 
Any decision of the city manager or his designee pursuant to granting or denying a license under division 2 of this article ("Licensing") may be immediately reviewed as a matter of right by the circuit court upon the filing of an appropriate pleading by an aggrieved party. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-110. - Notice. 
Any notice required under this article shall be accomplished by sending a written notification by certified mail to the mailing address set forth on the application for the license, which shall be considered the correct address for service unless the city manager or his designee has been otherwise notified in writing, or by personal service or delivery to the applicant or licensee. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-111. - Immunity from prosecution. 
The city or any of its departments or agents or any law enforcement officer shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good-faith trespass upon an adult entertainment establishment while acting within the scope of the authority under this article. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-112. - Construction. 
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of licensing, regulating and dispersing adult entertainment and related activities. Unless otherwise indicated, all provisions of this article shall apply equally to all persons, regardless of sex. Masculine pronouns, such as "he", "his", and "him", as employed in this article, shall also be construed to apply to feminine pronouns and neutral pronouns, unless the context suggests otherwise. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, unless the context suggests otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Secs. 18-113—18-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING 
 
Sec. 18-131. - License required, classifications. 
(a)	Requirement. No adult entertainment establishment may lawfully operate without having been first granted an adult entertainment license by the city manager or his designee under this article. 
(b)	Classifications. Adult entertainment establishment licenses referred to in this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)	Adult bookstore; 
(2)	Adult theater; 
(3)	Adult performance establishment; 
(4)	Escort service; or 
(5)	Physical contact parlor; or 
(c)	Single classification of license. An adult entertainment license for a particular adult entertainment establishment shall be limited to one classification of license. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-132. - Application for license; application fee; consent by applicant. 
(a)	Required. Any person desiring to operate an adult entertainment establishment shall file with the city manager or his designee a sworn license application on standard application forms supplied by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)	Contents of application. The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)	If the applicant is: 
a.	An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he is 18 years of age or older; or 
b.	A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, the names and residential addresses and residential telephone numbers of all partners whether general or limited, the residence address of at least one person authorized to accept service of process, and provide a copy of any existing partnership agreement; or 
c.	A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, the name and address of the registered corporate agent for service of process, the name, residential address, and residential telephone number of the person making the application for the corporation and provide a copy of its divisions of incorporation and by-laws. 
(2)	If the applicant intends to conduct the establishment under a name other than that of the applicant, the establishment's fictitious name registration under F.S. § 865.09. 
(3)	Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) has, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a felony of any state or of the United States or any specified criminal act and, if so, the specific crime involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction; 
(4)	Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) has had a previous license under this article suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stock-holder of a corporation whose license under this article has previously been suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation; 
(5)	Whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) holds any other licenses under this article and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed establishments; 
(6)	The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing; 
(7)	The location of the proposed establishment, including a legal description of the property site, and a legal street address, the name and address of the real property owner of the site, and a notarized statement of consent to the specific proposed adult entertainment use from the owner of the property; 
(8)	The applicant's mailing address, business addresses, residential address, and business and residential telephone numbers; and 
(9)	A site plan drawn to appropriate scale of the proposed establishment, including, but not limited to: 
a.	All property lines, rights-of-way, and the location of buildings, parking areas and spaces, curb cuts, and driveways; 
b.	All windows, doors, entrances and exits, fixed structural features, walls, stages, partitions, projection booths, admission booths, adult booths, concession booths, stands, counters and similar structures; 
c.	All proposed improvements or enlargements to be made, which shall be indicated and calculated in terms of percentage of increase in floor size; 
(10)	A recent photograph of the applicant; and 
(11)	The applicant's social security number or employer's tax identification number and either the applicant's driver's license number or the number of a state or federally issued identification card. 
(12)	If the applicant is not the owner of the subject real property the applicant shall produce a notarized statement evidencing that the owner of the subject real property has approved of or consented to the application for an adult entertainment license. 
(c)	Application fee. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $200.00 subject to adjustment from time to time by resolution of the city council. Such application fee shall be used to defray the costs and expenses incurred by the various departments in reviewing the application. If the application for a license is approved and a license is granted, the fee shall be applied as a credit towards the annual license fee required for the first year pursuant to this article. 
(d)	False, incorrect, or incomplete application. In the event the city manager or his designee determines or learns that the applicant has falsely or incorrectly completed the application for a proposed establishment, the city manager or his designee shall notify the applicant of such fact and the applicant will be allowed ten days to properly complete the application. The revised application shall be promptly forwarded to the appropriate department for review. The time period for granting or denying a license under this article shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. 
(e)	Consent. By applying for a license under this article, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise of their responsibilities under this article by the agents or departments of the city. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-133. - Processing of application; investigation; findings. 
(a)	Processing. Upon receipt of a complete application properly filed with the city manager or his designee and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the city manager or his designee shall immediately stamp the application with the date it was received and thereafter send photocopies of the application and all attachments to the other departments identified herein. 
(b)	Investigation. Each department shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application, and the proposed establishment in accordance with its responsibilities under this article to determine whether false, incomplete, or incorrect information was given on the application or whether the proposed establishment will be in violation of any provision of division 3 or division 4 of this article or of any building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance, regulation, lease, deed restriction, or court order. 
(c)	Findings. After investigation, each department shall report its findings in writing within fourteen days and shall state whether the department finds that false, incomplete, or incorrect information was given on the application or whether the proposed establishment will be in violation of any provision of division 3 or division 4 of this article or of any building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance, regulation, lease, deed restriction, or court order. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-134. - Grant; denial, rejection. 
(a)	Time period for granting or denying license. The city manager or his designee shall grant or deny an application for a license under this division 2 within thirty days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the thirtieth day, the applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the establishment for which a license is sought, unless and until the city manager or his designee notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons for that denial. 
(b)	Granting of application for license. Unless a department has made a finding that would require that the application be denied, the city manager or his designee shall grant the application, notify the applicant of the granting, and issue the license to the applicant upon payment of the appropriate annual license fee required in this article, with credit as provided in this article. 
(c)	Denying of application for license. 
(1)	The city manager or his designee shall review the findings of each department and deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
a.	The application contains material false information, is incomplete, or the applicant has failed to comply with F.S. ch. 607 regarding corporations, ch. 620 regarding partnerships, or F.S. § 895.09 regarding fictitious names; 
b.	The granting of the application would violate a statute or ordinance, deed restriction, lease, or an order from a court of law which prohibits the applicant from obtaining an adult entertainment establishment license; 
c.	The applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to subsection 18-132(b)(1) has had a license under this article suspended or revoked by the city manager or his designee. 
(2)	If the city manager or his designee denies the application, he shall, within seven days, notify the applicant of the denial, and state the reason(s) for the denial. 
(3)	Reapplication. If a person applies for a license at a particular location within a period of nine months from the date of denial of a previous application for a license at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which will probably lead to a different decision regarding the former reason(s) for denial, the application shall be rejected. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-135. - Licenses; term; renewal; expiration, cancellation, reports; consent. 
(a)	Contents. An adult entertainment license shall state the name of the licensee, the name of the establishment, the street address of the establishment, the classification of the license, the date of issuance, and the date of expiration. 
(b)	Term. All licenses issued under this article shall be annual licenses which shall commence running on October 1st, if they have been paid for, and shall expire on September 30th of the following year. If a license is issued after October 1st, but by March 31st of the following year the applicant shall pay the applicable license fee in full. If a license is issued after March 31st, but by October 1st of the same year, the applicant shall pay one-half the applicable license fee. 
(c)	Renewals. Licenses shall be renewed annually. Subject to other provisions of this article, a licensee under this article shall be entitled to a renewal of his annual license from year to year, as a matter of course, by October 1st by presenting the license for the previous year, restating and updating all information required for a license application, and by paying the applicable license fee. 
(d)	Expiration. A license that is not renewed under this article by October 1st of each year shall expire. However, an expired license may be renewed by November 30th of the same year upon presentment of an affidavit stating that no adult entertainment activity has taken place at the establishment subsequent to expiration, upon payment of the applicable license fee, and upon payment of a penalty of ten percent of the appropriate license fee for the month of October, or fraction thereof, and an additional penalty of five percent of the appropriate license fee for the month of November, or fraction thereof. 
(e)	Cancellation. All expired licenses not renewed by November 30th shall be canceled summarily by the city manager or his designee. 
(f)	Reports and records. Each licensee shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the city manager or his designee to implement this article and to carry out its purpose. Whenever the information required by or provided under this article has changed, the licensee shall promptly report to the city manager or his designee the changed information. 
(g)	Consent. By holding a license under this article, the licensee shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the departments of their responsibilities under this article. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-136. - Annual license fee. 
(a)	Levy. There are hereby levied the following annual license fees under this article for an adult entertainment establishment: 
(1)	An adult bookstore, $750.00. 
(2)	An adult theater, as follows: 
a.	Only adult booths, $35.00 for each booth; 
b.	Having only a hall or auditorium, $3.50 for each seat; 
c.	Having only an area outdoors designed to permit viewing by customers seated in vehicles, $3.50 for each parking space; 
d.	Having a combination of subsections a., b. and or c., the cumulative license fee applicable to each under such subsections; 
e.	Adult motel, $750.00. 
(3)	An establishment having a license for an escort service, $750.00. 
(4)	An establishment having a license for a physical contact parlor, $750.00. 
(5)	Escort service, $750.00. 
(b)	Fees regulatory. The application and annual license fees collected under this article are declared to be regulatory fees which are collected for the purpose of processing and investigating applications, transfers, and renewals, and subsequent examination and inspection of adult entertainment establishments under this article and the administration thereof. These regulatory fees are in addition to and not in lieu of the occupational license taxes imposed by other ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-137. - Transfer of licenses. 
(a)	Requirements. An adult entertainment license is not transferable either partially or fully to a another person by surrendering possession, control, or operation of the licensed establishment. An adult entertainment license may be transferred to another person only upon satisfaction of the following requirements: 
(1)	A license transfer is applied for to the city manager or his designee by filing an application setting forth the information called for under section 18-132, and the application has been granted by the city manager or his designee after investigation for the compliance with this article; and 
(2)	Satisfactory proof is provided that control of the establishment has been or will be transferred through a bona fide sale, lease or other transaction; and 
(3)	A transfer fee of ten percent of the applicable license fee is paid. 
(b)	Effect of suspension or revocation procedures. No license may be transferred pursuant to subsection (a) when the city manager or his designee has notified the licensee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the licensee. 
(c)	No transfer to a different location. A licensee shall not transfer his license to another location. 
(d)	Attempted improper transfer void. Any attempted transfer of a license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-138. - Changing name of establishment. 
No licensee may change the name of an adult entertainment establishment unless and until he satisfies each of the following requirements: 
(a)	Gives the city manager or his designee 30 days notice in writing of the proposed name change; 
(b)	Pays the city manager or his designee a $100.00 change-of-name fee; and 
(c)	Complies with F.S. § 865.09 regarding fictitious names. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-139. - Suspension. 
(a)	Suspension for illegal transfer. In the event the city manager or his designee learns or finds upon sufficient cause that a licensee engaged in a license transfer contrary to section 18-137, the city manager or his designee shall forthwith notify the licensee of the pending suspension of the license. If the suspension becomes effective, the suspension shall remain in effect until documents which satisfy the requirements of subsection 18-137(a) are filed with the city manager or his designee and a transferred license has been issued. 
(b)	Suspension for violation of building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance, or regulation. In the event a department learns or finds upon sufficient cause that a licensed adult entertainment establishment is operating in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state, or local, contrary to the respective general requirements of this article, that department shall promptly notify the licensee and the city manager or his designee of the violation and shall allow the licensee a seven-day period in which to correct the violation. If the licensee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven-day period the city manager or his designee shall notify the licensee of pending suspension of the license. If the suspension becomes effective, the suspension shall remain in effect until the department determines in writing that the violation of the provision in question has been corrected. 
(1)	Effective date of suspension. All periods of suspension shall take effect ten days after the date the city manager or his designee mails the notice of suspension to the licensee or posts the notice of suspension at the licensee's establishment, or the date licensee delivers his license to the tax collector, whichever happens first. A suspension shall be abated in the event the licensee timely challenges the suspension pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 18-140. 
(c)	Suspension for illegal conduct at establishment. 
(1)	Three convictions. In the event three or more violations of specified criminal acts occur at an adult entertainment establishment within a two-year period, and convictions result from at least three of the violations, the city manager or his designee shall, upon receiving evidence of the three convictions, notify the licensee of a pending suspension of the license for a period of 30 days. 
(2)	Additional conviction following suspension. In the event one or more additional violations of any specified criminal act occurs at the same establishment within a period of two years from the date of the last violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 30 days under subsection (c)(1), but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 30 days, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations, the city manager or his designee shall, upon receiving evidence of the additional conviction after previous suspension, notify the licensee of a pending suspension of the license for a period of 90 days. 
(3)	Additional conviction following two prior suspensions. In the event one or more additional violations of any specified criminal act occurs at the same establishment within a period of two years from the date of the last violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 90 days under subsection (c)(2), but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 90 days, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations, the city manager or his designee shall, upon receiving evidence of the additional conviction after two previous suspensions, notify the licensee of the pending suspension of the license for a period of 180 days. 
(d)	Revocation for repeat convictions following three suspensions. In the event one or more additional violations of any specified criminal act occurs at an adult entertainment establishment which has had a license suspended for a period of 180 days pursuant to subsection (c)(3), and the violation occurs within a period of two years from the date of the last violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 180 days, but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 180 days, the city manager or his designee shall, upon receiving evidence of a conviction for the subsequent violation after three suspensions, forthwith notify the licensee of the pending revocation of the license. 
(e)	Revocation for false information. In the event the city manager or his designee receives evidence that a license was granted, renewed, or transferred based upon false information, misrepresentation of fact, or mistake of fact, the city manager or his designee shall forthwith notify the licensee of the pending revocation of the license. 
(f)	Transfer or renewal or amendment. The transfer or renewal of a license pursuant to this article shall not defeat a suspension or revocation of a license or related proceedings. 
(g)	Effective date of revocation. The revocation shall take effect ten days after the date the city manager or his designee mails the notice of revocation to the licensee, or posts the notice of revocation at the licensee's establishment, or on the date of the licensee delivers his license to the tax collector, whichever happens first. A revocation shall be abated in the event the licensee timely challenges the revocation pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 18-140. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-140. - Suspension and revocation proceedings. 
(a)	Challenge to suspension or revocation. If the city manager or his designee notifies a licensee in writing of the pending suspension or revocation of a license, then the suspension or revocation shall become final and effective seven days after mailing to the licensee's record address or actual delivery of the notice to the licensee, unless the licensee first files with the city manager or his designee a written response stating the reasons why the suspension or revocation would be in error or inappropriate and a written notice of intent to challenge the suspension or revocation requesting a hearing to determine whether the suspension or revocation will become effective. A suspension or revocation already in effect but not previously challenged in a suspension or revocation hearing, may be challenged in the same manner but is not abated during the proceedings. 
(b)	Hearing on suspension or revocation. When a licensee files a written response and notice of intent to challenge a pending or existing suspension or revocation then a public hearing to determine if the pending suspension or revocation will become effective and final shall be held by a hearing officer, an appropriate quasi-judicial hearing officer who will hold a public hearing, take testimony, and render a ruling. The city manager or his designee shall notify the city attorney and any appropriate city staff who shall schedule and provide notice of the hearing. 
(1)	The suspension or revocation hearing should be held within 20 days of a written challenge and request for a hearing, or as soon thereafter as can reasonably be scheduled, but no sooner than after seven days notice mailed to the licensee and posting to the public at a place for notices in a public building. 
(2)	The participants before the hearing officer shall be the licensee, any witnesses of the licensee or of the city. City staff, any interested members of the public, and any witnesses of the interested members of the public. Any interested member of the public who participates at the hearing shall provide a mailing address with the hearing officer. 
(3)	The licensee and any witnesses of the licensee shall be limited to a total of 30 minutes to present the licensee's case. City staff and its witnesses shall be similarly limited to a total of 30 minutes. Each interested member of the public and his or her witnesses shall be limited to ten minutes. For good cause shown, the hearing officer may grant additional time to each side or the public. 
(4)	Testimony and evidence may be submitted by any witness but shall be limited to matters directly relating to the grounds for suspension or revocation. Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious testimony or evidence may be excluded. 
(5)	All testimony shall be under oath. The hearing officer shall decide all questions of procedure and standing. The order of presentation of testimony and evidence shall be as follows: 
a.	The licensee and any witnesses of the licensee. 
b.	Any interested member of the public and their witnesses, if any. 
c.	The city staff and any witnesses. 
d.	Rebuttal witnesses from the licensee. 
e.	Rebuttal witnesses from the city staff. 
f.	Summation by the licensee. 
g.	Summation by the city staff. 
(6)	The hearing officer may also call and question witnesses or request additional evidence as the hearing officer deems necessary and appropriate. 
(7)	To the maximum extent practicable, the hearing shall be informal. Reasonable cross examination of witnesses shall be permitted, but questioning shall be confined as closely as possible to the scope of direct testimony. 
(8)	If the hearing officer comes to believe that any facts, claims, or allegations necessitate additional review or response by either the licensee or staff, then the hearing officer may order the hearing continued until a future announced date certain. 
(9)	The hearing officer shall render a written decision determining whether the suspension or revocation will become or remain effective within ten days after the suspension or revocation hearing concludes. 
(c)	Filing of decision. The original of the written decision of the hearing officer shall be filed with the clerk to the city council, and copies shall be mailed to the city manager or his designee, the licensee, and to any interested member of the public who participated at the hearing and requested a copy of the written decision. 
(d)	Appeals to city council. 
(1)	Any party aggrieved by the hearing officer's decision on an application for a determination under section 18-140 may appeal the decision to the city council, provided the person participated at the hearing. If the aggrieved person decides to appeal the decision, he shall file a notice of appeal describing the grounds for the appeal with the clerk to the city council not later than 15 days after the hearing officer's decision is filed with the clerk to the city council. 
(2)	If an aggrieved party files a timely notice of appeal pursuant to subsection (d)(1), the city council shall review the hearing officer's decision. Prior to such review, no party may communicate with any council member about the case. The record before the city council shall consist of the complete record of the proceedings before the hearing officer. The participants before the city council shall be the licensee, appropriate city staff, and any interested member of the public who participated at the hearing before the hearing officer. The licensee shall be limited to a total of ten minutes to present his argument, as shall the city staff. Any interested member of the public who participated at the hearing shall be limited to three minutes to present his argument. For good cause shown, the chairman may grant additional time. 
(3)	At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render a decision affirming the decision of the hearing officer or reversing the decision of the hearing officer, or remanding the case to the hearing officer for further consideration. 
(4)	A record of the decision on the appeal shall be made and filed by the clerk to the city council who shall also notify the city manager or his designee of the city council's decision on the appeal. 
(5)	If a decision by the hearing officer that a suspension or revocation shall become effective is upheld by the city council, then that suspension or revocation shall go into effect the day following the decision of the city council. 
(e)	Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city council on an application, may challenge the decision in the circuit court, but only if the person participated at the hearing. If the aggrieved person decides to challenge the decision, he shall file a petition for writ of certiorari with the clerk to the circuit court not later than 30 days after the decision of the city council is filed with the clerk to the city council. The record before the circuit court shall consist of the complete record of the proceedings before the city council. 
(f)	Requirement of exhaustion of procedures. Judicial review of a suspension or revocation shall only be available after the procedures set forth in section 18-140 have been exhausted. 
(g)	Notice of final suspension or revocation. If no response or request for a suspension or revocation hearing is filed within seven days of the notice of a pending suspension or revocation, or if the licensee who requested the hearing does not appear at the suspension or revocation hearing after notice, or if the hearing officer decides after a hearing that a pending suspension or revocation will become final and no appeal is made to the city council, or if an appeal is made and the city council upholds a suspension or revocation decision of the hearing officer, then the city manager or his designee shall issue to the licensee notice of final suspension or revocation of the adult entertainment license and mail or arrange delivery of the notice it to the licensee's record address. 
(h)	Effective date of suspension or revocation. The suspension or revocation of a license shall take effect the day after delivery of a notice of final suspension or revocation to the licensee in person, or by mail to the licensee's record address, or on the date the licensee surrenders the license, whichever happens first. The licensee shall immediately return and surrender a revoked license to the city manager or his designee. A suspension or revocation shall be abated during an appeal of a hearing officer's ruling to the city council until the day following the decision of the city council. 
(i)	Effect of final revocation. If a license is revoked, the licensee of the adult entertainment establishment shall not be allowed to obtain another adult entertainment license for a period of one year, and no adult entertainment license shall be issued again to any other person for the location upon which the adult entertainment establishment was situated. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Secs. 18-141—18-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISTANCE RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 18-161. - Prohibited locations. 
(a)	Zoning. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, or any provision of the city's planning, land development, and zoning regulations, no person shall propose, cause or permit the operation of, or enlargement of, an adult entertainment establishment which, while in operation of, or enlargement of, an adult entertainment establishment unless the establishment would or will be located in an industrial zoned district where adult entertainment establishments are an expressly permitted use. 
(b)	Distance minimums. In addition to the zoning requirements set forth in subsection (a), an adult entertainment establishment shall not be allowed to open, operate, or be enlarged within any of the following distances: 
(1)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 400 feet of any area of the county or the city classified as C, P, FR, RC, A-1 through A-3, RA, RR, R-1 through R-9, MH-1 through MH-8 or PUD, unless the adult entertainment establishment is a part of the PUD. 
(2)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any pre-existing adult entertainment establishment. 
(3)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 400 feet of any religious institution, educational institution, public park or recreational facility or educational institution bus stop. 
(c)	Enlargement. In this subsection the term "enlargement" includes, but is not limited to, increasing the floor size of the establishment by more than ten percent. 
(d)	Supplemental to alcoholic beverage regulations. The zoning and distance requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section 18-161 are independent of and do not supersede the distance requirements for alcoholic beverage establishments which may be contained in other laws, rules, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-162. - Measurement of distance. 
The distance from the proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment mentioned herein to any area of the county or the city classified in subsection 18-161(b) of this article or to any pre-existing adult entertainment establishment or to any religious institution, educational institution, public park or recreational facility or educational institution bus stop shall be measured by drawing a straight line between the closest property lines of the proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment and the other zoning categories or uses identified in section 18-161 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-163. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)	An adult entertainment establishment which, on January 25, 1997, the date Ordinance No. 21-96 was first published, was located on a site which is prohibited by section 18-161, shall cease operations by October 1, 1999. 
(b)	When a nonconforming use of an adult entertainment establishment has been discontinued for 90 consecutive days or more, the nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned and the future use of the premises or site shall revert to only those uses permitted on the site on which the establishment is located. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-164. - Variances. 
The city manager or his designee is authorized to recommend a variance from the distance and zoning requirements of this article, pursuant to the procedures and criteria set forth for other variance requests as set forth in the city Code and the city council is authorized to make a determination on the city manager or his designee's recommendation pursuant to the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Secs. 18-165—18-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL OPERATIONAL RULES 
 
Sec. 18-181. - General requirements for all adult entertainment establishments. 
Each adult entertainment establishment is subject to all of the following general requirements and shall: 
(a)	Conform to all applicable building, fire, health, zoning, and land use statutes, codes, ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, state or local. 
(b)	On the first Monday of each month provide the office of the sheriff with a report of all persons who worked or who were workers at the establishment or for the adult entertainment business during the previous month, which report shall contain the name, date of birth, residential address, social security number, position, and stage name, if any, of such persons. 
(c)	Keep the adult entertainment license posted in a conspicuous place at the establishment available for inspection by the public at all times. 
(d)	Cover opaquely each window or other opening through which a person outside the establishment may otherwise see inside the establishment. 
(e)	Maintain all exterior walls and surfaces of the establishment, excluding signs, a single achromatic or light pastel color, and shall maintain all awnings, canopies, window shutters, window treatment, or other trim the same color or a single different shade of the same achromatic or light pastel color. The trim color shall not exceed 20 percent of the entire exterior surface of the building. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of an establishment such as brick or stone. 
(f)	Install, construct, keep, maintain, or allow only those signs at the establishment which comply with the city's sign ordinances and the provisions of this subsection. 
(1)	No sign shall contain any flashing lights, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner (except for the logo of the establishment, provided the logo shall not contain any specified anatomical areas, or any male or female forms at or below the clavicle). 
(2)	No sign shall contain in the name or logo of the establishment, or otherwise, any words or material which depict, describe, reference, or infer in any manner, sexual activities, specified anatomical areas, or the display of specified anatomical areas. 
(g)	Each entrance and exit at the establishment shall remain unlocked when any person who is not a worker is inside the establishment. 
(h)	Acquire and maintain all necessary governmental licenses, notwithstanding any licenses required by this article, including, but not limited to, a sales tax license issued by the State of Florida.  
Sec. 18-182. - Adult theaters. 
In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in section 18-181, an adult theater shall comply with the following special requirements. 
(a)	If an adult theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall have: 
(1)	Individual separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, to accommodate the number of persons allowed to occupy the area; 
(2)	A continuous main aisle alongside of the seating areas in order that each person seated in the areas shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and 
(3)	A sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area. 
(4)	Sufficient illumination so that persons is all areas of the auditorium can be seen. 
(b)	If an adult theater contains adult booths, each adult booth shall have: 
(1)	A sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance which states the maximum number of persons allowed to occupy the booth, which number shall correlate with the number of seats in the booth; 
(2)	A permanently open entrance not less than 32 inches wide and not less than six feet high, which entrance shall not have any curtain rods, hinges, rails, or the like which would allow the entrance to be closed or partially closed by any curtain, door or other partition; 
(3)	Individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, which correlate with the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth; 
(4)	A well-illuminated continuous main aisle alongside the booth in order that each person situated in the booth shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and 
(5)	Illumination by a light bulb of no less than 25 watts. 
(c)	If an adult theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by persons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced, that the material to be seen by those persons may not be seen from any public right-of-way, property zoned for residential use, religious institution, educational institution, or park. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-183. - Adult performance establishments. 
In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in section 18-181, an adult performance establishment shall comply with the following special requirements: 
(a)	Have a stage provided for the use by any worker who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area to a customer consisting of a permanent platform (or other similar permanent structure) raised a minimum of 18 inches above the surrounding floor and encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet; and 
(b)	Any area in which a private performance occurs shall: 
(1)	Have a permanently open entrance not less than 32 inches wide and not less than six feet high, which entrance shall not have any curtain rods, hinges, rails, or the like which would allow the entrance to be being closed or partially closed by any curtain, door, or other partition; and 
(2)	Have a wall to wall, floor to ceiling partition of solid construction without any holes or openings, which partition may be completely or partially transparent, and which partition separates the worker from the person viewing the private performance. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-184. - Adult bookstores. 
In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in section 18-181, an adult bookstore shall not display merchandise or adult material in a manner that allows such merchandise or adult material to be visible from outside of the structures at the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-185. - Sexually oriented businesses. 
In addition to the general requirements for a adult entertainment establishment contained in section 18-181 above, a sexually oriented business shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following special requirements: 
(a)	Post in an open and conspicuous place and file with the office of the sheriff, a list of services provided by the sexually oriented business described in readily understandable language with a specification of the cost of such services. 
(b)	Provide each customer, in advance, with a separate written customer contract setting forth the services to be rendered, the cost of such service, the actual full name of the worker to provide said service, and the actual full name, address, and telephone number of the customer to which such service is rendered. 
(c)	Maintain a daily register recording all transactions on a form provided by the office of the sheriff, containing records of all customers with actual full names, addresses, time expended, services purchased and mode of payment and name of all workers who provided services together with a copy of each customer contract. 
(d)	Not increase the incentive or temptation for workers to engage in prostitution or lewdness by allowing any worker of the sexually oriented business to accept any tips or gratuities received directly from a customer in addition to the service fee specified in the customer contract. 
(e)	Not exhibit, publish, distribute or cause to be exhibited, published or distributed any advertising matter or signage that would reasonably suggest to prospective customers that the workers of the business are of a specific gender or are dressed in any manner other than that required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-186. - Physical contact parlors. 
In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in section 18-181 and the special requirements for a sexually oriented business contained in section 18-185 above, a physical contact parlor shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following special requirements: 
(a)	Operate from a fixed physical commercial location at which shall be displayed its sexually oriented business license and all other required occupational licenses. 
(b)	Provide clean linen and towels for each customer without any reuse of towels or linens before relaundering; provided, however, that heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets, provided that such paper is used by only for one customer, then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. 
(c)	Provide closed cabinets for the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering commercial physical contact. 
(d)	Disinfect and sterilize all non-disposable instruments and materials after use on each customer. 
(e)	Require all workers to wear a clean outer garment in the nature of a surgical gown when providing commercial physical contact, and during all other working hours to conceal, with a fully opaque covering, all specified anatomical areas of his or her body. 
(f)	Inform each customer in the customer contract that he must cover his or her specified anatomical areas with a towel, cloth, robe, undergarment, swimsuit or other similar fully opaque material while in the presence of a worker. 
(g)	Not permit, suffer, or allow any animal, except a seeing eye guide dog, to be on the premises of the physical contact parlor. 
(h)	If both male and female customers are to be served simultaneously, provide two separate work areas for providing physical contact, one for males and the other for females. 
(i)	Configure each work area where physical contact is to be provided so that the area is readily visible at all times from common areas of the establishment outside of the work area. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-187. - Escort services. 
In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in section 18-181 and the general requirements for a sexually oriented business contained in section 18-185 above, an escort service shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following special requirements: 
(a)	If offering or providing escorts within the city, an escort service shall notify the city manager or his designee of an authorized physical location, which may or may not be within the city, from where the escort service operates and dispatches escorts from. 
(b)	Include in all advertising or promotional literature posted, placed, published, or distributed within the city, the number of a valid adult entertainment establishment/escort service license issued by the city manager or his designee unless the escort service does not refer, send, or dispatch escorts to within the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
(c)	Ensure that every escort and worker of an escort service is provided or obtains, carries while working as an escort, and displays upon the request of any law enforcement officer, an occupational license to engage in the occupation of escort within the city. Exception: An escort or worker of an escort service who is a paid employee for whom taxes and social security payments are withheld and paid by the escort service, and who is not an independent contractor, may substitute and carry a copy of the adult entertainment escort service license of the employing escort service. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-188. - Worker records and inspections of records. 
(a)	An adult entertainment establishment shall maintain a worker record for each worker who currently works or performs at the establishment, and for each worker who worked at the establishment during the preceding one-year period. 
(1)	The worker record shall contain the current or former worker's full legal name, including any aliases, date of birth, residential address, residential telephone number, social security number, driver's license number or state or federally issued identification card number, and a recent photograph of the worker. 
(2)	The worker record shall also describe the status of each worker (whether the worker is or was a paid employee for whom income taxes and social security payments are or were withheld or is or was a lessee, sublessee, independent contractor, or subcontractor). 
(3)	The worker record shall also contain a copy of a valid city occupational license for any lessee, sublessee, independent contractor, or subcontractor who is not an employee and is allowed to work or perform at the establishment. 
(b)	The original worker records, and the original customer contract, and daily registers required by division 4, or true and exact photocopies thereof, shall be kept at the establishment at all times. 
(c)	Each operator of the establishment shall be responsible for knowing the location of the originals, or the true and exact photocopies thereof, of each worker record, customer contract, and daily register. 
(d)	Each operator of the establishment shall, upon request by a law enforcement officer when the establishment is open for business, immediately make available for inspection the original, or the true and exact photocopies thereof, of any worker record, customer contract, and daily register. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Secs. 18-189—18-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CRIMINAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 18-201. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates any section of this division 5 ("Criminal Provisions") may be punished as provided in F.S. §§ 125.69, 162.21 and/or 162.22. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-202. - Operation without valid adult entertainment license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment when: 
(a)	The establishment does not have a valid adult entertainment license for each applicable classification; 
(b)	The license of the establishment is under suspension; 
(c)	The license of the establishment has been revoked or canceled; or 
(d)	The establishment has a license which has expired. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-203. - Working at unlicensed establishment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an employee of an adult entertainment establishment that the worker knows or should know that the establishment does not have a valid license under this article, or has a license which is under suspension, has been revoked or canceled, or has expired, or which does not have each applicable adult entertainment license conspicuously displayed. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-204. - Operation contrary to certain provisions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment: 
(a)	Which does not satisfy all of the general requirements of subsection 18-181(c), (d), (e), or (f); 
(b)	Which is an adult theater and does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 18-182; 
(c)	Which is an adult performance establishment and does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 18-183; 
(d)	Which is an adult bookstore which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 18-184; 
(e)	Which is a sexually oriented business (physical contact parlor or escort service) which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 18-185, regardless of whether the establishment is licensed under this article; 
(f)	Which is a physical contact establishment and does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 18-186, regardless of whether the establishment is licensed under this article; 
(g)	Which is an escort service and does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 18-187, regardless of whether the establishment is licensed under this article; 
(h)	While the entrance or exit of the establishment is locked when a customer is inside the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-205. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for a worker of an adult entertainment establishment to commit any of the following acts or for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment to knowingly or with reason to know, permit, suffer, or allow any worker to commit any of the following acts: 
(a)	Engage in a straddle dance with a person at the establishment; 
(b)	Offer, contract or otherwise agree to engage in a straddle dance with a person at the establishment; 
(c)	Engage in any specified sexual activity at the establishment; 
(d)	Engage in public nudity as defined in section 18-106 of this article at the establishment; 
(e)	Display or expose at the establishment specified anatomical areas while such worker is not continuously positioned at least three feet away from all other persons or while such employee is not in an area as described in subsection 18-183(a); 
(f)	Display or expose specified anatomical areas at an establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold, offered for sale or consumed; 
(g)	Display or expose any specified anatomical area while simulating any specified sexual activity with any other person at the establishment; 
(h)	Engage in a private performance unless such worker is in an area which complies with the requirements of subsections 18-183(b)(1) and (2); 
(i)	Intentionally touch any person at the adult entertainment establishment, while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area; or 
(j)	Intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed body of any person at the adult entertainment establishment, at any point below the waist and above the knee of the person, or to intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any female person; 
(k)	Exception. Notwithstanding any provision indicating to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any worker of an adult entertainment establishment to expose any specified anatomical area during the worker's bona fide use of a restroom, or bona fide use of a dressing room which is used and occupied only by other workers. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-206. - Touching workers prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person in an adult entertainment establishment to intentionally touch a worker who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area at the adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person in an adult entertainment establishment to intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any worker, or to touch the clothed or unclothed body of any worker at any point below the waist and above the knee of the worker. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-207. - Advertising prohibited activity. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment to advertise, encourage or promote any activity prohibited by this article or any applicable state statute or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-208. - Minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator or worker of an adult entertainment establishment to knowingly, or with reason to know, permit, suffer, or allow a person under 18 years of age to: 
(a)	Enter or remain in the establishment; 
(b)	Purchase goods or services at the establishment; or 
(c)	Work at the establishment as a worker. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-209. - Failure to maintain worker records. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment at which the license required by division 2 of this article and each record required by division 4 of this adult entertainment code, including every worker record, customer contract, and daily register have not been compiled, are not maintained, or are not made available for inspection by a law enforcement officer upon request when the establishment is open for business. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to be a worker of an adult entertainment establishment who fails to obtain, carry, and display upon demand of a law enforcement officer, while working in the adult entertainment occupation, an occupational license for the adult entertainment occupation in which the worker is engaged. 
(c)	Exception: It is an affirmative defense and subsection (b) does not apply to a worker of an adult entertainment establishment who is a paid employee for whom taxes and social security payments are withheld and paid to the federal government by the adult entertainment establishment, and who is not an independent contractor, except an employee who is an escort working away from the establishment premises who shall then be required to obtain, carry, and display to law enforcement officer, upon demand, a copy of the adult entertainment license of the employing escort service. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-210. - Exceeding occupancy limit of adult booth. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy an adult booth in which booth there are more people than that specified on the posted sign required by section 18-182. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-211. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day for: 
(a)	An operator of an adult entertainment establishment to allow such establishment to remain open for business, or to allow, suffer or permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service. 
(b)	A worker of an adult entertainment establishment to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-212. - Alteration of license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or otherwise change the contents or appearance of an adult entertainment license except the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-213. - False statement in application for license. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person applying for an adult entertainment license pursuant to division 2 to make a false statement or provide false information which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license on the application required by division 2. 
(b)	It shall also be unlawful for any person to provide false or misleading information in the monthly reports required by section 18-181 or in the worker record, customer contract, and daily register records required by section 18-185 and section 18-188. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-214. - Solicitation or personal advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for any worker of an adult entertainment establishment while situated outside any structure at the adult entertainment establishment, or at a place at the adult entertainment establishment where the worker is visible from any public right-of-way or sidewalk, to display or expose specified anatomical areas or to engage in personal advertising, pandering, or solicitation, whether passive or otherwise, on behalf of the worker, any other worker, or the adult entertainment establishment. "Personal advertising" is defined as encouraging or enticing, by whatever direct or indirect means, potential customers beyond the adult entertainment establishment to enter the adult entertainment establishment. Additionally, it shall be unlawful for an operator or any worker to suffer, permit, or allow any door that is visible from a public right-of-way or sidewalk to be opened or remain opened except when a person is entering or existing the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-215. - Prohibited acts by customers, workers and operators of physical contact parlors. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator or worker of a physical contact parlor to commit any of the following acts or for an operator of a commercial physical contact parlor to knowingly or with reason to know, permit, suffer, aid, assist, or allow any worker or customer to commit any of the following acts: 
(a)	Fail to, while engaged in providing in commercial physical contact, wear a clean outer garment in the nature of a surgical gown when providing commercial physical contact; 
(b)	Display or expose specified anatomical areas to a customer or customer at a commercial physical contact parlor; 
(c)	Fail to require, at all times, all customers to cover the customer's specified anatomical areas by a towel, cloth, robe, undergarment, swimsuit or other similar fully opaque material while in the presence of a worker; 
(d)	Perform commercial physical contact on a customer while not on the premises of a commercial physical contact parlor licensed under this article; 
(e)	Engage in, or offer to engage in, any escort services or private modeling in relation to the commercial physical contact parlor; 
(f)	Solicit or require a customer or customers to remove any item of clothing as a prerequisite to providing commercial physical contact; 
(g)	Solicit a tip or gratuity in exchange for a promise or suggestion of any act or enhanced service. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-216. - Prohibited acts by customers, workers and operators of sexually oriented businesses. 
It shall be unlawful for a customer of a sexually oriented business to do any of the following acts, or for a worker or operator of a sexually oriented business to knowingly permit, suffer, aid, assist, or allow a customer to do any of the following acts: 
(a)	Touch, massage, or manipulate directly, or indirectly, the body of any worker of the sexually oriented business; 
(b)	Touch, massage, manipulate, display or expose any of the customer's own specified anatomical areas while in the presence of a worker or operator of the sexually oriented business; or 
(c)	Engage in any specified sexual activity while in the presence of an worker of the sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Sec. 18-217. - Prohibited acts by escorts. 
It shall be unlawful for an escort or escort service worker to commit any of the following acts, or for an operator of an escort service to knowingly or with reason to know, permit, suffer, aid, assist, or allow any escort or escort service worker to commit any of the following acts: 
(a)	Enter a hotel, motel or other transient place of lodging for the purpose of meeting or serving a customer, without immediately meeting with an employee of the place of lodging who is working at the front desk or reception area and doing each of the following: 
(1)	Provide the time of arrival and the estimated time of departure; 
(2)	Present a copy of their escort service's adult entertainment license and escort's occupational license; 
(3)	Identifying himself or herself, identify the escort service that sent him or her, state the name of the customer he or she is meeting or servicing; 
(4)	Describe the location of the meeting, including any applicable room number; and 
(5)	Notify an employee at the front desk or reception area upon departing the premises. 
(b)	Distribute, place, post, or leave any unsolicited business cards, advertisement, or promotional material on or within the premises of any other business; 
(c)	Begin a meeting or service with a customer after 10:00 p.m. any day of the week and 9:00 a.m. of the following day; 
(d)	Begin a meeting or service with a customer without first meeting the customer in a public place, such as a bar or restaurant, before accompanying the customer to any place which is not open and occupied by the public, such as a hotel room or residence; 
(e)	Display or expose specified anatomical areas to a customer of an escort service; 
(f)	Require, entice or solicit a customer to remove any article of clothing; 
(g)	Solicit a tip or gratuity from a customer in exchange for a promise or suggestion of any act or service. 
(Ord. No. 21-96, § 2, 3-5-97)  
Secs. 18-218—18-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BINGO 
 
Sec. 18-241. - Definitions. 
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Applicant means and refers to any person, corporation, partnership or association which is either a charity which is to conduct bingo games in a bingo hall, or a for profit bingo organization. 
Authorized expenses means and refers to the cost of equipment and supplies actually used in the conduct of bingo games at the bingo hall, state and local permit and license fees, bookkeeping and accounting fees for records and reports, advertising, cost of security personnel, pro rata share of rent, insurance, and utilities, cost of refreshments served at no cost to patrons and volunteers, cost of food, beverages and cigarettes to be sold at the bingo hall. 
Bingo card means and refers to the flat piece of paper or thin pasteboard employed by players engaged in the game of bingo. The bingo card shall have not fewer than 24 playing numbers printed on it. These playing numbers shall range from 1 through 75, inclusive. No bingo card may be used in a bingo hall unless it has been sold by the charity conducting the bingo in the bingo hall. Each bingo card sold by a charity in a bingo hall must have printed on it the full name of the charity (including the name or designation of the chapter or location of the charity). 
Bingo game means and refers to the activity, commonly known as "bingo" in which participants pay a sum of money for the use of one or more bingo cards. When the game commences, numbers are drawn by chance, one by one, and announced. The players cover or mark those numbers on the bingo cards which they have purchased until a player receives a given order of numbers in sequence that has been preannounced for that particular game. This player calls out "bingo" and is declared a winner of a predetermined prize. More than one game may be played upon a bingo card, and numbers called for one game may be used for a succeeding game or games. 
Bingo hall means and refers to any location, building, or part of a building in which more than one charity conducts bingo games and which is operated by a for profit bingo organization. Any for profit bingo organization, as defined herein, shall be presumed to "operate a bingo hall" if such for profit organization either leases space to charities for the conduct of bingo games or leases equipment to charities for the conduct of bingo games in a bingo hall. 
Charity means and refers to a charitable, nonprofit, or veterans' organization which has qualified for exemption from federal income tax as an exempt organization under the provisions of § 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 or § 528 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; which is engaged in charitable, civic, community, benevolent, religious, or scholastic works or other similar activities; and which has been in existence and active for a period of three years or more. 
City means and refers to the City of DeBary, Florida, or its designee. 
Designated member of charity means and refers to those eligible members of a charity who have been designated to be in charge of the bingo games for the charity. 
Eligible member of charity means and refers to a member of the particular charity who has either been a member of the charity for no less than 18 months, or has been both a member of the charity for six months and has been a resident of Volusia County for no less than 18 months, and is a person who, due to gender, race, religion, or other characteristic, had not been permitted to be a member of the charity at sometime during the immediately preceding 18-month period. 
For profit bingo organization means and refers to any person, corporation or partnership which is not a charity which leases any bingo hall to a charity and which supplies bingo equipment or services to the charity for use in the bingo hall. 
Interested party means and refers to any person, partnership or corporation which is a permittee or is an applicant for a permit, or who is a designated member of a charity, or who is an independent contractor or consultant with regard to conducting bingo games or the operation of a bingo hall (whether paid or not) of a permittee or applicant, or who is a partner in a partnership which is a permittee or an applicant, or is a person, partnership or corporation which is an officer or director of a corporation or who owns stock of a for-profit corporation which is a permittee or an applicant for a permit, or any member of an association which is a permittee or an applicant. 
Patron means or refers to a person who plays bingo at a bingo hall. 
Permit means and refers to a regulatory permit under the provisions of this regulatory article. 
Permittee means and refers to any holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
Sale means and refers to the event in which a permittee receives money or other things of value, including receipts for admission fees, sales or rental of bingo cards or packages, sales or rental of bingo accessories, sales of food, beverages and cigarettes, rental fees, service fees, security services, or any other money received from any other source. 
Session means and refers to a designated set of bingo games played in a day or part of a day. 
Specified criminal act means and refers to any felony of any kind, or any misdemeanor involving theft or illegal gambling of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 1, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-242. - Persons involved in conduct of bingo games. 
Each person involved in the conduct of any bingo game must be an eligible member of the charity sponsoring the bingo game and may not be compensated by salary, tips or other means for operation of such bingo game. When bingo games are conducted by a charity, the charity conducting the bingo games shall be required to designate up to three eligible members of that organization to be in charge of the games, one of whom shall be present during the entire session at which the bingo games are conducted. The organization conducting the bingo games is responsible for posting a notice, which notice states the name of the organization and the designated member or members, in a conspicuous place on the premises at which the session is held. In no event may a caller in a bingo game be a participant in that bingo game. No person can be a designated member of more than one charity conducting bingo games in a bingo hall. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 2, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-243. - Bookkeeping requirements charities. 
Complete financial records for each charity relating to bingo operations conducted in a bingo hall must be kept according to generally accepted accounting practices. In addition, consecutively numbered duplicate receipts must be prepared for each sale, with the patron receiving one receipt and the permittee keeping the duplicate receipt. Receipts may be produced either by cash registers which automatically record duplicate receipts or by some other method approved in advance by the city. All money received from sales shall be deposited in a separate bank account used only by that particular charity for bingo funds within 24 hours of when such money was received from a patron. No credit or extended payment terms shall be extended to any patron at any time. All expenditures related to any bingo game or the charity's operation of bingo games, including, but not limited to, bingo prizes, rent, utilities, and all other costs of operation shall be paid by pre-printed consecutively numbered checks written on the bingo bank account of the charity. All checks written on the bingo bank account must show the legal name of the payee and the payee's social security number or federal tax ID number, unless specifically otherwise approved by the city council in advance. For each bingo session, a written record must be kept setting forth the name of the charity, the date, starting and ending times, the number of patrons present, the total amount of money received, the prizes awarded, the check numbers of the checks used to pay the bingo prizes, and the eligible member(s) of the charity conducting the game. In addition, a continuous VHS recording (with both audio and video being recorded) of each bingo session shall be made, starting five minutes before the beginning of the session and ending no earlier than five minutes after the end of the session. At the beginning of the VHS tape, a placard must be displayed before the video camera showing the date and time, and an audio statement must be recorded stating the date, name of the charity, the name of the person(s) conducting the session, and the number of patrons present. The remainder of the VHS video portion of the tape shall show the numbers being drawn in the conduct of bingo games. The audio portion of the VHS recording shall record the voice(s) of the designated member(s) of the charity conducting the bingo session. Before the end of the VHS recording, but after the end of the session, a designated member of the charity must make an audio statement setting forth the date, name of the charity, name of the person(s) who conducted the session, the number of patrons present, the number and amount of prizes awarded, and the numbers of the checks used to pay prizes to patrons. Two of the designated members of the charity must state on the audio portion of the VHS recording their names and a statement that the information stated regarding the bingo session is accurate. In addition, those two designated members of the charity must sign off before close of business that day as to the accuracy of the receipts, expenditures and all other bookkeeping records relating to that bingo session. Forms for such sign off shall be as prescribed by the city. All bookkeeping records, including, but not limited to, all the written records, sign off forms, bank statements, cancelled checks, check books, duplicate receipts, deposit tickets and receipts, and all leases and agreements shall be maintained on the premises of the bingo hall for a period of no less than three years. All VHS tapes of bingo sessions must be labeled with the date of the session, the beginning and ending times of the taping, and the name of the charity conducting the bingo, and they must be maintained on the premises of the bingo hall for a period of no less than six months after the bingo session recorded on the VHS tape. All bookkeeping records and VHS tapes of bingo sessions shall be available for inspection and copying by the city and by state and county law enforcement personnel or their designees at all times that the bingo hall is open for business. Charities permitted to conduct bingo in a bingo hall which have gross bingo receipts of more than $52,000.00 annually, or gross bingo receipts of more than $1,000.00 in any one week, may spend a maximum of 25 percent of a sum of money which is equal to gross receipts less prizes which are attributable to bingo sessions, for payment of authorized expenses. In no event may the charity expend bingo proceeds for any purpose other than prizes attributable to such bingo sessions, and authorized expenses as defined herein. All other bingo proceeds must be utilized for charitable purposes by the charity. Charities permitted to conduct bingo in a bingo hall with annual gross receipts of $52,000.00 or less per year and which do not have gross receipts of over $1,000.00 in any one week, may deduct the actual cost of authorized expenses and the amount of prizes attributable to bingo sessions, with the remainder of the bingo proceeds being utilized for charitable purposes by the charity. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 3, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-244. - Bookkeeping requirements for profit bingo organization. 
The for profit bingo operation must keep complete financial records in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices, and the for profit bingo organization shall have no business or business-purpose other than the operation of the bingo hall within the city. Funds of the for profit business bingo organization must be kept in a distinct bank account with the words "For Profit Bingo Account DeBary" in its name. No interested party in the for profit bingo organization, or any spouse, parent, sibling, or child of an interested party in the for profit bingo organization, may be a designated member of any charity conducting bingo in a bingo hall. All money received from any source by the for profit bingo organization must be deposited into the bank account within 24 hours of receipt. All expenditures of any sort made by the for profit bingo organization shall be paid by pre-printed consecutively numbered checks written on the bank account of the for profit bingo organization. All checks written on the for profit bingo organization bank account must show the legal name of the payee and the payee's social security number or federal tax ID number. All bookkeeping records, including, but not limited to, bank statements, cancelled checks, check books, deposit tickets and receipts, and all leases and agreements shall be maintained by the for profit bingo organization on the premises of the bingo hall for a period of no less than three years. Since it is the intent of the state law regulating bingo that all profits from bingo operations are to go to charity, the for profit bingo organization must not charge for rental or sale of property or equipment or supplies any more than is ordinary and customary in the Volusia County area for the sale or rental of property, equipment or supplies under similar circumstances. For instance, rental terms for equipment would be compared to long term rentals rather than short term or transitory rentals, and since rental of property and equipment is utilized by more than one charity in the bingo hall, the costs for rental of property and equipment would be equitably divided among the various charities operating within the bingo hall. In the event an audit by a Florida CPA designated by the city of the records of the for profit bingo organization reveals charges to the charities in excess of what is ordinary and customary in the Volusia County area, as determined by an auditor designated by the city, the for profit bingo organization shall equitably refund the difference to the charities operating in the bingo hall. In the event the for profit bingo organization wishes to appeal the determination of the city auditor, it may file a notice of appeal with the city along with a certified audit by a Florida licensed CPA upon which the for profit bingo organization is basing its appeal. A hearing before the city council shall be held within six weeks of receipt by the city of the notice of appeal and certified audit. The city shall hire a third Florida CPA to review the audits previously accomplished as to the records of the for profit bingo organization and any other records deemed appropriate by such CPA firm, and the city shall base the results of the appeal on the reports of the CPA's presented to the city. If the for profit bingo operation wishes to appeal any determination by the city council under this section, it may appeal same to the court of appropriate jurisdiction in Volusia County. All bookkeeping records of the for profit bingo organization shall be available for inspection, auditing and copying by the city and by state and county law enforcement personnel or their designees at all times that the bingo hall is open for business, or upon request. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 4, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-245. - Notices. 
Each bingo hall must have prominently posted signs, (no less than four square feet in size each), at all entrances to the bingo hall and at no less than five additional places in the bingo hall one of which must be within five feet of the caller, which state: 
NOTICE 
ALL BINGO SESSIONS ARE 
AUDIO AND VIDEO RECORDED 
IF YOU DO NOT RECEIVE A RECEIPT FOR ANY PAYMENT MADE PLEASE NOTIFY LICENSING 
407-668-2040 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 5, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-246. - Regulatory permit required; application; investigation required; contents of application; fee. 
An annual regulatory permit shall be required for each for profit bingo organization and for each charity operating bingo games in a bingo hall. No permit for an applicant shall be issued until an application is made to the city which shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the applicant has complied with this article and all other requirements of this Code and of the Florida Statutes. Each application must be accompanied by a fee of $500.00 to cover the cost of investigation, administration and handling of the application. Each application must be sworn to and state the name, address and date of birth of all interested parties of the applicant, and must include a statement as to whether any interested party of the applicant has been convicted within 15 years of the date of application of any specified criminal act, and if so, the name of such interested party, the date and place of conviction and the nature of the crime for which the interested party was convicted. No application shall be processed by the city unless such application complies with all the requirements as stated hereunder. If an incomplete application, or an application not accompanied by the fee as herein required, is received by the city, the city shall send a notice of intent to deny the permit to the applicant with an explanation of the requirements necessary to make the application complete. Such notice shall include a statement that if a completed application and/or required fee is not submitted or if an appeal to city council of the determination by the city that such application is incomplete is not submitted within ten days of receipt by applicant of such notice, the application shall be finally denied. If the applicant does not return a properly completed application and/or required fee or does not file a notice of appeal as designated in such notice within ten days of receipt by applicant of notice therefor, the city shall notify the applicant of final denial of the permit application. Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any occupational licenses or other permits or licenses required under this Code. In the event a permit hereunder is revoked, no permit fee having previously been paid hereunder shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 6, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-247. - Continuing duty to update application. 
Applicants for a regulatory permit and any person, partnership, corporation, association or other entity which has been issued a permit under this article are under a continuing duty to update the information contained in the application submitted for a permit, and shall, within 30 days of any change in such information notify the city in writing of such changes. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 7, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-248. - Fingerprinting. 
(a)	No application for a regulatory permit under this article shall be complete until all interested parties of the applicant have submitted their fingerprints to the city. 
(b)	A permittee shall not be deemed to have complied with the provisions of section 18-244 until and unless the fingerprints of any new interested parties of the permittee have been submitted to the city. 
(c)	For purposes of this section, fingerprints submitted to the city must be in a form approved by the city. Fingerprints made outside the presence of a fingerprint technician employed by the city shall not be acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 8, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-249. - Permit not to be issued without specific authorization following conviction for certain crimes. 
The city shall not grant, without specific authorization from city council, a permit or a renewal of a permit under this article to any applicant if an interested party thereof has been convicted of a specified criminal act and such conviction is final and not on appeal within 15 years of the date of application. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond upon a charge of a specified criminal act. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 9, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-250. - Permit not to be issued without specific authorization to certain person, etc., after revocation. 
The city shall not grant, without specific authorization from city council, a permit under this article to any permittee or applicant if an interested party of the applicant was a permittee or an interested party of a permittee at the time such permit was revoked under the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 10, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-251. - Issuance of permit; term; renewal. 
If the city determines that the applicant is not ineligible to be issued a permit or a renewal of a permit without specific authorization from city council as provided herein, a regulatory permit shall be issued to be effective for one year from the date of issuance, upon payment of the annual permit fee of $5,000.00. Upon request by an applicant, the city shall permit the applicant to pay the $5,000.00 permit fee in monthly installments in advance, it being understood that the bingo hall would not be permitted to operate in any month unless and until all monthly installments of the permit fee applicable to the for profit bingo organization and all charities utilizing the bingo hall shall have been paid. In order for the city to grant a renewal without specific authorization from city council, the application for renewal and the investigation thereon must show that the applicant is not ineligible under the provisions hereof for the issuance of a permit without specific authorization from city council. The purpose of the $5,000.00 permit fee is to defray the costs involved in the enforcement of this article in any bingo hall within the city, it specifically being the intent that the total fees collected from a for profit bingo organization and the charities operating within a particular bingo hall should approximate the cost to the city (including, but not limited to administrative and bookkeeping expenses, auditing fees and attorney fees) of regulating bingo within the city. In the event the cost to the city of regulating bingo is less than the total permit fees hereunder collected by the city, the city shall either credit such excess to future permit fees hereunder or negotiate the return of the excess fees pro rata to the permittees. In the event the cost to the city of regulating bingo at a bingo hall is in excess of the total fees received in any one year (or portion of the year, if the revocation of a permit takes place), from the permittees relating to the bingo hall, such excess costs to the city shall be collected from the permittee before the yearly renewal of a permit hereunder, or shall be collected upon the revocation of any permit hereunder. The city shall have a lien on the bingo equipment used in the bingo hall for purposes of satisfying any uncollected costs to the city of regulating bingo in the bingo hall. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 11, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-252. - Appeal from action of city. 
If the city determines that it may not issue a permit to the applicant under the provisions of this article, without specific authorization from city council, or under the provisions of section 18-246 relating to incomplete applications or applications not accompanied by the required fee, the city shall notify the applicant by hand delivery or by certified mail of the city's intention to deny the permit. Such notice shall include a copy of this article and the reason(s) for the denial of the permit. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the city's determination to deny the permit to the city council by filing with the city clerk a notice of appeal within ten days of receipt by applicant of notice of intent to deny. If an applicant appeals a determination by the city to deny a permit based on failure to submit a properly completed application or for failure to submit the required fee, city council, within 15 days of such appeal, shall hold a public hearing to determine whether such application is sufficiently complete to comply with the requirements of section 18-246 and/or the required fee was submitted with such application. If city council determines that such application is sufficiently complete to comply with the requirements of section 18-246, and the required fee was submitted therewith, city council shall direct the city to process such application. If city council shall determine that such application is not sufficiently complete to comply with the requirements of section 18-246, or that the required fee was not submitted therewith, city council shall direct the city to issue a notice of final denial of such application for permit. Provided, however, if city council finds that the defects in the application or the failure to pay the required fee were the result of excusable neglect or inadvertence on the part of the applicant. City council may grant the applicant a specific time period in which to submit a properly completed application and/or submit the required fee. 
If an applicant appeals a determination by the city to deny a permit or a renewal of a permit based on any grounds other than an incomplete application or failure to submit the required fee, city council, within 15 days of such appeal, shall hold a public hearing to determine whether issuance or renewal of the permit would be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. In determining whether issuance or renewal of the permit would be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. City council shall consider whether the factor(s) which caused the city to not issue a permit without specific authorization from city council are related to the bingo operation or bingo involvement by the applicant or an interested party thereof for which a permit application is made or the involvement with or operation by the applicant or an interested party thereof of any other bingo operation and if such factor(s) evidence a disregard for the health, safety or welfare of such applicant's or permittee's patrons, charities or employees, or of persons residing or doing business nearby, or a disregard for or violation of the financial constraints of this article or of state law by either the charity or the for profit bingo organization. If city council determines that a factor which caused the city not to issue a permit without specific authorization from city council is related to the use or operation or involvement by the applicant or an interested party thereof of the bingo hall for which a permit application is made or the use or operation by the applicant or an interested party thereof of any other bingo hall and that such factor evidences a disregard for the health, safety or welfare of such bingo hall's patrons, charities, or employees, or of persons residing or doing business nearby, or a disregard for or violation of the financial constraints of this article or of state law by either the charity or the for profit bingo organization. City council shall direct the city to issue a notice of final denial of such application for permit or renewal of permit. In the event an application or renewal is finally denied, applicant shall have the right to appeal such denial to the court having jurisdiction of such matters under the constitution and laws of the state of florida. If the city council determines that none of the factors which caused the city not to issue a permit or renewal without specific authorization from city council is related both to the use or operation or involvement, by the applicant or an interested party thereof, of the bingo hall for which a permit application is made or the use or operation by the applicant or an interested party thereof of any other establishment and that such factor does not evidence a disregard for the health, safety or welfare of such bingo hall's patrons or employees, or of persons residing or doing business nearby, or a disregard for or violation of the financial constraints of this article or of state law by either the charity or the for profit bingo organization, city council shall direct the city to issue a permit to such applicant forthwith. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 12, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-253. - Authority to revoke permits; grounds for revocation. 
The city council, by majority vote of those present, after a hearing as hereinafter provided, is hereby authorized to revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this article of any permittee under any one or more of the following circumstances if the city council makes an affirmative finding that the continued operation of the permitted premises would be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
(1)	Permittee, or any interested party of permittee, is convicted of a specified criminal act. 
(2)	Permittee fails to comply with the fire prevention ordinances of the city after reasonable notice shall have been given to the permittee to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such ordinances on the permitted premises. 
(3)	Permittee or any interested party of permittee violates any state statute relating to bingo operations or gambling law. 
(4)	Permittee fails to comply with any provision of the city or county Code, including, but not limited to, the building code, the electrical code, the mechanical code, the zoning code, the sign code, or the plumbing code after reasonable notice shall have been given to the permittee to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such ordinances on the permitted premises. 
(5)	Permittee fails to comply with any provisions of this article after reasonable notice or correct any condition in violation of such article on the permitted premises. 
(6)	Permittee furnishes incorrect or incomplete information on its application for permit or application for renewal of permit. 
(7)	Permittee fails to comply with the occupational license ordinances for the city or Volusia County after reasonable notice shall have been given to the permittee to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such ordinances related to the permitted premises. 
(8)	Permittee fails to furnish notification of changes in application information within 30 days of change in such information as required by section 18-247 hereof. 
(9)	Any person who has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the last 15 years becomes an interested party of the permittee. 
Reasonable notice as used herein shall mean ten calendar days written notice either hand delivered, sent by certified mail, or posted on the front door of the bingo hall. If a permit is revoked hereunder for a for profit bingo organization, the permits for all charities operating in the bingo hall operated by the for profit bingo organization shall be suspended. In the event a for profit bingo organization obtains a permit to operate in the bingo hall used by the charities with suspended permits, such suspended permits will be reinstated. No additional time shall be added to the term of any suspended permit. If a permit for a charity operating bingo in a bingo hall is revoked, it will not automatically revoke the permit of other charities conducting bingo in the bingo hall, nor the permit of the for profit bingo organization. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 13, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-254. - Notice of hearing concerning permit revocation. 
Whenever the city council shall find any of the conditions enumerated in section 18-253 hereof to exist, it shall notify by certified mail or hand delivery to applicant or permittee that city council shall hold a public hearing to determine whether the continued operation of the permitted premises is detrimental to the public health, morals, safety and welfare. In determining whether the continued operation of the permitted premises is detrimental to the public health, morals, safety and welfare, city council shall consider whether the condition(s) enumerated in section 18-253 which are found to exist are related to the use or operation by the permittee or an interested party thereof of the permitted premises and if such condition(s) evidences a flagrant disregard for the health, morals, safety or welfare of such permittee's patrons or employees, or of persons residing or doing business nearby. If city council determines that a condition enumerated in section 18-253 does exist as to a permitted premises and that such condition relates to the use or operation by the permittee or of an interested party thereof of the permitted premises and that such condition evidences a flagrant disregard for the health, morals, safety or welfare of such permittee's patrons or employees or of persons residing or doing business nearby, city council shall revoke the permit of the permittee. If city council determines that no conditions enumerated in section 18-253 exist as to a permitted premises, or that no such existing condition relates to the use or operation of the permittee or an interested party thereof of the permitted premises, or that no such existing condition evidences a flagrant disregard for the health, morals, safety or welfare of such permittee's patrons or employees, or of persons residing or doing business nearby, city council shall not revoke the permit of the permittee. Such hearing is to be held at a time and place to be specified in the notice and at a time not less than ten days from the date of service of the notice. Such notice shall also list with specificity the act(s) or occurrence(s) concerning which the hearing will be held. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 14, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-255. - Operating bingo hall or conducting bingo games in bingo hall without permit unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association, corporation or any other entity to operate a bingo hall or to conduct bingo games in a bingo hall within the city, unless such entity shall have a currently valid regulatory permit therefor. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 15, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-256. - Bingo halls open for inspection. 
Each bingo hall shall be open for inspection by city, county, state, and federal representatives and any authorized inspection personnel during all hours such establishment is open for business, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 16, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-257. - Issuance of permit not to permit acts otherwise unlawful. 
The issuance of a permit hereunder shall not be construed as permitting, licensing or allowing the council of any act or acts otherwise prohibited or made unlawful by valid city or county ordinance, or state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 17, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-258. - Federal, state, county and city enforcement of article. 
Law enforcement officials of the City of DeBary, State of Florida, Volusia County and the U.S. government are specifically authorized to enforce the provisions of this article and are permitted to inspect bingo halls and records of for profit bingo organizations and charities conducting bingo games in a bingo hall as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 18, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 18-259. - Penalty. 
Any person, partnership, association, or corporation committing an act which is prohibited or made unlawful by the provisions of any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in the Volusia County Code, and, in addition, violations of this article shall be subject to enforcement by the code enforcement board of the county. 
(Ord. No. 19-97, § 19, 11-5-97)  
Secs. 18-260—18-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SOLICITORS 
 
Sec. 18-281. - Definitions. 
Home solicitation sale is defined pursuant to F.S. §§ 501.021 through 501.055. 
Person means an individual, organization, group, association, partnership, corporation, trust, business entity or any combination of the above. 
Soliciting means the act of approaching or petitioning a person in a motor vehicle, at a person's home or business, or otherwise on a street for the purpose of receiving monetary donation or contribution, or for the purpose of remuneration for goods or services, of any kind, or as advance payment or contemporaneous payment for goods or services, of any kind, to be furnished or performed, or delivered contemporaneously or in the future. 
Solicitor means any person actively engaged in the act of soliciting. 
Street means a road, roadway, or other way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, or place, or however otherwise designated, and shall include the full are of the right-of-way so designated including, but not limited to, sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 03-11, § 3, 4-20-11)  
Sec. 18-282. - Home solicitation sales. 
(a)	Prior to engaging in any home solicitation sales activity, as that term is defined under state law without reference to the minimum dollar amount limitation, a local business tax receipt must be obtained from the city. Prior to the issuance of a local business tax receipt, the applicant must submit a home solicitation sales permit issued by the clerk of the court pursuant to F.S. §§ 501.021 through 501.055, as amended. 
(b)	Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city manager may issue a home solicitation sale permit for any publicly sponsored event by a government entity such as, by way of illustration only and without limitation, a public school. The written permission of the chief executive or administrative officer of the particular government entity must be provided at the time than an application is submitted and attached to each copy of the permit and shall constitute a part of the permit document. 
(Ord. No. 03-11, § 3, 4-20-11)  
Sec. 18-283. - Hours of home solicitation. 
Persons issued home solicitation sale permits, and other persons whose speech is fully protected under the state and federal constitutions or who are not otherwise required to obtain a permit pursuant to section; 18-286 or F.S. § 501.022 shall be allowed to engage in soliciting on the streets, sidewalks, and public places within the city only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 03-11, § 3, 4-20-11)  
Sec. 18-284. - Unlawful activities by home solicitors. 
It is unlawful for any individual engaged in home solicitation sales, including persons engaged in home solicitation sales who are otherwise exempt from the effect of this article pursuant to section 18-286 to: 
(1)	Enter the premises of a private residence when a "no solicitors" sign is posted; 
(2)	Remain upon any residential premises after the owner/occupant requests the solicitor depart; 
(3)	Approach rear or side doors of residential premises; 
(4)	Intentionally make any physical contact with the person solicited without the person's consent; 
(5)	Block the free passage of the person being solicited; 
(6)	Fail to inform the person being solicited the true identity of the organization the solicitor represents and, if requested by the person being solicited, fail to produce identification for the organization which the solicitor represents, including, if applicable, the city business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 03-11, § 3, 4-20-11)  
Sec. 18-285. - Registration when home solicitation permit not required. 
In the event a home solicitation sales permit is not required under state law due to the minimum dollar amount requirement under the statutory definition, a statutory exemption from the home solicitation sales permit requirements, or any other reason, a local business tax receipt must still be issued by the city prior to engaging in home solicitation sales. 
(1)	As a condition of issuance of a local business tax receipt when there is no home solicitation sales permit from the clerk of the court, the applicant must provide a list of each person engaging in the home solicitation activity, including the name, address and phone number of each person, and the name address, phone number of the organization conducting or sponsoring the sales activity. 
(2)	In the event that home solicitation sales are conducted by minors, such minors must carry personal identification which includes their full name, date of birth, residence address, and employer and the name and permit number of their adult supervisor (F.S. § 501.022(1)(b)(5)). 
(Ord. No. 03-11, § 3, 4-20-11)  
Sec. 18-286. - Exemption; claim of exemption for home solicitation. 
(a)	Unless otherwise expressly specified, sections 18-281 through 18-285 concerning home solicitation sales shall not apply to vendors of newspapers; bona fide elementary, middle or high school groups engaged in fundraising; charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic, service or other such organizations; any person(s) soliciting or accepting contributions for any local, county, state or federal candidate's campaign, provided the candidate has filed the appropriate paperwork pursuant to local, state and federal regulations; or any person(s) canvassing for any local, county, state or federal candidate or issue. 
(b)	Any person who desires to engage in home solicitation sales and claims to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in this chapter [article], or from the payment of the permit fee, shall cite to the city manager the statute or other legal authority under which exemption is claimed and shall present to the city manager proof of qualification for such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 03-11, § 3, 4-20-11)  
Sec. 18-287. - Solicitation along rights-of-way. 
(a)	A permit for solicitation on city, county, or state rights-of-way, as defined herein, within the boundaries of the city may be obtained from the city manager or his or her designee under the following conditions: 
(1)	The applicant shall be an organization qualified under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and registered pursuant to F.S. ch. 496, or persons or organizations acting on behalf of and with the written authority of such an organization. 
(2)	The applicant shall provide the specific location(s), date(s) and time(s) of the planned solicitation. 
(3)	The applicant shall take measures to assure the safety of the solicitors as well as the motorists. Such measures shall include, but not be limited to, providing a Florida Department of Transportation approved safety vest to each solicitor. 
(4)	The applicant shall provide indemnification satisfactory to the city for defense and liability for any judgments, claims and costs arising out of the applicants' activities relative to the solicitation. This indemnification shall be in the form of an insurance policy that names the city as an additional insured and is endorsed to provide a separate aggregate of $1,000,000.00 for the event for which the person or organization is making application. 
(b)	It is unlawful for a person to raise funds, or seek financial assistance of any kind or nature, or to otherwise solicit on any street or right-of-way within the city without first acquiring a local business tax receipt from the city. 
(1)	It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any street, road, highway, lane, alley, sidewalk or driveway in the course of soliciting. 
(2)	It is unlawful for any person to engage in soliciting in a manner that impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(3)	It is unlawful for a solicitor to remain in a traffic lane when a traffic control signal, such as a green ball/green arrow indication, allows traffic to flow in that lane. 
(c)	Upon receipt of an application, plan, and indemnification acceptable to the city, a permit will be issued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	No person or organization or person acting on the organization's behalf, may receive a permit or permits allowing solicitation for more than three days in any calendar year. 
(2)	To avoid solicitation during the hours that experience the highest numbers of traffic accidents, no permit shall be given for solicitation outside the hours 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(3)	No more than four solicitors may solicit at any one intersection. 
(4)	Soliciting will only be allowed at a limited number of intersections preapproved for the safe conduct of such activities, in consultation with law enforcement and FDOT staff as appropriate, and each intersection shall count as a separate permit for a person or organization and shall count toward the limitation set forth in this division for the annual maximum number of permits. 
(5)	Each solicitor must carry a copy of the permit. 
(6)	Solicitors must be 18 years of age or older. 
(7)	If multiple applications are received for the same intersection at the same time, the first complete and otherwise acceptable application will be given the permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-11, § 3, 4-20-11)  
Sec. 18-288. - Revocation. 
(a)	Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter [article] may be revoked at any time by the city manager or his/her designee for upon certification that: 
(1)	A solicitor has provided false information on an application; or 
(2)	A solicitor has engaged in conduct in violation of this chapter [article], or any state and/or federal laws. 
(b)	A solicitor shall be given written notice of the cause and terms of the revocation and of the right to have such a revocation reversed, modified or affirmed following a hearing to be conducted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 03-11, § 3, 4-20-11)  
Sec. 18-289. - Appeals. 
Any person wishing to appeal the decision of the city manager may file a written appeal to the city council within 60 days of the ruling. The city manager or designee shall schedule a hearing for the appeal at the next regularly scheduled council meeting or special council meeting and shall provide written notice by U.S. mail upon the appellant at the address provided by the appellant, informing him/her thereof. At the hearing, the appellant shall have the right to hear the evidence relied upon by the city manager and the right to present evidence and witnesses on his/her behalf. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the action of the city council shall be final. All decisions of the city council shall be issued in writing. 
(Ord. No. 03-11, § 3, 4-20-11)  
Chapter 22 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Charter elected officers, art. IV; elections and nominations, art. V. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Florida election code, F.S. chs. 97—106. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Adoption of state law provisions. 
The following provisions of the Florida Election Code which are not mandatory are adopted by the City Council which are to be applicable to elections in the city: 
F.S. Section 	  Description 
101.6107—101.69 	Absentee ballots 
102.012 	Inspectors and clerks 
 
(Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, 6-21-95; Ord. No. 05-14 , § 1, 6-4-14) 
Editor's note— The following are mandatory provisions of the state election code which are applicable to municipal elections: 
F.S. 	Description 
Chapters 97, 98 	Qualification & registration of electors 
§ 99.012 	Resign to run 
§ 99.093 	Municipal candidates; election assessment 
§ 100.011 	Opening & closing of polls 
§ 100.151 	Special elections called by local governing bodies; notice 
§ 100.201—100.351 	Bond referenda 
§ 100.361 	Municipal recall 
§ 101.002 	Use of system by municipalities 
§ 101.015 	Standards for voting systems 
§ 101.031 	Instructions for voters 
§ 101.041 	Voting by secret ballot 
§ 101.161 	Referenda; ballots 
§ 101.21 	Official ballots; number; printing 
§ 101.6101—101.6107 	Mail ballot election procedures 
§ 101.635 	Distribution of blocks of printed ballots 
§ 101.715 	Accessibility of polling places to elderly and physically handicapped 
§ 101.733 	Election emergency 
§ 101.75 	Change of election dates in certain circumstances 
Chapter 104 	Violations; penalties 
Chapter 106 	Campaign financing 
 
Charter reference— City council to adopt election procedures, § 5.05.  
Sec. 22-32. - Duties of election officials. 
The duties, authority and responsibility of state and county officers, boards and bodies set forth in the state election code shall apply to the corresponding municipal entities in the conduct of municipal elections. 
(Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, 6-21-95)  
Sec. 22-33. - Right to contest municipal election. 
The right to contest any municipal election is hereby created. The election or nomination of any person to a municipal elective office may be contested by any defeated candidate for such office or nomination in the same manner and by the procedure now provided by the laws of the state. Any question which may be submitted to the voters of the city may be contested by any qualified elector in the manner provided by law, provided that nothing herein shall be construed to abrogate or abridge in any way any remedy that may now exist by quo warranto or mandamus, but in such case the proceedings hereinabove provided shall be taken to be alternative or cumulative. The city council is hereby declared to be a proper party defendant in all matters affecting the truth and accuracy of the election returns. 
(Ord. No. 95-13, § 5, 6-21-95)  
Sec. 22-34. - Council vacancies filled at general election. 
A successor council member chosen to fill a vacant council seat does not extend or change the term of such council seat, the term of which is fixed by the Charter. 
Upon the certification of election results, a successor council member elected at a general election to fill a vacant seat as set forth in section 4.08 of the DeBary City Charter shall serve the remainder of the unfinished term and shall not serve a new, full term. However, if such unfinished term were to end in the same year that the election to fill the vacancy is held, the successor council member shall, upon certification of the election results, serve out the remainder of the vacated term and also be elected to a new, full term to begin on January 1. 
(Ord. No. 04-10, § I, 4-21-10)  
Sec. 22-35. - Early voting. 
The city hereby exercises its right to exempt itself from the provisions of F.S. § 101.657 and shall contract with the Volusia County Supervisor of Elections to conduct early voting for the city at the office of the supervisor of elections and any other early voting sites the supervisor may establish in public libraries and/or city halls. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 8-4-04)  
Secs. 22-36—22-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CANVASSING BOARD 
 
Sec. 22-51. - Designated. 
The Volusia County canvassing board shall serve as the canvassing board for all municipal elections, except during special elections or in other circumstances occurring when the Volusia County canvassing board is not seated and otherwise in the City Council's discretion. Notwithstanding the preceding, the City Council may appoint two members of the City Council who are not seeking reelection and the city clerk to serve as the canvassing board during special elections or in other circumstances when the Volusia County canvassing board is not seated and otherwise in the City Council's discretion. 
(Ord. No. 95-13, § 3, 6-21-95; Ord. No. 05-14 , § 2, 6-4-14)  
Sec. 22-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-14 , § 2, adopted June 4, 2014, repealed § 22-52. Former § 22-52 pertained to the option to appoint a county canvassing board and derived from Ord. No. 95-13, adopted June 21, 1995.  
Secs. 22-53—22-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - INSPECTORS AND CLERKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Inspectors and clerks, F.S. § 102.012. 
 
Sec. 22-71. - Appointment. 
If the city does not utilize the Volusia County Supervisor of Elections for appointment of inspectors and clerks, the City Clerk shall appoint inspectors and clerks in accordance with Florida law unless the City Council directs otherwise. Each person named as an inspector or clerk of election shall have the following additional qualifications: 
(1)	Shall not be a candidate for any office to be voted on in such election; 
(2)	Shall not be the parent, grandparent, child, grandchild, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, first cousin, husband or wife, either by blood or marriage, of any candidate for any office to be voted on in such election; 
(3)	Shall not be an officer or employee of the city; 
(4)	Shall have undergone poll worker training issued by the supervisor of elections within two years of the election. 
(Ord. No. 95-13, § 4, 6-21-95; Ord. No. 05-14 , § 3, 6-4-14)  
Sec. 22-72. - Vacancies. 
If any vacancies occur in such appointments, the city clerk shall immediately make new appointments filling the vacancies and no vacancy shall be filled in any other manner except for an emergency on election day. The inspectors and clerks of elections shall each take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation which shall be printed or written to the effect that he will perform the duties of inspector or clerk of election according to law and will endeavor to prevent all fraud, deceit and abuse in conducting the election. Such oath shall be returned with the poll list and returns of elections to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 95-13, § 4, 6-21-95)  
Secs. 22-73—22-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CANDIDATES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Nominations and elections, terms of office, art. V. 
State Law reference— Campaign financing, F.S. ch. 106. 
 
Sec. 22-91. - Nomination of candidates, petitions for placement on ballot. 
Candidates for the office of mayor or for the office of city council shall be nominated only by a nonpartisan primary election, if one need be called. The name of any elector of the city shall be printed on the primary ballot if there is filed with the city clerk a petition in accordance with the following provisions and if the person whose name is to appear on such petition is qualified for the office he is seeking in all other respects: 
(1)	Such petition shall state the name of each person whose name is presented for a place upon the ballot and that he is a candidate for the office of mayor or the office of city council for the city, and, if he is a candidate for the office of city council, the petition shall state the seat for which the candidate is running. 
(2)	In the case of a person who is a candidate for mayor or city council, his petition shall be signed by at least 25 duly registered, qualified electors of the city. 
(3)	Each elector signing a petition shall add to his signature the date of signing. All signatures shall be made with ink. 
(4)	There shall be attached an affidavit of the candidate circulating the same, stating the number of signatures and that each signature is that of the person whose name it purports to be. 
(5)	The petitions shall be made available to potential candidates by the city clerk, beginning 30 days prior to the start of qualifying and must be filed with the city clerk within the qualifying period. 
(Ord. No. 95-13, § 6, 6-21-95)  
Sec. 22-92. - Acceptance by candidate. 
Any person whose name has been submitted for candidacy by any such petition shall file his acceptance of such candidacy, together with his qualifying papers, with the city clerk, not later than the first two full (Monday through Friday) business weeks of July; otherwise his name shall not appear upon the ballot. 
(Ord. No. 95-13, § 7, 6-21-95; Ord. No. 08-96, § 1, 5-1-96)  
Chapter 26 - EMERGENCY SERVICES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement, § 2-86 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm business means the business by any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility, either privately owned or commercial. 
Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which a law enforcement agency is expected to respond. 
Alarm user means the person in control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
Automatic dialing device means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. 
Burglary alarm system means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
False alarm means an alarm signal indicating a burglary or robbery situation, eliciting a response by a law enforcement agency when a situation requiring such response does not in fact exist, but does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user. 
Interconnect means to connect an alarm system, including an automatic dialing device, to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon activation of the alarm system. 
Primary trunk line means a telephone line serving the county, department of public safety or communications center that is designated to receive calls for service from the public. 
Robbery alarm system means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
Sheriff means the director of the department of public safety of the county or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § II, 3-2-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-32. - Disruption of telephone service due to installation, etc., prohibited; exceptions. 
Except for any alarm system installed, maintained, owned, possessed or operated prior to April 6, 1995, it shall be a violation of this section for any person to install, maintain, own, possess or operate any alarm system which interferes with, seizes or in any manner disrupts telephone service to or from the premises being serviced by the alarm system unless: 
(1)	There is an auxiliary or secondary dedicated phone line in service to and from the premises; or 
(2)	Written notice is provided to the alarm user, prior to the installation, which states that in the event the alarm user is utilizing the telephone at the time the alarm is activated, telephone service will be interrupted, disrupted and/or seized immediately upon the activation and transmittal of the alarm to the alarm base. The alarm company shall obtain and maintain a signed receipt of such notice, which specifies that the above-described notice has been given to the user and that the operation of the system, specifically the effect of an alarm activation on the telephone service, has been fully explained to the user.  
Sec. 26-33. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, a violation of this article may be abated by any manner as provided by law. Each day the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)	In addition to any penalty provided by law for the violation of any of the provisions of this article, the city council may bring suit in the appropriate circuit court to enjoin, restrain or otherwise prevent the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, in any manner as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § VIII, 3-2-94)  
Sec. 26-34. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the emergency services from misuse through prohibition and regulation of certain alarms within the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § I, 3-2-94)  
Sec. 26-35. - Automatic dialing devices. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any business, user or person to program or interconnect an automatic dialing device to select a primary trunk line of the city, department of public safety or communications center; and it is unlawful for an alarm business or user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to select a primary trunk line within 12 hours of receipt of written notice from the sheriff that it is so programmed. 
(b)	All automatic dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line shall be reprogrammed or disconnected. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § III, 3-2-94)  
Sec. 26-36. - Termination of system at county communications center or department of public safety. 
No commercial or private alarm system may be terminated in the county communications center or department of public safety, except that the sheriff may at his discretion allow the termination of governmental alarm systems or certain alarm systems originating at federally insured banking or savings institutions as he may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § IV, 3-2-94)  
Sec. 26-37. - Registration; turning off activated alarms. 
Prior to the installation or use of any type robbery and/or burglar alarm, the owner or manager of the premises shall furnish to the county department of public safety (sheriff's office) information regarding the full names, addresses and phone numbers of at least two people who can be reached at all times and who are authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the alarm system. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or manager of the premises to notify the sheriff's office of any change in said information within seven days thereof, including, but not limited to the unavailability of any responder during any periods of time. If any such person shall fail to appear and turn off any such alarm system within 30 minutes after being notified by the sheriff's office to do so, then the owner or manager of the premises shall be charged a fee which is listed in appendix A for each such occurrence, or, failing to pay such fee within 20 days, may be notified in writing by the sheriff's office that the sheriff's office will not respond to any further alarms at that location. Failure to register as required in this section will also result in a fee which is listed in appendix A to be charged to the owner of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § V, 3-2-94)  
Sec. 26-38. - False alarms. 
(a)	Burglar alarms. For a response by the sheriff's office to any false alarm, the sheriff shall charge and collect from the person having or maintaining such burglar alarm on premises owned or occupied by him, fees as follows: 
(1)	For a first and second response to premises at which no false alarm has occurred within the preceding six-month period, referred to in this subsection as a first response and second response respectively, no fee shall be charged; but the person having or maintaining such burglar alarm shall, within three working days after notice to do so, make a written report to the sheriff on forms prescribed by him setting forth the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized serviceman, and such other information as the sheriff may reasonably require to determine the cause of such false alarm and the corrective action taken. 
(2)	For a third response to premises within six months after such second response, a fee which is listed in appendix A shall be charged. If such third false alarm or any such succeeding false alarm is a result of failure to take necessary corrective action, the sheriff's office may notify the alarm user, in writing, that the sheriff's office will not respond to any further alarms at that location until written proof that the necessary corrective action has been taken is provided to the sheriff or his designee. 
(3)	In those instances where the alarm user is required by law to have an alarm system in operation, thereby prohibiting the disconnection for repeated failure to take necessary corrective action, the false alarm fee shall be an amount which is listed in appendix A for each such false alarm in excess of two within the six-month period. 
(b)	Robbery alarms. The same procedures as outlined for burglar alarms shall apply to robbery alarms. 
(c)	Payment and disposition of fees. All fees due under the provisions of this article shall be paid directly to the county department of finance, and shall be credited to the city's portion of the sheriff's office budget. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § VI, 3-2-94)  
Sec. 26-39. - Authority to prescribe additional regulations and procedures. 
(a)	The sheriff shall establish procedures governing the implementation of this article, including but not limited to: 
(1)	Registration procedures and forms. 
(2)	Processing of false alarm reports submitted by alarm users. 
(3)	Collection of fees. 
(4)	Alarm deactivation procedures. 
(5)	Appeal processes by alarm users. 
(6)	Recordkeeping systems. 
(7)	Alarm response procedures. 
(b)	These procedures shall be reviewed periodically by the sheriff and changes may be made as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § VII, 3-2-94)  
Secs. 26-40—26-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 26-50. - Intent. 
The City of DeBary finds and declares that the city is vulnerable to a wide range of emergencies, including natural, technological, and manmade disasters, all of which threaten the life, health, and safety of its citizens; damage and destroy property; disrupt services and everyday business and recreation; and impede economic growth and development. It is the intent of the city to reduce the vulnerability of its citizens and property by providing for rapid and orderly relief to persons, the restoration of services and property, and the coordination of activities relating to emergency preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation. To accomplish these goals, thlis article sets forth provisions by which the city may declare a state of emergency via an emergency authorization official and authorize disaster recovery and mitigation measures when a quorum of the city council is unable to timely meet. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 26-51. - Definitions. 
Abandoned vehicle means any vehicle meeting the definition of abandoned property, as defined in F.S. § 705.101 that is left, stored, or abandoned: 
(1)	In a wrecked, inoperative, junked, or partially dismantled condition upon any public property of this city. 
(2)	On any roadway of this city without the consent of the agency having jurisdiction thereof. 
(3)	Left, stored, or abandoned upon the property of another without the consent of the owner of the property. 
City shall mean the City of DeBary. 
Comprehensive emergency operations plan (CEOP), as amended. City of DeBary's standard operating policy, procedures, guidelines, forms, and supporting materials to be used during any state of emergency declared in the city. 
County shall mean Volusia County. 
Derelict vessel means any vessel, as defined in F.S. § 327.02 that is left, stored, or abandoned: 
(1)	In a wrecked, junked, or substantially dismantled condition upon any public waters of his city. 
(2)	At any port of this city without the consent of the agency having jurisdiction thereof. 
(3)	Docked or grounded at or beached upon the property of another without the consent of the owner of the property. 
Disaster means the actual occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or human-made cause including, but not limited to, fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, snowstorm, ice storm, wind storm, oil spill, water contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military action or paramilitary actions, or similar occurrences resulting terrorist activities, riots, or civil disorders. 
Disaster-generated debris means any material, including trees, branches, personal property and building material on public or private property that is directly deposited by the disaster. 
Emergency or local emergency means any natural or manmade event including, but not limited to, flood, conflagration, hazardous material dispersal, hurricane, tornado, earthquake or explosion with the limits of the city resulting in imminently threatening the death or injury of persons, or the destruction of property, to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
Emergency authorization official shall mean, in order of succession from first to last: 
(1)	The mayor, or, if applicable, the interim mayor; 
(2)	The vice-mayor; 
(3)	Council member in seat #1 (if not the vice-mayor); 
(4)	Council member in seat #2 (if not the vice-mayor); 
(5)	Council member in seat #3 (if not the vice-mayor); 
(6)	Council member in seat #4 (if not the vice-mayor). 
Succession shall be deemed to occur upon the absence, unavailability, incapacitation or abdication of a prior-ranked individual. 
State shall mean State of Florida. 
State of emergency shall mean the occurrence, or threat thereof, whether accidental, natural, or caused by man, in war or peace, which results or may result in substantial injury or harm to the population, substantial damage to or loss of property, or substantial disruption of utilities and infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 26-52. - Declaration; time limits. 
The emergency authorization official shall be authorized to declare a local state of emergency whenever he/she determines that a natural or manmade disaster has occurred or that the occurrence or threat of such disaster is imminent and requires immediate and expeditious action. An emergency city council meeting shall be convened, as soon as practicable within 24 hours thereafter, for the purpose of assessing such disaster. At such meeting, the city council may adopt emergency ordinances or resolutions in accordance with sections 10.02 and 10.03 of the City Charter and applicable state statutes, adopt any emergency appropriations pursuant to subsection 11.05(b) of the City Charter, and, if warranted, pass a resolution nullifying or cancelling an outstanding declaration of emergency. The duration of a declared state of emergency for the city shall be limited as set forth in F.S. § 252.38. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 26-53. - Powers during emergency. 
The city manager or his/her designee or successor in interest, shall be empowered during a state of emergency: 
(1)	To implement emergency plans and procedures and take such other prompt and necessary action to save lives and protect property, including but not limited to, the authority to compel and direct timely local evacuation, if necessary. 
(2)	Pursuant to the established "comprehensive emergency operations plan" (CEOP) of the city, declare that the CEOP is in effect, as appropriate. 
(3)	To obligate emergency expenditures for payment from the emergency reserve fund when such action is necessary to preserve the public safety, health, and welfare. All such transfers and obligations shall be reported to the city council at the first opportunity following such action, but no later than 30 days after such occurrence. 
(4)	To automatically initiate execution of the CEOP. 
(5)	To exercise, on behalf of the city, any of the powers described in F.S. § 252.38(3)(a). 
(6)	To determine a threat to public health and safety that may result from the generation of widespread debris throughout the city, that such debris constitutes a hazardous environment for all modes of movement and transportation of the residents as well as emergency aid and relief services, endangerment to all properties in the city, an environment conducive to breeding disease and vermin, and greatly increased risk of fire, and that it is in the public interest to collect and remove disaster debris from all property whether public lands, public or private roads, and gated communities to eliminate an immediate threat to life, public health and safety to reduce the threat of additional damage to improved property and to promote economic recovery of the community at large. 
(7)	To authorize the city or its contracted agent(s) right of access to private roads or gated communities as needed by emergency vehicles such as, but not limited to, police, fire, medical care, debris removal, and sanitation to alleviate immediate threats to public health and safety. 
(8)	To suspend the procurement requirements under article IV of chapter 2 of this Code and make emergency purchases as deemed necessary to mitigate and counteract the ill effects of a declared emergency. 
(9)	To execute contracts with third parties and other governmental agencies as deemed necessary to mitigate and counteract the ill effects of a declared emergency. Any emergency contracts so executed shall be limited to the purpose of mitigating or otherwise managing the emergency declared and shall not obligate the city to the purchase of products or services beyond the timeframe of such emergency. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 26-54. - Unconscionable pricing. 
(a)	Upon a declaration of a state of emergency pursuant to this Article, it is unlawful and a violation of this article and F.S. § 501.204 for a person or his or her agent or employee to rent or sell or offer to rent or sell any essential commodity at an unconscionable price including, but not limited to supplies, services, provisions, or equipment that is necessary for consumption or use as a direct result of the emergency. This prohibition remains in effect until the declaration expires or is terminated. For purposes of this section, the provisions of F.S. § 501.160(1) are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(b)	Upon a declaration of a state of emergency pursuant to this article, in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents, any person who offers goods and services for sale to the public during the duration of the emergency and who does not possess a business tax receipt under F.S. § 205.032 or F.S. § 205.042 commits a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or F.S. § 775.083. During a declared emergency, this subsection does not apply to religious, charitable, fraternal, civic, educational, or social organizations. During a declared emergency and when there is an allegation of price gouging against the person, failure to possess a license constitutes reasonable cause to detain the person, provided that the detention shall only be made in a reasonable manner and only for a reasonable period of time sufficient for an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the failure to possess a license. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 26-55. - Restricted areas; curfew; and special prohibitions. 
The city manager has the power to invoke any or all of the following prohibitions or restrictions during a declared state of emergency: 
(1)	Restrictions. In the interest of protecting citizens and property during a declared state of emergency, the city manager may apply additional restrictions contained in this section to certain neighborhoods, boroughs, districts or sections of the city impacted or threatened by a disaster. 
(2)	Restricted access areas. No person shall enter an area designated as a restricted access area unless he/she is in performance of his/her official governmental duties, has written permission of the city manager or his/her designee, or resides in such area. 
(3)	Curfew . In the event of a declaration of a state of emergency and if it is necessary to preserve peace and order within the city, the city manager may impose a curfew for a restricted area or the entire city as required by the circumstances surrounding a declared state of emergency. Such curfew shall not apply to persons in the bona fide performance of designated essential services such as fire, police, medical and physician services, public service, government, or government-contracted employees in the execution of their delegated duties, or other employees, with verifiable identification, traveling to and from their place of employment. 
(4)	Alcoholic beverages . No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in a public street or on public property or within a motor vehicle driven or parked thereon within a designated restricted area. 
(5)	Weapons . No person shall openly carry, brandish or illegally possess any rock, bottle, sword, firearm, club, brick or other type of ad hoc or practical weapon, who uses or intends to use such weapon against a person or the property of another. Illegal possession or brandishment of such weapon shall be prima facie evidence of intent to violate the provisions of this section. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit a duly licensed individual from lawfully carrying a concealed weapon in accordance with state law. 
(6)	Notice of restrictions . Should the city manager or his/her designee invoke any or all of the foregoing provisions contained in this section, he/she shall inform city staff, law enforcement, and emergency personnel of such and provide local news media with written notification thereof for immediate dissemination to the public. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 26-56. - Removal of debris. 
To assist in maintaining safe and sanitary living and functioning conditions and protect property from immediate threat, the city manager or his/her designee, during a declared state of emergency, shall have the power, but not the obligation, to authorize the removal of disaster-generated debris and wreckage resulting from a declared disaster from all property whether such debris and wreckage is located on public lands, public or private roads, or gated communities. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 26-57. - Hold harmless. 
(a)	The city shall, prior to removing disaster-generated debris and wreckage, obtain a right of entry permit and agreement from private and gated communities located within the city. Such permit and agreement shall provide for the United States Government, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the State of Florida, and the City of DeBary, and their agencies, agents, contractors and subcontractors to be indemnified and held harmless for any damages of any type whatsoever, whether to property or to persons situated thereon when debris and wreckage are removed during a declared state of emergency. 
(b)	The city shall endeavor to obtain and update these permits and agreements annually and have them readily available for use as needed. 
(c)	The city shall not be responsible for any debris generated by any contractor. A contractor who generated debris or wreckage is responsible for its removal and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 26-58. - Time periods tolled. 
During a state of emergency, all procedural and notice time periods affecting the normal functions of the city, to the extent such requirements cannot be complied with due to the emergency, shall be temporarily suspended during the declaration of emergency. Such functions include, but are not limited to, permitting, code enforcement matters, municipal approvals, and scheduled public meetings. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 26-59. - State of emergency terminated. 
When the threat or danger warranting the declaration of emergency no longer exists, the emergency authorization official or city council may terminate such state of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 26-60. - Management of disaster-generated debris. 
Solid waste generated as a result of a declared disaster that is the subject of an emergency order issued by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or the city shall be managed as follows: 
(1)	Recycling and reuse of disaster-generated debris is encouraged to the greatest extent practicable. Such recycling and reuse must be in accordance with applicable DEP rules or city codes and may include, but is not limited to, chipping and grinding of the vegetative debris to be beneficially used as a ground cover or soil amendment, compost, or as a combustible fuel for any applicable commercial or industrial application. 
(2)	Disaster-generated debris may be temporarily stored and managed at staging areas when said staging areas within the city or the county have been authorized. 
(3)	Disaster-generated vegetative debris managed at a staging area may be disposed of in a permitted lined or unlined landfill, a permitted land clearing debris facility, a permitted or certified waste-to-energy facility, or a permitted construction and demolition debris disposal facility. Vegetative debris may also be managed at a permitted waste processing facility or a registered yard-trash processing facility. 
(4)	Construction and demolition debris that is mixed with other disaster-generated debris need not be segregated from other solid waste before disposal in a lined landfill. Construction and demolition debris that is source separated or is separated from other disaster-generated debris at an authorized staging area, or at another area permitted or specifically authorized by the DEP, may be managed at a permitted construction and demolition debris disposal facility, a class III landfill, or a recycling facility upon approval by the DEP of the methods and operational practices used to inspect the waste during segregation. 
(5)	Unsalvageable refrigerators and freezers containing solid waste, such as rotting food, which may create a sanitary nuisance, may be disposed of in a permitted landfill; however, chlorofluorocarbons and capacitors must be removed and recycled to the greatest extent practicable. 
(6)	The city may conduct the burning of disaster-generated yard trash, other disaster-generated vegetative debris, or untreated wood from construction and demolition debris in air-curtain incinerators. The operator of the air-curtain incinerator is subject to any requirement of the city, the Division of Forestry, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, or of any other agency concerning authorization to conduct open burning. Any person conducting open burning of vegetative debris is also subject to such requirements. 
(7)	To the greatest extent practicable, and in accordance with applicable DEP rules and city codes, the city will separate and recycle other materials including, but not limited to, metals, construction debris and demolition debris. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 26-61. - Emergency response plan. 
The City shall, in accordance with the standards set forth in Rule 9G-6.0023, F.A.C., and F.S. § 252.35(2), and if financially feasible, endeavor to approve and adopt a "comprehensive emergency operations response plan." Such plan shall be coordinated with the response plan of Volusia County and be subject to annual review and evaluation by the city and may be amended as required by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Sec. 26-62. - Conflict of laws; severability. 
In the event this chapter conflicts with any other ordinance of the city, this chapter shall govern during a declared state of emergency. If any section, sentence, clause, or portion of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. 
(Ord. No. 08-10, § II, 8-4-10)  
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement, § 2-86 et seq.; possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited, § 6-5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Penalty. 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties designated in section 1-15. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 30-7-07)  
Sec. 30-2. - Code enforcement officer. 
The code enforcement officer is hereby designated as the investigating and enforcing authority pursuant to the provisions of this article. The code enforcement officer is hereby directed and empowered to inspect land on which a nuisance is suspected to exist, to receive all complaints of a violation of this article, and to enter upon any real property in the conduct of official business pursuant to this article. The code enforcement officer shall be responsible for providing all notices to affected property owners required by this article and to take such other action as is reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 3-7-07)  
Sec. 30-3. - Florida Litter Law. 
It is hereby stated that the city officially adopts the Florida Litter Law as stated in F.S. § 403.413. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 3-7-07)  
Secs. 30-4—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Standard housing code, § 14-111 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adjacent lot and lot adjacent mean the lot immediately adjoining or contiguous to or abutting the right-of-way immediately opposite the lot that is subject to review under this article. 
Building means any structure as defined within the Standard Building Code, section 201.2. The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
Developed lot means any lot which has a building or mobile home on it and is in residential, mobile home, commercial, industrial or public use. 
Intersection sight distance means the corner sight distance available in intersection quadrants that allows a driver or pedestrian approaching an intersection to observe the actions of vehicles on the crossing leg(s). 
Lot means an area of land which abuts a street and which either complies with or is exempt from the Volusia County Subdivision Regulations and is sufficient in size to meet the minimum area and width requirements for its zoning classification as established in article VII of the Volusia County Ordinance No. 80-8, as amended [appendix B, Code of Ordinances of Volusia County], and a portion of a subdivision or any other tract or parcel of land, including the air space above or contiguous thereto, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both. The word "lot" includes the word "plot," "tract" or "parcel," and said parcel is classified in article VII of said county zoning ordinance as R-1 through R-9, MH-1, MH-2, MH-5 through MH-7, B-1 through B-9, BPUD, I-1 through I-4, IPUD, MPUD or RPUD or an approved community development plan. 
Natural state means a vacant lot that has never been cleared. 
Nuisance tree means any tree that tends to create a danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
Nuisance weeds means grass, weeds, brush and undergrowth (specifically excluding trees, shrubs and saw palmettos) which are allowed to grow in an uncontrolled manner or not cared for or regularly maintained and which reach a height in excess of ten inches. 
Owner means the owner of record of a lot as such appears in the official records of the clerk of the circuit court in and for the county. 
Rubble and debris means waste materials resulting from the construction or demolition of structures or buildings which are not usable as a part of or for the construction or demolition of structures or buildings. 
Tree means any woody plant or palm which in its mature state under normal growing conditions reaches a height of ten feet or greater. 
Waste means garbage, rubbish and refuse from residential, commercial or industrial activities, including kitchen and table food waste, animal or vegetative waste that is attendant with or results from the storage, preparation, cooking or handling of food material; paper, wood scraps, cardboard, cloth, glass, rubber, plastic; discarded automobiles, tires or automobile parts or fixtures; household goods or appliances; toys; tools or equipment; and similar materials. 
Yard trash means abandoned vegetative material from landscaping, maintenance or land clearing operations, and includes such materials as tree and shrub trimmings, grass clippings, palm fronds, tree limbs, tree stumps and similar materials. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94; Ord. No. 11-96, § 1, 7-3-96; Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 10-07, § 2, 3-7-07; Ord. No. 22-07, § 1, 10-3-07) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-32. - Penalty. 
If the code enforcement officer shall find that any of the provisions of this article are being violated, he shall notify the property owner of such violations, in writing, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering any action necessary to correct it. Any person found guilty of a violation of any provision of this article, or any lawful order of the city council or code enforcement officer, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 30-33. - Civil remedies. 
The city council may institute in any court, or before any administrative board of competent jurisdiction, action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation of this article or of any order or regulations made in connection with its administration or enforcement; and the court or administrative board shall adjudge to the plaintiff such relief by way of injunction or any other remedy allowed by law or otherwise, to include mandatory injunction, as may be proper under all the facts and circumstances of the case, in order to fully effectuate the regulations adopted and orders and rulings made pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 30-34. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 30-35. - Exempt areas. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, this article shall not apply to any property within the city which is used for agricultural purposes, or on [to] any lot in an undisturbed natural state or condition. However, this exemption shall not apply to lots in a natural state that contain rubbish, waste, yard trash or nuisance trees. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94; Ord. No. 11-97, § 1, 6-4-97; Ord. No. 15-05, § 2, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 10-07, § 3, 3-7-07)  
Sec. 30-36. - Declaration of nuisance. 
It is hereby declared and determined by the city council that the following shall each individually or in any combination be considered a nuisance when they exist upon any lot, lots or adjacent lots, as the case may be, in the city: 
(1)	Nuisance weeds, excluding trees, shrubs and saw palmetto, where the greater portion of the weeds on the lot exceeds ten inches in height, which impair the economic welfare of property, contribute to a fire hazard and/or create a health hazard when any part of said growths are located on any lot adjacent to the boundary of any developed lot. 
(2)	Accumulations of waste, yard trash, or rubble and debris. 
(3)	Accumulations of waste, yard trash, or rubble and debris that may harbor rats or snakes or that may contain pools of water that may serve as breeding grounds for insects or other disease vectors. 
(4)	Tree(s) within 100 feet of improved property if by reason of height, proximity to neighboring structures, or physical condition might cause damage to life or property within the immediate area. 
(5)	Intersection sight distance obstructions as defined in section 30-31. 
(6)	Lighting located on privately owned property that results in beams, rays, reflections or diffusions of light spilling out, over, upon, or onto adjacent or surrounding residential properties; provided that such lighting unreasonably disturbs, annoys, or interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of any occupant of any adjacent or surrounding residential properties, or such lighting unreasonably interferes with, endangers, or injures the health or safety of any occupant of any adjacent or surrounding residential properties. For purposes of this subsection, an unreasonable disturbance, annoyance, and interference shall be determined with regard to whether such lighting is so excessive or intrusive as it would unreasonably disturb, annoy, and interfere with a reasonably prudent person of ordinary sensibilities' comfortable enjoyment of life and the affected residential property. In assessing whether lighting constitutes a violation of this subsection, the city may consider the following, non-exclusive factors: (1) observations of any city investigative agents; (2) witness statements; (3) perceived intensity of the light; (4) duration of the light; (5) the relationship of the light to the intensity of other or background ambient light; (6) the uses permitted within the zoning district in which the light emanates or emanated and the uses permitted within zoning districts that are proximate thereto; (7) the time of day or night at which the light is perceived; (8) the proximity of the light to facilities customarily utilized for sleeping purposes; (9) whether the light is continuous, pulsating, constant, or intermittent; (10) the existence of additional complaints concerning the light from additional persons who claim to be affected by the light; and (11) any other evidence available. 
Notwithstanding the preceding, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the following specific uses, activities, and circumstances: 
(a)	Any lighting located on or emanating from government or City-owned property; 
(b)	Approved streetlights, illuminated signage, or traffic signals and lights located within public or private rights-of-way or easements, or to any lighting required or installed by city, county, state, or federal governments or agencies; 
(c)	Any temporary lighting used for the construction or repair of roadways, utilities, and other related public infrastructure; 
(d)	Temporary emergency lights required by the police department, fire department, and other emergency services. 
(e)	Holiday lights, displayed at times when such lights are generally considered appropriate, provided they do not produce excessive glare. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94; Ord. No. 11-96, § 2, 7-3-96; Ord. No. 15-05, § 3, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 10-07, § 4, 3-7-07; Ord. No. 22-07, § 2, 10-3-07; Ord. No. 05-15 , § 2, 1-6-16)  
Sec. 30-37. - Nuisance abatement requirements. 
It is further determined by the city council that any nuisance declared by this article which is found upon any lot, lots or adjacent lots, as the case may be, in the city shall be abated in the following manner: 
(1)	If the nuisance consists of accumulations of waste, yard trash, rubble, debris, nuisance trees, or intersection sight distance obstructions as provided in section 30-36, it shall be abated in its entirety; 
(2)	If the nuisance consists of nuisance weeds as provided in section 30-36, it shall be abated in its entirety, provided that the nuisance lies upon a previously cleared or improved lot adjacent to a developed lot; or 
(3)	If the nuisance consists in part or combination of any of the nuisances declared in section 30-36, then the provisions of subsection (1) of this section shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94; Ord. No. 15-05, § 4, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 22-07, § 3, 10-3-07)  
Sec. 30-38. - Code enforcement officer. 
The code enforcement officer is hereby designated as the investigating and enforcing authority pursuant to the provisions of this article. The code enforcement officer is hereby directed and empowered to inspect land on which a nuisance is suspected to exist, to receive all complaints of a violation of this article, and to enter upon any real property in the conduct of official business pursuant to this article. The code enforcement officer shall be responsible for providing all notices to affected property owners required by this article and to take such other action as is reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 30-39. - Notice to correct violation. 
The code enforcement officer is empowered to enter upon and inspect lots on which a nuisance declared by this article is suspected to exist. In the event inspection reveals the presence of a nuisance, the code enforcement officer shall notify the record owners by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, of such nuisance, or by hand delivery by the code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff. Said notice shall be sent to the last available address of the owners of record as found in the public records. Said notice shall advise the owner that a nuisance exists on said owner's lot or lots and said nuisance shall be abated by the owner. The notice shall specify what corrective action shall be taken by the owner to abate the nuisance and that failure to abate the nuisance will result in the code enforcement officer's abating said nuisance and that a lien for the costs and administrative expenses of said abatement shall be recorded against the property for failure to abate the nuisance. The owner shall have 21 days from receipt or delivery of the notice to correct the nuisance. The notice shall also state that the owner has a right to appeal the determination of the code enforcement officer to the special master and that said appeal, upon payment of the fee in accordance with section 30-40, shall be filed within 15 days of receipt or delivery of the notice from the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 30-40. - Appeals. 
Within 15 days after the receipt or delivery of the notice from the code enforcement officer pursuant to section 30-39, the owner of the lot may make written request for a hearing before the special master to appeal the decision of the code enforcement officer and to show that the condition alleged in the notice does not exist or that such condition does not constitute a nuisance. Filing of such appeal shall toll the 21-day period to correct the nuisance until the decision of the special master is rendered. Failure to notify or to timely appear for the hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the lot owner's right to appeal. The code enforcement officer shall give the owner seeking such hearing written notice of the date and location of the scheduled hearing. At the hearing before the special master, the city and the lot owner may introduce such competent, substantial evidence as is deemed relevant and necessary. Thereafter the special master shall render a decision on said hearing. In order to defray the expense of processing an appeal to the special master, the fee for said appeal shall be as established by resolution and listed in appendix A; provided, however, that the city shall refund the appeal fee to the applicant if the special master concurs with the applicant in its decision. Following review by the special master, or waiver of the right to appeal by the owner, the owner shall have exhausted his administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94; Ord. No. 03-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 30-41. - Posting of lot; abatement of nuisance. 
In the event no appeal is filed as provided in section 30-40 or the notice is returned undelivered, upon the expiration of the 21-day period after receipt or attempted delivery of the notice to correct the nuisance, the code enforcement officer shall re-inspect the lot to ascertain whether or not the nuisance has been abated. Should the code enforcement officer determine that the subject lot still constitutes a nuisance as defined in this article, and has notified the owner as such, and the owner has failed to abate said nuisance within the allowed time, the code enforcement officer shall abate said nuisance; provided, however, if the notice to abate said nuisance, sent by certified or registered mail, is returned, undelivered, the code enforcement officer shall post a copy of the notice on the lot in a conspicuous place. After ten days following the posting of said notice, the code enforcement officer shall abate said nuisance. In no case will the nuisance be abated by the code enforcement officer earlier than 21 days from the mailing of the notice. The code enforcement officer, through his agents or authorized contractors, is authorized to enter upon the lot and take such steps as are reasonably necessary to effect abatement. The city shall not be required to have any lot mowed or cleared or the nuisance abated by its contractors or agents more than three times per year. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94; Ord. No. 03-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 30-42. - Assessment of costs of abatement; imposition of lien. 
As soon after such abatement as provided for in section 30-41 is feasible, the cost, plus an amount as established by resolution and listed in appendix A, to defray administrative and operating expenses for abating the nuisance on each lot, shall be calculated and invoiced by the zoning enforcement official to the lot owner. The cost plus said expense are due and payable upon the date of the mailing of said invoice. Such additional charges are hereby declared to be necessary for the purpose of inspection, administration and enforcement of this article. Thereupon, the zoning enforcement official, shall levy a special assessment lien in the amount of such cost plus the administrative expense against such lot. Such lien shall describe the lot and show the total costs assessed are due and payable. Until payment is complete, such assessments shall be a legal, valid and binding obligation upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94; Ord. No. 17-98, § 1, 8-5-99; Ord. No. 07-14 , § I, 10-1-14)  
Sec. 30-43. - Notice of lien. 
The code enforcement officer shall mail a copy of the recorded special assessment lien to the record owners of each lot described in the special assessment lien provided for in section 30-42, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last available address of record for such owners. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 30-44. - Recording of lien. 
As soon as possible after the assessment has been made as provided in section 30-42 by the code enforcement officer, a certified copy of the special assessment lien shall be recorded in the official records of the county in the office of the clerk of the circuit court in and for the county; and the lien shall become effective as of the date of filing such copy with said clerk of the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 30-45. - Effect of lien. 
The property lien created under the provisions of this article shall become effective as of the date of recording such copy in the official records of the county by the clerk of the circuit court. Such assessments, together with interest thereon, may be enforced by civil action in the appropriate court of the county. The liens created under this article shall be a first lien equal to a lien for nonpayment of property taxes, on any property against which an assessment for costs to abate the nuisance has been filed, and shall continue in full force from the date of recording until discharged by satisfaction. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 30-46. - Satisfaction of lien. 
Upon satisfaction of the lien created under this article, the city shall file an order of satisfaction, release and dismissal of lien with the clerk of the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 30-47. - Storage of personal property. 
Personal property which is customarily associated with and incidental to residential premises including, but not limited to, lawn and porch furniture, chairs, chaise lounges, and benches may be stored on a porch or in the rear yard of all single family and multi-family residential areas; birdbaths, lawn decorations and birdfeeders may be stored outdoors in the front, side or rear yard. Recreational equipment, picnic tables, grills and doghouses shall be stored in the rear yard, rear yard porch or rear yard enclosures in all single-family and multifamily residential areas. This provision does not include basketball goals as expressly permitted herein. All other personal property must be stored inside an enclosed principal structure. This provision does not include storage in or under carports or similar types of accessory structure. A basketball hoop/goal is permitted within the front yard of a single-family residential home subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	Only one front yard goal is permitted per residence. 
(2)	The goal must be setback at least 15 feet from the property line. 
(3)	Only portable basketball goals or fixed basketball goals mounted to a single pole that have an isolated in-ground foundation are permitted. Basketball goals permanently attached to the house are prohibited. 
(4)	No basketball court may be constructed specifically for the basketball goal, though an otherwise permitted driveway may be utilized as a court. 
(5)	Basketball goals are not permitted in the street or right-of-way at any time. 
(6)	To avoid a noise nuisance, basketball goals shall not be used after 9:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m. 
(7)	Metal or chain nets are expressively prohibited. No basketball goal may be leaned or set against a wall, the house, a tree or any other structure. No basketball goal may be modified or used for purposes other than basketball play. 
(8)	Basketball goals must be set perpendicular to the front face of the home, in close proximity to the home, and cannot face the street. 
(9)	Backboards shall not be attached to the house, garage, roof or tree or any structure other than a basketball pole. 
(10)	Courts shall not be painted or permanently outlined in the driveway, pavement, or landscaping. 
(11)	The use or installation of rebound nets or structures is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 5, 3-7-07; Ord. No. 03-12, § I, 8-1-12; Ord. No. 09-13, § I, 8-7-13 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-07, § 5, adopted March 7, 2007, added § 30-38 to the Code. Inasmuch as said section already existed, the new provisions were redesignated as § 30-47 to maintain the numerical continuity of the Code at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 30-48. - Lots and yards to be kept clean and sanitary. 
It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee, or occupant of a lot or portion thereof, or every representative or employee of such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any lot or portion thereof within the limits of the city to maintain the premises in such a manner that they, at all times, be clean and sanitary, and present a neat and sightly appearance. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 6, 3-7-07)  
Sec. 30-49. - Plant with sharp thorns or spines prohibited near sidewalk or roadway. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or allow to grow or to remain any Spanish bayonet, century plant or plant of similar nature having sharp thorns or spines within three feet of any sidewalk or roadway, nor shall the outer ends of the branches of such plants be allowed to come within three feet of the sidewalks or roadways within the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 7, 3-7-07)  
Sec. 30-50. - Storage containers and similar type units. 
The overnight placement of any moving and/or storage structure, whether temporary or permanent and regardless of size, type or nature, in the paved or unpaved portion of any driveway, or any location on a lot, or in or on any road right-of-way is prohibited and unlawful, notwithstanding the foregoing: 
(a)	A temporary moving and/or storage structure may be placed on the paved driveway portion of a parcel in conjunction with a bona fide move to or from the parcel resulting from a change in occupancy; provided however, that in no event may the moving and/or storage structure remain on the premises for a period exceeding seven consecutive days; provided, further, however, that only one placement of such a structure may occur on a parcel during each calendar year absent written proof being provided in advance to the city's code enforcement administrator that a bona fide additional move will occur during the same calendar year relative to the same premises. 
(b)	The city manager may allow the temporary seasonal use of storage containers or pods in residential and nonresidential zoning districts to be utilized by licensed commercial delivery services for the storage of packages intended for same day delivery to residential units when it is demonstrated that the public health, safety and welfare will not be impaired, and when the following enumerated conditions are met: 
(1)	A written request and processing fee of $50.00 shall be submitted to the Planning Administrator for review and final approval by the city manager that includes the following information and statements: 
a.	A guarantee of removal of all temporary structures by January 2nd of each calendar year. 
b.	Removal of all signs, trash, or debris from the site and the immediate vicinity, upon termination of the activity shall be guaranteed in writing. 
c.	Statement that the delivery service will comply with subsection 30-50(b) of the City of Debary Code of Ordinances. 
d.	A site plan/sketch plan showing the size and location of the storage facilities and the location of ingress and egress of the temporary storage facility. 
e.	Adequate delineated and stabilized parking/loading area for the activity must be provided on-site and shown on a site plan. 
f.	Written consent of the property owners of sites to be utilized for placement of the storage containers/facilities. 
g.	If required, written permission from the applicable home owner's association. 
h.	The written request shall include an approval signature line for the city manager. 
(2)	A separate temporary package storage written request shall be required for each lot or parcel to be used as a temporary storage facility. 
(3)	No more than one package storage pod or facility shall be allowed for the same lot or parcel during a single calendar year. 
(4)	These temporary storage facilities may be utilized to facilitate delivery of parcels and packages within residential zoning districts and commercial parking lots during a period of time commencing on November 15th and terminating on December 31st of each year. 
(5)	Delivery of packages from such storage containers or pods via golf carts, low-speed vehicles and utility vehicles shall comply with all applicable traffic regulations and the provisions of F.S. § 316.2126. 
(6)	No activities other than the temporary storage of parcels and consequent delivery by golf carts or similar low speed utility vehicles to specific destinations may take place. 
(7)	All temporary storage facilities shall be securely placed on the ground. 
(8)	Outside of residential subdivisions, the temporary storage container may be placed in commercial parking lots that are in close proximity to the residential neighborhood being served and with written permission of the property owner and where the storage POD does not interfere with traffic circulation. The POD shall also meet the minimum setbacks of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(9)	The delivery of packages from the temporary storage facilities shall occur only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(10)	Individual single-family garages and private homes shall not be used as a temporary storage facility. 
(11)	No structures shall be located in the right-of-way. 
(12)	Adequate stabilized area with a minimum of 14 feet unobstructed height, shall be provided for trailer off-loading of packages. This area shall not block handicapped accessible areas. 
(13)	Additional conditions may be required as deemed necessary by the city manager or his/her designee for any temporary package storage activity. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 8, 3-7-07; Ord. No. 03-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 30-51. - Prohibited conditions. 
(1)	Collection of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed within the meaning of this section are those contained in ditches, ponds, pools, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective roof gutters, tanks, flush closets or other similar water containers. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the corporate limits of the city any collections of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes are breeding or are likely to breed unless such collections of water are treated so as to effectively prevent such breeding. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 9, 3-7-07)  
Sec. 30-52. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding. 
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 10, 3-7-07)  
Sec. 30-53. - Public rights-of-way. 
(a)	For the purpose of this section, "right(s)-of-way" shall be defined as that area from the property line to the edge of the pavement of a roadway, including any grassy or unpaved areas. 
(b)	It shall be the responsibility of every owner, agent or tenant of improved property in the city to, at all times, maintain those rights-of-ways abutting their property. These responsibilities shall include removing litter and debris, cutting the grass and weeds and trimming and maintaining trees to maintain a neat and trimmed appearance. 
(c)	It is declared that the placement of plantings, except grass and the placement of structures (excepting mail boxes in compliance with U.S. Postal Service requirements) in the publicly owned right-of-way is prohibited and is declared to be a nuisance and a violation. The city manager or his/her designee or the enforcement official is authorized to remove (abate) plantings or structures placed in the public right-of-way without prior permission pursuant to section 42-36 of this Code. 
(d)	It is declared a nuisance and a violation and shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant, having control of any lot or parcel of real estate in the city, to keep the branches and limbs of all trees which extend outside of the private property lines, trimmed so as to have a clearance of at least eight feet over and above abutting sidewalks, and all limbs and branches trimmed so that if any branches or limbs extend over any street or roadway there shall be a clearance of at least 14 feet over such arterial or collector roadways and at least 12 feet over any residential street. This section shall also apply to existing trees on any lot or public right of way abutting any lot or common area and existing or future trees planted and grown by the owner, lessee, occupant, or the agent, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant, or developer of any subdivision whether the trees be planted and growing inside of the private property lines in the city, or whether the trees be planted and growing outside the private property lines between the private property lines and the curb of the street. 
(e)	Waste deemed to be a public health or safety hazard placed in the city right-of-way shall be declared to be a nuisance and the city is authorized to remove the nuisance, after posting the property with notice requiring the property owner to abate the violation within 24 hours of the posting of the notice. The property owner shall be responsible for any costs incurred by the city for abatement of the nuisance and a lien shall be imposed on the property. 
(f)	The city manager or their designee shall be authorized to declare waste deemed to be a public health or safety hazard to be a nuisance on public rights-of-way. 
(g)	Notice required under this section shall: 
(1)	Be hand-delivered to a person in possession of the property or be posted in a conspicuous place on the front door and/or on the garage door of the structure, if one exists; 
(2)	Be posted on a stake on undeveloped properties, not less than five feet from the nuisance to be abated and visible from the street; 
(3)	Include the property address, violation, and corrective measure to be taken; 
(4)	Be signed by the enforcement officer and include the date and time of the posting. 
(h)	Fees and costs to abate such nuisance shall be declared to be a debt to the city and a lien shall be authorized upon such real property liable for the abated nuisance. Such amount shall be recoverable in any court of competent jurisdiction and shall constitute a lien against the premises to the same extent and character as the lien for property taxes and special assessments and with the same penalties and with the same rights of collection, foreclosure, sale, and forfeiture as obtained for special assessment liens and may be handled in the same manner by the city. 
(i)	Within 15 days after the posting of the notice from the enforcement official pursuant to this section, the owner of the lot may make written request for a hearing before the city's special master to appeal the decision of the enforcement official and the lien for abatement of the nuisance and to show that the condition alleged in the notice did not exist or that such condition did not constitute a public health or safety hazard. Filing such appeal shall toll the recording of a lien against the subject property until the decision of the special master is rendered. Failure to notify or to timely appear for the hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the lot owner's right to appeal. The enforcement official shall give the owner seeking such hearing written notice of the date and location of the scheduled hearing. At the hearing before the special master, the city and the lot owner may introduce such competent, substantial evidence as is deemed relevant and necessary. Thereafter, the special master shall render a decision on the hearing. In order to defray the expense of processing an appeal to the special master, the fee for appeal shall be $100.00; however, the city shall refund the appeal fee to the applicant if the special master concurs with the applicant in its decision. Following review by the special master, or waiver of the right to appeal by the owner, the owner shall have exhausted his administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 03-12, § I, 8-1-12)  
Secs. 30-54—30-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED, WRECKED ABANDONED PROPERTY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned property located on public property, F.S. § 705.103. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 30-81—30-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 50. 
 
Sec. 30-101. - Penalty; enforcement. 
(a)	Violations of this article are punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(b)	Any building inspector, code enforcement officer or duly constituted law enforcement officer may assist in the enforcement of this article. 
(c)	It is the intent of the city council that the enforcing officer attempt to abate any violation of this article prior to the commencement of the appropriate legal proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 94-28, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 30-102. - Jurisdiction; applicability of zoning regulations. 
(a)	This article shall be applicable throughout the city. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided in this article, this article shall be cumulative and supplemental to any zoning ordinance or regulation currently in effect. 
(Ord. No. 94-28, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 30-103. - Findings; declaration of nuisance. 
It is hereby found by the city council that abandoned vehicles, defined for the purpose of this article as those vehicles that are inoperative, wrecked, partially dismantled or otherwise mechanically incapable of being operated in their present condition, or without current state license tags, if required, are a public nuisance for the following reasons: 
(1)	Such vehicles, if stored in the open on private property, or if abandoned on public rights-of-way, can detract from the aesthetic quality of the surrounding neighborhoods and diminish the value of the adjacent properties. 
(2)	Such vehicles, if parked on a public right-of-way, can constitute a safety hazard by virtue of the obstruction to the free flow of traffic and give rise to other traffic hazards. 
(3)	Where such abandoned vehicles are on private property and stored in other than a completely enclosed garage, a health hazard may arise by virtue of the fact that such a vehicle can become a breeding place for disease-carrying insects and vermin. 
(4)	Abandoned vehicles as described by this article constitute an abuse of the environment in that such vehicles are solid waste which pollute the land. 
(Ord. No. 94-28, § I, 4-6-94)  
Sec. 30-104. - Abandoned vehicles prohibited; exceptions; notice of violation. 
(a)	All vehicles which are inoperative as described in section 30-103 or without a current state license tag, if required, shall be prohibited on any public right-of-way under any circumstances, or on private property except within a completely enclosed garage or when such vehicles are a permitted principal use or special exception in any zoning classification in the zoning ordinance. 
(b)	In the event an inspection reveals the presence of an abandoned vehicle which is in violation of this article, the code enforcement officer or his authorized representative may notify the record owner of the vehicle and the private property of such violation by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery, or in an any other manner as provided by law. Said notice shall be sent to the last available address of the owner of record as found in the county public records. Said notice shall advise the owner that a violation exists on said owner's lot and compliance must be accomplished. If the violation is not corrected, the code enforcement officer or his authorized representative may initiate any enforcement action as authorized in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-28, § I, 4-6-94; Ord. No. 12-06, § 1, 7-5-06)  
Sec. 30-105. - Allowing vehicle to remain on property for longer than twenty-one days. 
No person in charge or control of any property in the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any dismantled, partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, inoperative, unlicensed vehicle to remain on such property longer than 21 days; except this section shall not apply with regard to any vehicles within an enclosed garage or when such vehicles are a permitted principal use or special exception in any zoning classification in the zoning ordinance, but in no event shall a carport be considered an appropriate storage place. 
(Ord. No. 12-06, § 2, 7-5-06)  
Sec. 30-106. - Removal of abandoned vehicles on private property. 
(a)	Whenever the enforcement officer ascertains that an abandoned vehicle is present on private property, he or she may cause a notice to be placed upon the abandoned vehicle, or on the real property on which the vehicle is located. In addition to such posting, he or she shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain the name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and upon such discovery he or she shall make every reasonable attempt to notify the owner and shall mail on the date of posting a copy of such notice to the owner of the vehicle. He or she shall also mail on the date of posting a copy of the notice to the owner of the property, as shown by the real estate tax records, upon whose property it is located. 
(b)	The notice required by subsection (a) of this section shall be substantially in the following form: 
CITY OF DeBARY 
NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE FOLLOWING PROPERTY. This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) located at (setting forth brief description of location) is improperly stored and is in violation of Ordinance No. 12-06 of the City of DeBary and must be removed within twenty-one days from date of this notice; otherwise it shall be presumed to be abandoned property and will be removed to a storage facility approved by the City Council and thereafter disposed of in accordance with applicable state law or City ordinance. The owner of the vehicle or person in charge of the property or authorized agents shall be liable for all costs of removal, storage and/or disposal of the vehicle by order of the City of DeBary. Dated this: (setting forth the date of posting of notice). Signed: (setting forth name, title, address and telephone number of enforcement officer). 
Such notice shall be not less than eight inches by ten inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the elements for a period of 20 days. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for the owner of the vehicle, or for the owner of the private property upon which the vehicle is located, to fail to remove the vehicle from the private property within 21 days from the posting of the notice required by this section, or to fail to show reasonable grounds for the failure to do so within such time limit. 
(d)	Within the 21-day calendar period specified in the notice, the owner or the person in charge of the property or authorized agent may appeal to the Code Enforcement Board (CEB). The CEB shall determine the validity of the violation and may, for good cause, extend the time for compliance or removal. If such an appeal is made, no removal shall be required until after the appeal has been finally determined. 
(e)	If no appeal is made, and if at the end of 21 days after posting such notice to the owner or any person interested in the vehicle described in such notice the person has not removed the vehicle from the private property or shown reasonable cause for failure to do so, the enforcement officer may cause the vehicle to be removed to a storage facility approved by the city council, and thereafter disposed of in accordance with applicable state law or city ordinance. The owner of the vehicle or person in charge of the property or authorized agents shall be liable for all costs of removal, storage and/or disposal of the vehicle pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 12-06, § 3, 7-5-06)  
Sec. 30-107. - Civil action. 
Violations of this division may be enjoined or otherwise prosecuted by the city by civil action in addition to the criminal enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 12-06, § 4, 7-5-06)  
Sec. 30-108. - Authority of city council to contract for removal. 
The city council is hereby authorized and empowered to contract on an exclusive or nonexclusive basis with any person as the council deems advisable for the purpose of removing and destroying abandoned vehicles in violation of this division upon the direction of the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 12-06, § 5, 7-5-06)  
Sec. 30-109. - Payment of costs of removal. 
All expenses incurred in the removal and destruction of abandoned vehicles from private property shall be paid to the person designated by the city council to remove and destroy them by the owner of the abandoned vehicle if he or she can be determined, or, if not, then by the private property owner. 
(Ord. No. 12-06, § 6, 7-5-06)  
Sec. 30-110. - Right of entry of enforcement officers. 
(a)	The enforcement officer shall have the right to enter private property for the purposes of inspecting for junk vehicles or posting of required notices when vehicles have been discovered in violation of this division. 
(b)	The enforcement officer shall have appropriate official identification on his or her person, which identifies such officer as an agent of the city when he or she enters private property for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 12-06, § 2, 7-5-06)  
Sec. 30-111. - Repair of motor vehicles; storage of unlicensed or inoperable vehicles. 
(1)	All motor vehicles including, but not limited to, cars, motorcycles, trucks, three-wheelers, and tractors, being repaired within residentially zoned areas of the city must be currently registered to the property owner or resident of such property and any such repair must be performed in a garage or carport. 
(2)	Those properties zoned to allow automotive repair businesses which have a properly licensed automotive repair business operating, all vehicles on the property must a valid registration, or dealer tag on vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 11, 3-7-07)  
Secs. 30-112—30-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle noise, F.S. §§ 316.293, 403.415. 
 
Sec. 30-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the meanings given by common and ordinary use as defined by the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary. All terminology used in this article, not specifically defined, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The level so read is designated dBA. 
Agricultural means the land uses where agricultural activities are legally permitted. 
Commercial means the land uses where retail sales and services, professional, tourist and other commercial activities are legally permitted. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition, for or on public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Daylight hours means one-half hour before sunrise and one-half hour after sunset. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit for describing the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micronewtons per square meter. 
Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an existing or imminent peril. 
Environmental control officer means the director of the county environmental control division. 
Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. The term is used synonymously with the term "sound." 
Noise disturbance and sound disturbance mean any sound in quantities which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life or property, or unnecessarily interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation, of a reasonable person with normal sensitivities. 
Person means any individual, association, partnership, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust, two or more persons having a joint or common interest or any other legal entity, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the United States, a state or any political subdivision of a state. 
Pure tone means any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a set of single pitches. For the purposes of measurement, a pure tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands by five decibels for center frequencies of 500 H z and above, and by eight decibels for center frequencies between 160 and 400 H z , and by 15 decibels for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 H z . 
Real property line means an imaginary line along the surface, and its vertical plane extension, which separates the real property owned, rented or leased by one person from that owned, rented or leased by another person, excluding intrabuilding real property divisions. 
RMS (root mean square) means the square root of the mean of a set of squared values. 
Sound means an oscillation in pressure, stress, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. The term is used synonymously with the term "noise." 
Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a metering characteristic and weighting A, B or C as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters, ANSI S1.4-1971, or in successor publications. If the weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
Sound level meter means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels. The output meter reads sound pressure level when properly calibrated, and the instrument is of type 2 or better, as specified in the American National Standards Institute publication S1.4-1971, or its successor publications. 
Sound pressure means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by the presence of sound energy. 
Sound pressure level means 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 at the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals (20 × 10 -6 N/m 2 ). The sound pressure level is denoted L p or SPL and is expressed in decibels. 
Special variance and variance mean an authorization, issued by the county manager or his duly authorized representative, to exceed the sound level limit for a specified period of time. 
(Ord. No. 94-22, § I, 3-23-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-132. - Penalty; confiscation of noise-creating equipment; responsibility for violations. 
(a)	Violations of this article are punishable as provided in section 1-15. Any person who continues to violate the provisions of this article after having been previously cited may be subject to further citations, including further citations issued on the day upon which the original citation was issued. 
(b)	Upon conviction of being in violation of this article three times for the same offense within a 12-month period, when such sound is created by the same sound emitter, the noise-creating equipment may be confiscated by the court following such latest conviction until such time as the offender can satisfy the court that he is prepared to and in fact will operate said equipment within the limits of this article. Further violation shall result in the permanent confiscation by the court upon such conviction. 
(c)	The owner of property, a tenant, a lessee, a manager, an overseer, an agent, corporation or any other person entitled to lawfully possess or who claims unlawful possession of such property at a particular time involved shall each be responsible for compliance with this article, and each may be punished for violation of this article. It shall not be lawful defense to assert that some other person caused such sound, but each lawful possessor or claimant of the premises shall be responsible for operating or maintaining such premises in compliance with this article and shall be punishable, whether or not the person actually causing such sound is also punished. 
(Ord. No. 94-22, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 30-133. - Additional remedies. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provisions of this article which endangers the comfort, repose, health and peace of residents in the city is declared to be a public nuisance, and the city is authorized to pursue any and all remedies therefor. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit any private right of action. 
(Ord. No. 94-22, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 30-134. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article shall apply in the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-22, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 30-135. - Enforcement standards. 
Standards for enforcement of this article shall be in accordance with those set forth in addendum A following this article. Amendments to the enforcement standards may be made by the city manager, based upon best professional information available to him, which are necessitated by changes in sound measuring equipment or changes in prevailing academic, technical or operational criteria. 
(Ord. No. 94-22, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 30-136. - Sound limitations established; applicability. 
(a)	Classification of use occupancy. For the purposes of defining the use occupancy under this article, all premises containing habitually occupied sleeping quarters shall be considered residential use. All premises containing transient commercial sleeping quarters shall be considered tourist use. All premises containing business where sales, professional or other commercial use is legally permitted, including hospitals, shall be considered commercial use. All premises where manufacturing is legally permitted shall be considered manufacturing use. In cases of multiple use, the more restrictive use category shall prevail. Nursing homes, schools, libraries and church uses shall be considered residential uses. Any area not otherwise classified shall conform to commercial standards. 
(b)	Measurement of sound. Standards, instrumentation, personnel, measurement procedures and reporting procedures to be used in the measurement of sound as provided for in this article shall be those as specified in section 30-135. 
(c)	Maximum permissible sound levels by use occupancy. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound from any occupancy in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the use occupancy category in table I, more than ten percent of any measurement period, which shall not be less than ten minutes when measured at or beyond the property boundary of the land use from which the sound emanates. 
TABLE I 
Use Occupancy   Category 	Time 	Sound Level Limit 
(dBA) 
Residential 	7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
After 10:00 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. 	60 
55 
Industrial PUD boundary 
adjacent to residential 	7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
After 10:00 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. 	60 
55 
Commercial or tourist 	7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
After 10:00 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. 	65 
60 
Manufacturing 	At all times 	75 
Agricultural 	At all times 	75 
Industrial 	At all times 	75 
 
(d)	Exceptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations except as listed in table I: 
(1)	Air conditioners are exempt from provisions of table I when this equipment is functioning in accord with the manufacturer's standard mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition according to standards promulgated by the American Refrigeration Institute. The same exception shall apply to lawn mowers and agricultural equipment during daylight hours. 
(2)	Nonamplified crowd noises resulting from activities such as those planned by student government, community groups or racing/sport events are exempt. 
(3)	Construction operations for which building permits have been issued, or construction operations not requiring permits due to ownership of the project by an agency of government, are exempt, providing all equipment is operated in accord with the manufacturers' specifications and with all standard equipment, manufacturers' mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition. 
(4)	Noises of safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relief valves and bells and chimes of churches are exempt. 
(5)	Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency are exempt. 
(6)	Noises resulting from emergency work as defined in section 30-131 are exempt. 
(7)	Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the county in accordance with subsection (e) of this section is exempt. 
(8)	Noises made by persons having obtained a permit to use the streets are exempt. 
(9)	All noises coming from the normal operations of railroad trains are exempt. 
(10)	All noises coming from the normal operations of aircraft, not including scale model aircraft, are exempt. 
(11)	Those motor vehicles controlled by F.S. § 316.293, as may be amended, are exempt, but not those motor vehicles exempted from coverage. 
(12)	Motor vehicles defined in F.S. § 316.293(6)(a) and (b) are exempt. 
(13)	Home generators, that are permanently installed at a single family home for the home owner's use during periods of electrical outages in the surrounding neighborhood, are exempt. Permanently installed, shall not mean portable generators, but shall mean generators which are anchored by bolts to a poured concrete pad, and which are permanently attached to the home's electrical system, and for which building and electrical permits were secured. 
(e)	Special permits. Applications for a permit for relief from the maximum allowable noise level limits designated in this article may be made in writing to the city manager or his duly authorized representative. Any permit granted by the city manager under this subsection must be made in writing and shall contain all conditions upon which said permit shall be effective. The city manager or his duly authorized representative may grant the relief as applied for under the following conditions: 
(1)	The city manager may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements as he deems necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood, including use of mufflers, screens or other sound-attenuating devices. 
(2)	Permits may be granted for the purpose of entertainment under the following conditions: 
a.	The function must be open to the public and admission may be charged. 
b.	The function must take place on public property. 
c.	The permit will be given only for four hours in one 24-hour day. 
d.	The function must be staged between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(3)	Special permits for nonentertainment special purposes may be issued under the following conditions: 
a.	1. 
If the special purpose relates to the operation of a trade or business, that the special purpose not be in the ordinary course of that trade or business; and 
2.	If the special purpose does not relate to the operation of a trade or business, that the special purpose not be an ordinary event in the affairs of the applicant; and 
b.	If the special purpose be a recurring purpose, that it not recur more often than four times each calendar year; and 
c.	1. 
That the special purpose be absolutely necessary to the operation of the applicant's trade or business; or 
2.	If the special purpose does not relate to the operation of the trade or business, that the special purpose be compatible with the ordinary activities of the neighborhood in which the special purpose is to occur; and 
d.	Except in emergency situations, as determined by the county manager, the special permit may be issued only for four hours between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on weekdays; and 
e.	Special permits may be issued for no longer than 15 consecutive days, renewable by further application to the city manager. 
(4)	No permit may be issued to permit the use of any loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device on the exterior of any building which at any time exceeds the sound level limits in table I of this section, except those used for emergency warnings. 
(Ord. No. 94-22, § I, 3-23-94; Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 2-2-05; Ord. No. 02-00, § 1, 3-1-00)  
Sec. 30-137. - Exceeding sound limitations. 
It shall be unlawful, except as expressly permitted in this article, to make, cause or allow the making of any noise or sound which exceeds the limits set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-22, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 30-138. - Loud, disturbing or unnecessary noises. 
(a)	Some sounds may be such that they are not measurable or may not exceed the limits set out in this article, but they may be excessive, unnatural, prolonged, unusual and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare or prosperity of the residents of the city. 
(b)	With the exception of those exemptions provided by state law, noises prohibited by this article are unlawful notwithstanding the fact that no violation of section 30-136 is involved, and notwithstanding the fact that the activity complained about is exempted in section 30-136(d). 
(c)	Thus, the following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)	The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile or other vehicle, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any signaling device for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time; and the unreasonable use of any signaling device. 
(2)	The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio, television, tape or record player, amplifier, musical instrument or other machine or device used for the production, reproduction or emission of sound, any prolonged sounds made by people, and the keeping of any animal which causes frequent or long continuous noise in such a manner as to disturb the public peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with greater intensity than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such sound emitter is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. Quieter standards are expected during nighttime hours. 
(d)	Any person making a complaint under this section must sign a sworn affidavit prior to a warrant being issued; otherwise no such complaint will be honored. 
(Ord. No. 94-22, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 30-139. - Loudspeakers and public address systems. 
Loudspeakers or public address systems used to produce sound signals from any source for either advertising or other purposes may not be operated on or over public property and public rights-of-way unless a permit has been issued by the city. A fee established by resolution of the city council and listed in appendix A shall be paid for such permit. The permit may be canceled for noncompliance with this article. Such systems may be used Monday through Saturday during daylight hours only. 
(Ord. No. 94-22, § I, 3-23-94) 
ADDENDUM A. ENFORCEMENT STANDARDS 
I. General. 
1.1.  Purpose. These enforcement standards establish uniform guidelines for measuring and recording noise levels for the enforcement of the noise control ordinance of the city. 
1.2.  Standards. These enforcement standards should be used in conjunction with the following standards and recommended practices: 
(1)	Acoustical Terminology, American National Standards Institute Incorporated (ANSI) S1.1-1960. 
(2)	Specification for General-Purpose Sound Level Meters, ANSI S1.4-1971. 
(3)	Preferred Frequencies and Band Numbers for Acoustical Measurements, ANSI S1.1967. 
(4)	Method for Calibration of Microphones, ANSI S1.10-1966. 
(5)	Specification for Octave, Half-Octave and Third Octave Band Filter Sets, ANSI S1.11-1966. 
(6)	Specifications for Laboratory Standard Microphones, ANSI S1.12-1967. 
(7)	Preferred Reference Quantities for Acoustical Levels, ANSI S1.8-1969. 
(8)	Recommended Practice Qualifying a Sound Data Acquisition System, Society of Automotive Engineers, Incorporated, J184. 
(9)	Standard Method for the Measurement of Sound Pressure Levels, ANSI S1.13-1971. 
1.3.  Definitions. Unless otherwise defined here in this code or within the noise control ordinance, all terminology shall be in conformance with applicable publication of the American National Standards Institute, Incorporated (ANSI) or its successor body. 
II. Instrumentation. 
2.1. Requirements. Instrumentation used in making sound level measurements shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Sound level meter. Sound level meters shall be of at least type 2 meeting ANSI S1.4-1971 requirements. Alternately, a microphone or sound level meter may be used with a magnetic tape recorder and/or graphic level recorder or indicating meter, providing the system meets at least type 2 ANSI requirements. For measurements requiring octave band analysis, the equipment will additionally meet ANSI S1.11-1966. 
(2)	Sound level calibrator. The entire sound measurement system shall be calibrated with an acoustic calibrator recommended by the manufacturer and according to the manufacturer's recommended procedures. 
(3)	Windscreen. An open-cell, foam windscreen recommended by the manufacturer of the sound level meter shall be used. 
2.2.  Calibration. The instruments used for acoustical measurements shall be serviced in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Before and after a series of measurements, the instrumentation shall be calibrated acoustically according to the manufacturer's instructions and at intervals not exceeding two hours when the instrument is used longer than a two-hour period. 
2.3.  Meter operation. Unless expressed otherwise in this code, the sound level meter shall be operated in accordance with the instrument manufacturer's instruction and as follows: 
(1)	Microphone location. The microphone shall be located at a height of four feet above the ground level. All microphone positions shall be described in the recording of all data. 
(2)	Microphone orientation. The microphone shall be oriented in relation to the source of the sound in accordance with the instrument manufacturer's instructions. Where the instruction manual is vague or does not include adequate information, a specific recommendation shall be obtained from the manufacturer. 
(3)	Meter setting. The meter shall be set for the A-weighted network and fast response. 
(4)	Ambient sound. Measurements shall be made only when the A-weighted ambient sound level, including wind effects and all sources other than that being measured, is at least ten decibels lower than the sound level of the source. Methodologies are available for determining source levels when the source-ambient difference is less than ten decibels. These methodologies should be covered in a training course. 
III. Personnel. 
3.1.  Personnel. Persons selected to conduct sound measurement tests shall have received training in the techniques of sound measurement and the operation of sound measurement instruments. 
3.2.  Technician location. The technician making direct readings of the meter shall be positioned in relation to the microphone in accordance with the instrument manufacturer's instructions. Where the instruction manual is vague or does not include adequate information, a specific recommendation shall be obtained from the manufacturer. 
3.3.  Bystander location. During sound measurements, bystanders shall not be within ten feet of the microphone or noise source, except for a witness or trainee, who may be positioned behind the technician on a line with the technician and the microphone. 
IV. Measurement procedures. 
4.1.  Measurement procedures. The following procedure shall be used to determine if a violation exists pursuant to section 30-136: 
(1)	Sound level meter location. 
(a)	The sound level meter shall be located on the adjacent boundary closest to the noise source or on a lot from which the complaint arises, unless otherwise specified in the noise control ordinance. 
(b)	If a complaint arises from a multistory structure, the height of the sound level meter shall be adjusted so that it is on a direct line between the noise source and noise receiver. 
(c)	The microphone shall be at least three feet from any adjacent structures. 
(2)	Sound level exceeded ten percent of the time. 
(a)	Every ten seconds read the level from the sound level meter. 
(b)	Record this level on the data sheet (figure 1) as a check mark at the appropriate level. 
(c)	After 60 samples, test by the confidence criterion discussed below. If the samples meet the criterion, then the measurement is complete. If not, then 40 more samples must be taken and the confidence test repeated. If the confidence criterion is still not met, additional groups of 50 samples must be completed until the confidence criterion is met. 
(d)	Confidence criterion. 
(i)	Counting down from the top of the data sheet (and from left to right within each level), circle the "test samples" shown in table I. For instance, after 60 samples have been taken, then the second, the sixth, and the twelfth samples from the top are circled. (See figure 1, example 1.) 
(ii)	If these three test samples fall into three contiguous levels, then the measurement is complete. Otherwise, another group of samples must be taken and tested again. (Sometimes the test samples will be even more closely packed, falling into only one or two contiguous levels. In these cases, the criterion is also met.) 
(iii)	If 100 or more samples have been taken, skewing is allowed. The two outer test samples (the error limits) can be shifted by one sample (not one level) both in the same direction. (See figure 1, example 2.) This sometimes provides the necessary accuracy without requiring further sampling. However, if the criterion is still not met after skewing, then 50 more samples must be taken and tested. 
(e)	Once the confidence criterion has been met, the level exceeded ten percent of the measurement period (the second sample circled), has been determined with dB with 95 percent confidence. 
(3)	Maximum sound level. 
(a)	As noise source radiates sound, read the maximum deflection of the needle of the sound level meter. 
(b)	If possible, determine and record the minimum sound level during the period of observation. 
V. Reporting measurements. 
5.1. Information. The following information shall be obtained and reported for each sound measurement period: 
(1)	Dimensioned sketch or photograph of the test area showing location of sound sources and receivers. 
(2)	Note any possible reflecting objects within the test area. 
(3)	Physical and topographical description of the ground surface. 
(4)	Meteorological conditions, including temperature, relative humidity, wind direction and speed. 
(5)	Equipment and settings used for sound measurement. 
(6)	Date, time and length of measurement period. 
(7)	Measured sound levels. 
(8)	Background sound level. 
Editor's note— The data sheets, figures and examples referred to in these standards are not printed herein but are on file in the city clerk's office.  
Secs. 30-140—30-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Hazardous wastes, F.S. § 403.721 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 30-171—30-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COST RECOVERY FOR INCIDENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 38; traffic and vehicles, ch. 50. 
 
Sec. 30-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Costs means and includes but is not limited to: 
(1)	All costs incurred for response, containment and/or removal and disposal of hazardous materials or remedial actions, to include unbudgeted costs associated with its transportation and temporary storage. 
(2)	Damages for injury to, destruction of or loss of natural resources, as determined by the appropriate local, state or federal agency, including the reasonable costs of assessing such injury, destruction or loss resulting from a hazardous material incident. 
(3)	Health costs for persons or animals injured from or costs of any health assessment or health effects study carried out as a necessity resulting from a hazardous material incident. 
(4)	Costs of labor, including benefits, overtime and administrative overhead. 
(5)	Costs of equipment, operation, leasing, repair and replacement where necessary. 
(6)	Costs of contract labor and equipment. 
(7)	Costs of labor and equipment obtained directly by the county, county agencies or agents, and the municipalities. 
(8)	Costs of materials such as sorbents, foam, dispersants, neutralization agents, overpack drums or containers, etc. 
(9)	Costs of supervision and verification of cleanup and abatement. 
Hazardous material means any substance or material defined, listed, characterized or classified as a hazardous material, hazardous substance, hazardous waste or toxic substance according to chapter 38F-41, Florida Administrative Code (the Florida Substance List); title 40 Code of Federal Regulations 261 (Identification and Listing of Hazardous Wastes); title 40 Code of Federal Regulations 3,021.4 (Designation of Hazardous Substances); title 40 Code of Federal Regulations 355, appendices A and B (List of Extremely Hazardous Substances); and title 49 Code of Federal Regulations 172.101 and 172.102 (Hazardous Materials Tables). 
Hazardous material incident means actual or threatened release of hazardous substances or materials, including hazardous waste, which pose an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare of the population. 
Hazardous substance includes any solution, mixture or formulation containing hazardous material, and any material which, due to its chemical or physical characteristics, is determined by the county to pose a substantial threat to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the environment. The term includes but is not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum products, gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables and corrosives. 
Natural resources means land, fish, wildlife, biota, air, water, groundwater, drinking water supplies and other such resources belonging to, managed by, held in trust by, appertaining to or otherwise controlled by the city. 
Person means an individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, governmental entity or any other legal entity. 
Recovery means a phase of emergency management which restores the site of an incident to preemergency conditions. 
Release means the accidental or intentional, sudden or gradual spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into the environment, including the abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers and other receptacles containing any hazardous material or substance or waste or pollutant or contaminant. 
Response means a phase of emergency management which occurs during and immediately following an incident, provides emergency assistance to victims of the event, and reduces the likelihood of secondary damage. 
Responsible party means the person whose negligent or intentional act or omission caused a release, or the person who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous substance or waste at the time of such release without regard to fault or proximate cause, or the person who owned or had custody or control of the container which held the hazardous substance at the time or immediately prior to such release without regard to fault or proximate cause. 
(Ord. No. 94-17, § 2, 3-2-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-192. - Intent and purpose; statutory authority; jurisdiction. 
(a)	Intent and purpose. This division is intended to provide for recovery by the city of costs incurred in response and recovery efforts related to hazardous material incidents. In addition, it is intended to provide for cost recovery for damages to natural resources and government-owned properties. 
(b)	Authority. The city council has the authority to adopt this division pursuant to the provisions of F.S. ch. 252. 
(Ord. No. 94-17, § 1, 3-2-94)  
Sec. 30-193. - Liability for costs. 
(a)	Any responsible party who causes a hazardous material incident shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred by the city for response to and remediation of such an incident. 
(b)	The city will seek all available remedies at law, to include the provisions of this division, against any parties responsible for any environmentally damaging event, to include those actions and remedies available under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code relating to such matters. 
(Ord. No. 94-17, § 3, 3-2-94)  
Sec. 30-194. - Collection and disbursement of funds. 
(a)	Agent for collection. The county department of finance shall serve as the city's agent for collecting invoices and billing the responsible party for costs. Agents of the city and organizations responding to a hazardous materials incident according to responsibilities set forth in the county hazardous materials emergency plan or at the request of the county or the city will be eligible to submit bills. 
(b)	Submission of invoices. Invoices identifying eligible costs under this division shall be submitted to the department of finance within ten working days after the cost was incurred or identified. Submitted invoices should include sufficient documentation for cost reimbursement (i.e., copies of time sheets for specific personnel, copies of bills for materials, equipment and supplies procured or used, etc.). Accepting invoices from agencies outside the city shall not incur liability to the city to pay costs from such agencies until payment is received by the city from the responsible party. 
(c)	Method of payment. The department of finance shall submit one or a series of consolidated invoices to the responsible party identifying agencies, agents or municipalities and their specific costs of reimbursements. The responsible party shall issue a certified check to each eligible agency, agent or municipality requesting cost recovery for the amount incurred, within 60 days of receiving a consolidated invoice. 
(d)	Hazardous material incident trust fund. Any moneys recovered under this division and not identified for a specific cost reimbursement category shall be retained in a hazardous material incident trust fund. Trust fund moneys shall be used only to defray hazardous material costs as defined in section 30-195 when approved by the county hazardous materials advisory committee. 
(Ord. No. 94-17, § 4, 3-2-94)  
Sec. 30-195. - Methods of enforcement. 
(a)	Civil action. The city may enforce the provisions of this division by civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due under this division plus administrative collection costs and attorneys' fees, or for any other relief that may be appropriate. A certified copy of a judgment in favor of the city may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien upon any real or personal property owned by such person; and such lien shall be coequal with the lien of all state, district and municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and claims until paid or extinguished. 
(b)	Other remedies. This division shall not prohibit the city from pursuing any other remedy, whether civil or criminal, or from instituting any appropriate action or proceedings, including injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction, nor shall the recovery of extraordinary expenses under this division in any way release the various parties, or limit them, from legal liability incurred as a result of hazardous material cleanup or abatement as defined under any local, state or federal rule or regulation.  
Secs. 30-196—30-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - UNSAFE OR DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 20-00, §§ I—XV, adopted Feb. 7, 2001, set out provisions intended for use as Art. VI, §§ 30-196—30-209. At the editor's discretion and in concurrence with the city, these provisions have been included as Art. VI, §§ 30-221—30-234. 
 
Sec. 30-221. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.] 
Building means any structure as defined within the Standard Building Code, section 201.2. The term is limited to a building that is or was used or built for human habitation or occupancy. The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
Building official means the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
City council means the five duly constituted members of the city council. 
Code enforcement board means the board created pursuant to section 2-106 et seq. 
Owner means any person, group of persons, firm or firms, joint venture, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to the real property on which a building or structure is subject to the terms of this article. 
Person aggrieved shall mean one whose legal right is affected by a decision complained of, or whose pecuniary interest is directly affected by a decision. The person's interest must be specific and personal, not common to all members of the community. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to anything constructed or erected on the ground. The term is limited to a structure that is or was used or built for human habitation or occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § II, 2-7-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-222. - Enforcement official. 
The building official is hereby designated as the investigating and enforcing authority pursuant to the provisions of this article. The building official is hereby directed and empowered to inspect real property and improvements thereon, to the extent allowed by law, and, to receive all complaints of a violation of this article. The building official shall be responsible for providing all notices to affected property owners required by this article and to take such other action as is reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § III, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 30-223. - Purpose. 
(a)	There exist in the city buildings that are, or may become, unsafe or dilapidated due to lack of maintenance or damage caused by weather, fire, vandalism, vermin, insects, or other conditions. Such buildings constitute a menace to the health, safety, welfare, and reasonable comfort of citizens of the city. The existence of such buildings, if not remedied, creates blighted areas, attractive nuisances and unsafe areas, curtails investments and tax revenues, and impairs economic values all to the detriment of the citizens of DeBary. 
(b)	All buildings or structures of any kind, including all electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems which are unsafe, or unsanitary, constitute a fire hazard, or are dangerous to human life or a hazard to safety or health, shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition, in accordance with the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § IV, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 30-224. - Unsafe and dilapidated buildings prohibited. 
(a)	A building is unsafe or dilapidated when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)	There is an unusual sagging or leaning out-of-plumb of the building or any parts of the building and such effect is caused by deterioration or over-stressing to such an extent that there is a reasonable likelihood that the walls or other structural members may fall or give way. 
(2)	The building has improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs, or the same are overloaded or have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(3)	The building has been damaged or destroyed by fire, wind, or other causes and has become dangerous to life, safety, or the general health and welfare of people within or nearby the structure. 
(4)	The building is so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or so utterly fails to provide the amenities essential to decent living that it is unfit for human habitation or occupancy, or is likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to injure the health, safety, or general welfare. 
(5)	The building has parts which are so attached that there is a reasonable likelihood they may fall and injure members of the public or property in general. 
(6)	The building is vacant and not sufficiently secured to prevent access to trespassers and vagrants, or is otherwise untended or unkempt to the extent that it poses a general health or safety hazard for neighboring people or property. 
(7)	The electrical or mechanical installations or systems create a hazardous condition contrary to the standards of the building code. 
(8)	An unsanitary condition exists by reason of inadequate or malfunctioning sanitary facilities or waste disposal systems. 
(9)	The building is vacant and not sufficiently secured to prevent access to children or otherwise constitutes an attractive nuisance. 
(b)	A building that is unsafe or dilapidated constitutes a nuisance. No person shall permit an unsafe or dilapidated structure to exist on property under his or her ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § V, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 30-225. - Notice of determination that a building is unsafe or dilapidated. 
(a)	Upon identification of a building as unsafe or dilapidated by the building official, a notice shall be sent by the building official to the owner or owners of the building as listed on the most recent available tax rolls, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery by the said building official or deputy sheriff, directing that the building be repaired or demolished. Also, said notice shall be posted on the building. Failure of any person to receive notice shall not invalidate any proceedings under this section. Evidence of an attempt to serve notice, and proof of posting, shall be sufficient to show that these notice requirements have been met. Proof of posting with date and place of its posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice. Attached to the affidavit shall be a copy of the notice posted. 
(b)	The notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The name of the person upon whom the notice is served. 
(2)	The street address of the building and the legal description of the property on which it is located. 
(3)	That the building has been determined to be unsafe or dilapidated, and in a summary manner, the conditions upon which the determination is based. 
(4)	If repairs or alterations will remedy the conditions, the summary nature and extent of the repairs or alterations necessary. 
(5)	If the conditions are of such a character that repairs or alterations are not feasible or reasonably expected to remedy the conditions, notice that the building must be demolished. 
(6)	That within 45 days from sending the notice, a complete building permit application for necessary repairs must be submitted and repairs commenced, or the building must be demolished. 
(c)	If the conditions are not remedied within 45 days after the notice of determination is sent, or a building permit for repairs is not applied for and repairs not completed within a reasonable period of time, the determination shall be referred by the building official to the code enforcement board for a condemnation public hearing concerning the subject building. The owner or owners shall be notified by the building official of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing. Also, said notice shall be posted on the building. Failure of any person to receive notice shall not invalidate any proceedings under this section. Evidence of an attempt to serve notice, and proof of posting, shall be sufficient to show that these notice requirements have been met. Proof of posting with date and place of its posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice. Attached to the affidavit shall be a copy of the notice posted. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § VI, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 30-226. - Condemnation by the code enforcement board. 
(a)	If the owner of any building has failed to remedy unsafe or dilapidated conditions as provided in subsection 30-226(c), after the expiration of the 45-day period, the code enforcement board shall consider condemning the building. 
(b)	Each case before the board shall be presented by the building official or other city staff. At the hearing, the board shall proceed to hear evidence and testimony on the cases before the board. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The board shall take testimony from the building official or city staff, the property owner and other witnesses called by either the city staff or the property owner. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(c)	After hearing evidence and/or testimony on the case at said public hearing conducted by said board that any building is unsafe or dilapidated in accordance with subsection 30-224(a), the code enforcement board may adopt a resolution condemning it, requiring the owner to remedy the conditions by repair or removal by a date set by the board, and providing that failure of the owner to do so will result in the board authorizing the building official to take action to remedy the conditions and charging all expenses thereof against the real property. The board may also take any other appropriate action to carry out the purpose and intent of this article. The board, the building official or his duly authorized representative or the property owner may request a postponement or continuance of a scheduled public hearing. 
(d)	If the conditions are not remedied within the time established by the board, the building official shall take whatever action determined necessary and appropriate to remedy the conditions, including vacating, fencing, securing, demolishing, or removing the unsafe or dilapidated building. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § VII, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 30-227. - Notice of condemnation. 
(a)	A certified copy of the resolution of condemnation, together with a copy of the notice of determination containing information as provided in subsections 30-225(a) and (b), shall be sent by the building official, to each owner as listed on the most recent available real property tax rolls, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery by the building official or deputy sheriff. 
(b)	In addition, a certified copy of the resolution of condemnation, together with a copy of the notice of determination, shall be posted on the building following the adoption of the resolution of condemnation. Said notice shall be posted on the building following adoption of said resolution. 
(c)	Failure of any person to receive notice shall not invalidate any proceedings under this section. Evidence of an attempt to serve notice, and proof of posting, shall be sufficient to show that these notice requirements have been met. Proof of posting with the date and place of its posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice. Attached to the affidavit shall be a copy of the notice posted. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § VIII, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 30-228. - Repairs after condemnation. 
After the code enforcement board has condemned a building, no building permit application shall be accepted or permit issued for repairs of the building except as follows: 
(1)	The building official shall review any application for a permit to repair a condemned building, and shall determine whether repairs are feasible. 
(2)	If the proposed repairs are not reasonably expected to resolve the conditions or are otherwise not feasible, the permit shall be denied. 
(3)	If the repairs are feasible and are reasonably expected to resolve the conditions, a permit shall be issued only upon written condition that the owner or authorized agent specify the nature of the repairs, the date on which the repairs shall be complete, and that failure to complete the repairs within the time provided shall result in the building official taking remedial action with attachment of a lien for all costs or other action authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § IX, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 30-229. - Appeals. 
An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final administrative order of the code enforcement board to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo, but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the code enforcement board. The aggrieved party appealing a final administrative order has the burden of ensuring a verbatim record of the proceeding is made, which record includes the testimony and evidence upon which the appeal is based. An appeal shall be filed within 15 days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § X, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 30-230. - Administrative action. 
The decision of the code enforcement board shall be final administrative action, reviewable by certiorari in circuit court as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § XI, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 30-231. - Assessment of costs of abatement; imposition of lien. 
Any costs incurred by the city to correct dilapidated unsafe conditions pursuant to this provision shall be charged to the owner of the property, and shall constitute a lien against the property in favor of the city. The lien shall be entitled to the same priority as a lien for special assessments with the same rights of collection, foreclosure and sale, and lien shall be superior to all others except taxes. Until payment is complete, such assessment shall be a legal, valid, binding obligation upon the real property. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § XII, 2-7-01; Ord. No. 07-14 , § I, 10-1-14)  
Sec. 30-232. - Recording of lien. 
As soon as possible after the assessment has been made as provided in this article by the building official, a certified copy of the special assessment lien shall be recorded in the official records in the office of the clerk of the circuit court in and for the county, and the lien shall become effective as of the date of filing such copy with said clerk of the circuit court. The building official after recording of said lien, shall forward to the owner or owners a copy of the recorded lien by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery, by the building official or deputy sheriff. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § XIII, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 30-233. - Satisfaction of lien. 
Upon satisfaction of the lien created under this article, the building official shall file an order of satisfaction, release and dismissal of lien with the clerk of the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § XIV, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 30-234. - Structure presenting condition of imminent danger. 
(a)	A structure or property presents a condition of imminent danger to human life or health when: 
(1)	Due to structurally unsound conditions, a person entering the structure or a position thereof is likely to suffer physical injury, and the structure or unsound portion is not completely secured against access; or 
(2)	Due to structurally unsound conditions, any portion of the structure is likely to fall, be carried by the wind, or otherwise detach or move, and in so doing cause physical injury or damage to a person on the property or to a person or property nearby; or 
(3)	The condition of the property is such that it harbors or is inhabited by pests, vermin, or other organisms injurious to human health, the presence of which constitute an immediate hazard to people or property in the vicinity. 
(b)	Upon receipt of information that any structure or property, or portion thereof, is an imminent danger to human life or health, an inspection of the structure or property shall be conducted promptly to determine whether an imminent danger exists. 
(c)	Upon determination that an imminent danger exists, the owner as determined from the tax rolls or other information immediately available to the city, and any occupant, shall be notified of the imminent danger presented by the unsafe conditions. Notification shall be in writing provided by hand delivery or by registered letter to the most recent known address. In addition, notice of the unsafe conditions and imminent danger shall be posted on the property. If the owner cannot be determined or located, posting of the property shall constitute notice to the owner. The notice shall require that, within five days, the unsafe conditions be corrected, or occupants vacate the premises and the structure, building, or unsafe portion thereof, be demolished and removed. Corrective actions may include demolition and removal of structure, removal of building debris, fencing of the property, securing of windows and doors, removal of occupants, or any other action determined appropriate and sufficient to protect the public from injury by the unsafe conditions. 
(d)	If the unsafe conditions have not been corrected or removed within five days after the receipt of notice by the owner and occupant, or posting of the property if the owner cannot be located, the city shall correct the unsafe conditions by demolition and removal of structures, removal of building debris, fencing of the property, securing of windows and doors, removal of occupants, or any other action determined appropriate to protect the public. 
(e)	Any costs incurred by the city to correct unsafe conditions pursuant to this provision shall be charged to the owner of the property, and shall constitute a lien against the property in favor of the city. The lien shall be entitled to the same priority as a lien for special assessments and shall have the same rights of collection, foreclosure and sale, and lien shall be superior to all others except taxes. Until payment is complete, such assessment shall be a legal, valid, binding obligation upon the real property. 
(Ord. No. 20-00, § XV, 2-7-01; Ord. No. 07-14 , § I, 10-1-14)  
ARTICLE VII. - CONTROL OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES TO THE STORMWATER SYSTEM AND WATERS OF THE STATE 
 
Sec. 30-235. - Authority. 
The City is authorized by the Florida Constitution and the provisions of the F.S. chs. 163, 125 and 403 to establish and administer programs for stormwater management, including the control of pollution discharged to the city's storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-18-09)  
Sec. 30-236. - Findings. 
It is hereby found, determined and declared as follows: 
(1)	The contribution of pollutants through discharges from storm sewer systems has a significant impact on receiving waters in the city. 
(2)	Improperly treated discharges from industrial or commercial activities, interconnected municipal separate storm sewer systems, illicit discharges and discharges from spilling, dumping or disposal of material other than stormwater to the municipal storm sewer system of the city adversely affects the quality of water receiving such discharges. 
(3)	The United States Environmental Protection Agency, pursuant to title 40, section 122.26 of the Code of Federal Register [Regulations], has mandated the city, through the issuance of National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, to control discharges to the municipal storm sewer system in order to control the quality of discharges from the city's storm sewer system to waters of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-18-09)  
Sec. 30-237. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this regulation, the following definitions shall apply; words used in the singular shall include plural, and the plural, singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use. 
Best management practices or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, treatment methods and other management practices to prevent or reduce pollutants from entering the municipal storm sewer system or being discharged from the municipal storm sewer system. 
City. City of DeBary, Florida. 
Clean Water Act or CWA. Public Law (PL) 92-500, as amended PL95-217, PL95-576, PL6-483, PL97-117 and 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987, PL100-4. 
Council. The City Council of the City of DeBary. 
Construction activities. The alteration of land during construction and include such activities as clearing, grading and excavation. 
City manager. City Manager of the City of DeBary or his or her designee. 
Discharge. The release of liquid, solid or gaseous material and includes, but is not limited to, a release, spilling, leaking, seeping, pouring, emitting, emptying and/or dumping of any substance of material. 
Illicit connection. Point-source discharge to the city's municipal stormwater system or to waters of the United States which is not composed entirely of stormwater and/or which is not authorized by a permit. 
Illicit discharge. A discharge to the city's storm sewer system or to waters of the United States which is not composed entirely of stormwater, unless exempted pursuant to this regulation, and/orthe discharge to the city's storm sewer system or to waters of the United States and which is not in compliance with federal, state and city permits. 
Industrial activities. Activities at facilities identified by the United States. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). A conveyance, storage area or system of conveyances and storage areas including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, treatment ponds and other structural BMPs owned or operated by a local government that discharges to waters of the United States or to other MS4s, that is designed solely for collecting, treating or conveying stormwater, and that is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW), as defined by 40 Code of the Federal Register [Code of Federal Regulations] 122.2 or any context may require. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) . Authorized by the Clean Water Act, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program controls water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants into waters of the United States. The program is mandated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and administered by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, organization, corporation, association or other legal entity, whether singular or plural, as the context may require. 
Point source. Any discernible and confined conveyance including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, conduit, well, container, rolling stocks, concentrated animal feeding operation, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture. 
Pollutant. Includes, but is not limited to, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), heat, wrecked or damaged equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal (excepting the city's discharges) and agricultural waste discharged into the MS4, and not excluding other materials which the city manager, his/her representative, federal or state regulatory agencies may deem appropriate to be included. 
Reclaimed water. Water that has received at least advanced secondary treatment and basic disinfection and is reused after flowing out of a wastewater treatment facility. 
Reuse. The deliberate application of reclaimed water, in compliance with Florida Department of Environmental Protection and/or St. Johns River Water Management District rules, for a beneficial purpose. 
Runoff. The surface flow of water, which results from, and occurs following, a rainfall event. 
Significant construction activities. Construction activities which result in the disturbance of five acres or more of total land area. 
Significant redevelopment. The alteration of an existing development which results in the increase and in the discharge of a stormwater facility beyond its previously designed and constructed capacity, or increased pollution or changed points of discharge, except emergency repairs. 
Spill. Illicit discharge. 
Stormwater. Surface runoff and the discharge of runoff water resulting from rainfall. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A plan that identifies structural and nonstructural controls that will be put in place to minimize negative impacts, caused by offsite stormwater discharges to the environment. The purpose of these controls is to minimize erosion and run-off of pollutants and sediment. 
Waters of the United States. Surface and ground waters as defined by 40 Code of the Federal Register [Code of Federal Regulations] 122.2. 
(Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-18-09)  
Sec. 30-238. - Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(a)	No discharge to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system ("MS4") shall be permitted to impair the operation of the MS4 or contribute to the failure of the MS4 to meet any local, state or federal requirements, including, but not limited to, NPDES permits. 
(b)	Stormwater discharges to the MS4 from industrial, commercial or construction activities and from new development or redevelopment projects are required to obtain appropriate local, state and/or federal permits prior to discharging to the MS4. 
(c)	Any person determined by the city to be responsible for a discharge contributing to the failure of the city's MS4 to comply with the provisions and conditions of an NPDES permit shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall provide corrective measures as determined necessary by the city manager, and shall be liable for fines and damages. 
(Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-18-09)  
Sec. 30-239. - Stormwater discharges from industrial, commercial and construction activities. 
(a)	Stormwater discharges from industrial and commercial activities shall be treated or managed on site, in accordance with appropriate federal, state or local permits and regulations, prior to discharge to the city's MS4. 
(b)	Stormwater discharges from significant construction activities shall be treated or managed on site in accordance with appropriate federal, state or local permits and regulations, prior to discharge to the city's MS4. Erosion, sediment and pollution control for the construction site shall be properly implemented, maintained and operated according to a stormwater pollution prevention plan required by an NPDES permit for the discharge of stormwater from construction activities, or according to a state permit issued by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or St. Johns River Water Management District. 
(c)	Construction activity which is not defined as significant is still characterized as an illicit connection or illicit discharge if the activity causes an impairment of the operation of the MS4 or contributes to the failure of the MS4 to meet any local, state or federal requirements, including, but not limited to, NPDES permits. 
(d)	The owners or operators of industrial facilities, commercial entities and construction sites which discharge stormwater to the city's MS4 shall provide prior written notification to the city of the discharge and shall have received prior approval of the discharge from the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-18-09)  
Sec. 30-240. - Control of pollutant contributions from interconnected municipal storm sewer systems. 
The discharge of stormwater between interconnected state, county, cities or other MS4s shall not be permitted to cause the city's MS4 to be in violation of the provisions of an NPDES permit. Owners of any portion of the City of DeBary's interconnected MS4 shall be responsible for controlling the quality and quantity of discharge of stormwater to the city's MS4. 
(Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-18-09)  
Sec. 30-241. - Prohibition of illicit discharges and illicit connections. 
(a)	Illicit discharges and illicit connections to the city's MS4 are prohibited. 
(b)	Failure to report a connection to the city's MS4 or to waters of the United States from industrial activities, commercial entities or construction activities constitutes an illicit connection. 
(c)	Failure to report to the city a discharge to the city's MS4 or to waters of the United States from industrial activities, commercial entities or construction activities constitutes an illicit discharge. 
(d)	Any discharge to the city's MS4 or to waters of the United States which is in violation of federal, state or local permits or regulations constitutes an illicit discharge. 
(e)	Persons responsible for illicit discharges or illicit connections shall immediately cease the illicit discharge or illicit connection, and obtain appropriate approvals from applicable regulatory agencies prior to resuming the discharge or connection. 
(Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-18-09)  
Sec. 30-242. - Inspection and monitoring for compliance. 
City personnel shall be granted access for inspection of facilities discharging or suspected of discharging to the city's MS4 or waters of the United States in order to effectuate the provisions of this ordinance and to investigate violations or potential violations of any of the terms herein. All structures and processes which allow discharges to the city's MS4, as well as records concerning them, shall be made accessible to the city's personnel for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-18-09)  
Sec. 30-243. - Maintenance of structures. 
Structural control and other BMPs used for controlling the discharge of pollutants to the city's MS4 or to waters of the United States shall be operated and maintained so as to function in accordance with permitted design and performance criteria and in compliance with federal, state or local permit conditions and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-18-09)  
Sec. 30-244. - Exemptions. 
The following activities shall not be considered an illicit discharge or illicit connection, unless such activities cause, or significantly contribute to, the impairment of the use of the city's MS4 or the violation of the conditions of the city's NPDES permit: 
(1)	Discharges from: 
a.	Water line flushing; 
b.	Flushing of reclaimed water lines; 
c.	Street cleaning; 
d.	Sidewalk/building power washing; 
e.	Construction dust control; 
f.	Landscape irrigation; 
g.	Diverted stream flows or lake waters; 
h.	Foundation, footing and roof drains; 
i.	Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 Code of Federal Register 35.205(20)); 
j.	Discharges from potable water sources; 
k.	Air conditioning condensate or cooling water; 
l.	Irrigation water; 
m.	Springs; 
n.	Lawn watering; 
o.	Individual residential car washing; 
p.	Flows from riparian habitat and wetlands; and 
q.	Discharges or flow from emergency firefighting activities and emergency response activities done in accordance with adopted spill response/action plan. 
(2)	Discharges for which all appropriate federal, state and local permits have been obtained and which are in compliance with the conditions of said permits. 
(Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-18-09)  
Sec. 30-245. - Discharges of polluting matter in storm systems prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to drain, deposit, place or otherwise discharge pollutants into any stormwater system within the city, or to cause or permit to be drained, deposited, placed or otherwise discharged into such stormwater systems any organic or inorganic matter which causes pollution, pursuant to the water quality standards established by all applicable regulatory agencies. Polluting matter includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Petroleum products, including, but not limited to oil, gasoline and grease; 
(2)	Solid waste 
(3)	Paints; 
(4)	Steam cleaning waste; 
(5)	Pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers; 
(6)	Degreasers, solvents; 
(7)	Sanitary sewage; 
(8)	Chemically treated cooling water; 
(9)	Antifreeze and other automotive products; 
(10)	Lawn clippings, leaves, branches, etc.; 
(11)	Animal carcasses; 
(12)	Recreational vehicle waters; 
(13)	Dyes; 
(14)	Construction materials; 
(15)	Any liquids in quantity or quality which are capable of causing a violation of the city's NPDES stormwater permit; and 
(16)	Solids in such quantities or of such size capable of causing interference or obstruction to the flow in the city's stormwater system. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to wash any public or private streets, buildings, sidewalks or parking areas, unless all visible debris and sediments have been removed prior to washing. If the removal of the debris and sediments is not feasible (as determined by the city manager), then the street, building, etc., may only be washed with the city manager's written approval, which may include requirements to clean the affected drainage pipelines or provide treatment of wastewater to prevent downstream pollution. 
(Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-18-09)  
Sec. 30-246. - Enforcement, penalties and legal proceedings. 
(a)	This regulation may be administered by the city manager. All persons in violation of this regulation shall remedy such violations immediately. All persons in violation shall, in addition to all other required remedial actions, upon detection and/or written notification by the city, provide a written response to the city manager outlining the temporary and permanent measures that will be taken to correct the violation and a proposed schedule for completion of the corrective measures. All such proposals for corrective action are subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(b)	The city manager is authorized to issue cease and to desist orders in the form of written official notices hand delivered or sent by registered mail to the person(s) believed to be responsible for the violation and/or the owner of the property from or on which the violation is believed to be occurring. Specific activities and operations may be ordered to cease based upon the following conditions: 
(1)	In a situation that may have a serious effect on the health, safety or welfare of the public or the environment, including the quality of stormwater in the city's MS4; or 
(2)	When irreversible or irreparable harm may result, in the reasonable opinion of the city manager, and immediate cessation of the activity is necessary to protect the quality of the stormwater in the city's MS4, the public or the environment. 
(c)	Any person who violates this regulation and/or who fails to comply with the requirements of any provision of this regulation shall, without limitation on the city's legal recourse, be subject to prosecution before the code enforcement board of the city. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)	In addition to any fines which may be imposed by the code enforcement board, persons responsible for violation of this regulation shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city in sampling, analyzing and/or monitoring the discharge, together with all state and/or federal fines imposed as a result of the discharge and cost of removing, remedying or properly treating the discharge. 
(e)	Should any person responsible for a violation of this regulation fail to take the remedial action as required by the city, the city shall take such remedial action, and all costs incurred by the city shall be the responsibility of the person or persons responsible for the violation, and the city may record a lien against the personal and/or real property of the violators to recover said costs and to collect all fines and penalties imposed. 
(f)	In addition to the remedies provided herein, the city may make application to a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief to restrain any person from violating or continuing to violate the provisions of this regulation. In addition, the city may also seek entry of a court order requiring restoration and mitigation of any impacted facilities, land or waters, and may request any other appropriate legal remedy, including reimbursement of court costs. The city shall be entitled to an award of attorney's fees in prosecuting such actions, together with all attorney's fees and costs on appeal. 
(g)	In accordance with DeBary City Code, any person willfully or negligently violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Additionally, any person who has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be liable to the city for damages, for as long as the violation continues, together with attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses incurred by the city associated with the enforcement activities, including, but not limited to, sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(h)	The city may elect to take any or all of the above remedies concurrently, and the pursuit of one shall not preclude the pursuit of another. 
(i)	Any fines or other funds received as a result of enforcement action under this regulation and which are not used for the specific purposes enumerated herein shall be deposited into the stormwater utility fund, established under DeBary City Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 3-18-09)  
Secs. 30-247—30-259. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FERTILIZER MANAGEMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, adopted April 15, 2009, added §§ 30-247 through 30-258 to the Code. Because reserved sections including those numbers had been added to the end of art. VII to accommodate growth, the sections of art. VIII have been redesignated as set out herein at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 30-260. - Definitions. 
Apply or application means the physical deposit, placement, or release of fertilizer upon soil or turf. 
Applicator means any person who applies fertilizer. 
Article means chapter 30, article VIII of the DeBary Code of Ordinances, as amended, unless otherwise specified. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means the practice or combination of practices based on research, field testing and/or expert review, determined to be the most effective and practicable on-location means, including economic and technological consideration, that minimize the negative environmental impacts associated with the installation and maintenance of lawns, turf and landscapes. 
Commercial applicator means any person who applies fertilizer in exchange for money, goods, services or other valuable consideration and who is required by law, ordinance, or regulation to obtain a Volusia County local business tax certificate. 
City-approved best management practices training program means a program approved as such in writing by the manager of the city. The program shall include the most current version of the "Florida Green Industries Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources in Florida, June 2002," as revised, as well as the provisions of this article. The city will maintain a publicly available list of approved training programs. 
Fertilizer means any substance or mixture of substances, excluding pesticides, organic composts, and fertilizer derived from biosolids, that contains one or more recognized plant nutrients and promotes plant growth, or controls soil acidity or alkalinity, or provides other soil enrichment, or provides other corrective measures to the soil. 
Guaranteed analysis means the percentage of plant nutrients or measures of neutralizing capability claimed to be present in a fertilizer. 
Golf course means any public or private area of land designed and used exclusively for playing or practicing golf, including tees, fairways, greens, rough areas, hazards and driving ranges (stand-alone ranges or those associated with a golf course). A golf course shall also include the following uses if they are accessory to the above uses: clubhouses, and all facilities adjacent to and associated with the daily operations of the above-referenced areas. Golf-related structures or features on residentially zoned private land shall not constitute a golf course. 
Groundcover means plants used in mass as alternative to turf or lawn and/or to create variety in landscape; usually not having a mature height over two feet tall. 
Person means any person, natural or artificial, individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation, company, agent, employee, or any other legal entity, the United States of America, and the state of Florida and all political subdivisions, regions, districts, municipalities, and public agencies. 
Slow-release means nitrogen in a form which delays its availability for plant uptake and use for an extended period after application, or which extends its availability to the plant longer than a readily available, rapid or quick-release product. This definition includes the terms "controlled-release," "timed-release," "slowly-available," and "water-insoluble." 
Turf, sod, or lawn means a mat layer of monocotyledonous plants, including, but not limited to, Bahia, Bermuda, centipede, Paspalum, St. Augustine, and zoysia, or other groundcover. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-15-09)  
Sec. 30-261. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable throughout all of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-15-09)  
Sec. 30-262. - Weather restrictions. 
No fertilizer containing nitrogen or phosphorus shall be applied to turf during a period for which the National Weather Service has issued any of the following advisories for any portion of the city: a severe thunderstorm warning or watch, flood warning or watch, tropical storm warning or watch, hurricane warning or watch, or a three-day cone of uncertainty. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-15-09)  
Sec. 30-263. - Fertilizer content; application rate. 
(a)	All fertilizer shall be labeled in accordance with F.S. § 576.031 (2007), as it may be amended or superseded. 
(b)	No fertilizer containing phosphorus shall be applied to turf unless a phosphorus deficiency in the soil underlying the turf is demonstrated by a soil analysis test performed by a state-certified laboratory within one year of the phosphorus application. Any person who obtains such a soil analysis test showing a phosphorus deficiency and who wishes to apply phosphorus to turf shall mail a copy of the test results to the City of DeBary, Attention: City Manager, 16 Colomba Road, DeBary, Florida 32713 within 30 days of receipt of results. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, phosphorus shall not be applied to turf at a rate greater than one-quarter of one pound of phosphorus per 1,000 square feet per application, not to exceed one-half pound of phosphorus per 1,000 square feet per year. 
(c)	No fertilizer containing nitrogen shall be applied to turf unless at least 50 percent of its nitrogen content is slow release as indicated on the guaranteed analysis label, with no more than one pound total nitrogen per 1,000 square feet of area per application. 
(d)	Notwithstanding subsection (c), commercial applicators may apply fertilizer to turf at a rate that does not exceed one-half of one pound of readily available nitrogen per 1,000 square feet of area, provided, however, that any application that exceeds one-half of one pound of nitrogen shall conform to subsection (c). 
(e)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no fertilizer shall be applied to turf at a rate that exceeds the limits per plant species set forth below: 
Plant Species/Nitrogen Limit: 
Bahia grass: 	2—4 pounds of nitrogen per 1,000 square feet per year 
Bermuda grass: 	4—6 pounds of nitrogen per 1,000 square feet per year 
Centipede grass: 	2—3 pounds of nitrogen per 1,000 square feet per year 
St. Augustine grass: 	2—5 pounds of nitrogen per 1,000 square feet per year 
Zoysia grass: 	3—6 pounds of nitrogen per 1,000 square feet per year 
 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-15-09)  
Sec. 30-264. - Fertilizer-free zones. 
(a)	No fertilizer shall be applied within ten feet of any lake, pond, stream, water body, water course, or canal. Additionally, no fertilizer shall be applied within ten (feet of any wetland as defined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (chapter 62-340, Florida Administrative Code, as it may be amended or superseded). 
(b)	No fertilizer shall be deposited, washed, swept, or blown off—intentionally or inadvertently—onto any impervious surface, public right-of-way, public property, stormwater drain, ditch, conveyance, or water body. 
(c)	A low-maintenance zone is strongly recommended—though not required—for all areas within six feet of the normal high-water elevation of any lake, pond, stream, water body, water course or canal, or any wetland. Low-maintenance zones should be planted and managed in such a way as to minimize the need for watering, mowing, and other active maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-15-09)  
Sec. 30-265. - Mode of application. 
Broadcast spreaders applying fertilizers must be equipped with deflector shields positioned to deflect fertilizer from all impervious surfaces, rights-of-way, stormwater drains, ditches, conveyances, and water bodies. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-15-09)  
Sec. 30-266. - Grass clippings and vegetative material/debris. 
Grass clippings and/or vegetative material/debris shall not be deposited, washed, swept, or blown off—intentionally or inadvertently—onto any impervious surface, public right-of-way, stormwater drain, ditch, conveyance, or water body. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-15-09)  
Sec. 30-267. - Exemptions. 
(a)	Sections 30-263 through 30-266 of this article shall not apply to golf courses; provided, however, fertilizer shall not be applied to golf courses in excess of the provisions of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) document, BMPs for the Enhancement of Environmental Quality on Florida Golf Courses, January 2007, as FDEP updates or supersedes it from time to time. 
(b)	This article shall not apply to any bona fide farm operation that the city is without authority to regulate with regard to fertilizer application pursuant to the Florida Right to Farm Act, F.S. § 823.14, et seq. (2007), as it may be amended. 
(c)	This article shall not apply to sports turf areas at parks and athletic fields. 
(d)	This article shall not apply to newly established turf for 60 days after installation. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-15-09)  
Sec. 30-268. - Training requirements; proof of compliance. 
(a)	No commercial applicator shall cause fertilizer to be applied, except at his or her own residence, without proof of successful completion of a city-approved best management practices training program, unless he or she is under the direct physical supervision of a person who has proof of successful completion of such a training program. 
(b)	Each commercial applicator shall ensure that each applicator he or she employs has successfully completed a city-approved best management practices training program within 90 days of initial employment and shall ensure that prior to the successful completion of said program, each employee applicator shall work under the direct physical supervision of a person who has successfully completed said program. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-15-09)  
Sec. 30-269. - Commercial applicators. 
Prior to obtaining a Volusia County local business tax certificate for a business that provides landscape services, each commercial applicator shall obtain a certificate of completion from a city-approved best management practices training program. Commercial applicators who hold a Volusia County local business tax certificate as of the effective date of this article shall provide such certificate of completion to the City of DeBary City Manager's office by October 31, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-15-09)  
Sec. 30-270. - Variances. 
(a)	All requests for a variance(s) from the requirements of this article shall be made in writing to the City Council of DeBary. The city council may require the applicant's variance request to provide such information as necessary to carry out the purpose of this article. The city council may approve, approve with conditions or deny requests for variances. A variance may be granted if strict application of the city fertilizer management ordinance would lead to unreasonable or unfair results in particular instances, provided that the applicant demonstrates with particularity that compliance will result in a substantial economic, health or other hardship on the applicant requesting the variance or those served by the applicant. 
(b)	Variances may be issued by the city council only upon satisfaction of the following: 
(1)	A showing of good and sufficient cause by the applicant and that the cause is not self-imposed; and 
(2)	A determination by the city council that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief; and 
(3)	A determination by the city council that failure to grant the variance would result in a practical difficulty or a physical hardship affecting the applicant's economic use of the property; and 
(4)	A determination by the city council that the granting of the variance will not result in threats to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-15-09)  
Sec. 30-271. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article, or any provision of any resolution enacted pursuant to the authority of this article. Any person who violates any provision of this article, or any provision of any resolution enacted pursuant to the authority of this article may be punished in accordance with chapter 1, section 1-15. 
(b)	In addition to the enforcement provisions provided, the city may avail itself of any other legal or equitable remedy available to it including, without limitation, injunctive relief, in the enforcement of any provision of this article or any provision of any resolution enacted pursuant to the authority of this article. Any person violating this article shall be held liable for all costs incurred by the city in connection with enforcing this article, or any resolution enacted pursuant to the authority of this article including, but not limited to, attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 4-15-09)  
ARTICLE IX. - WATER CONSERVATION ORDINANCE FOR LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-09, § 1, adopted May 6, 2009, added §§ 30-259 through 30-266 to the Code. Because those numbers already existed in art. VIII, the sections of art. IX have been redesignated as set out herein at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 30-285. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this article to implement procedures that promote water conservation through more efficient landscape irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 03-09, § 1, 5-6-09)  
Sec. 30-286. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. 
Address means the house number of a physical location of a specific property. This includes "rural route" numbers but excludes post office box numbers. If a lot number in a mobile home park or similar community is used by the U.S. Postal Service to determine a delivery location, the lot number shall be the property's address. An "even-numbered address" means an address ending in the numbers 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 or the letters A—M. An "odd-numbered address" means an address ending in the numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 or the letters N—Z. 
District means the St. Johns River Water Management District. 
Landscape irrigation means the outside watering of plants in a landscape such as shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens and other such flora that are situated in such diverse locations as residential areas, public, commercial, and industrial establishments, and public medians and rights-of-way. "Landscape irrigation" does not include agricultural crops, nursery plants, cemeteries, golf course greens, tees, fairways, primary roughs, and vegetation associated with recreational areas such as playgrounds, football, baseball, and soccer fields. 
Nonresidential landscape irrigation means the irrigation of landscape not included within the definition of "residential landscape irrigation," such as that associated with public, commercial and industrial property, including commercial or transient housing units, hotel and motel units, and public medians and rights-of-way. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
Residential landscape irrigation means the irrigation of landscape associated with any housing unit having sanitary and kitchen facilities designed to accommodate one or more residents, including multiple housing units and mobile homes. 
(Ord. No. 03-09, § 1, 5-6-09)  
Sec. 30-287. - Landscape irrigation schedules. 
(a)	When daylight saving time is in effect, landscape irrigation shall occur only in accordance with the following irrigation schedule: 
(1)	Residential landscape irrigation at odd-numbered addresses or no address may occur only on Wednesday and Saturday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(2)	Residential landscape irrigation at even-numbered addresses may occur only on Thursday and Sunday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(3)	Nonresidential landscape irrigation may occur only on Tuesday and Friday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(4)	No more than three-fourths inch of water may be applied per irrigation zone on each day that irrigation occurs, and in no event shall irrigation occur for more than one hour per irrigation zone on each day that irrigation occurs. 
(b)	When eastern standard time is in effect, landscape irrigation shall occur only in accordance with the following irrigation schedule: 
(1)	Residential landscape irrigation at odd-numbered addresses or no address may occur only on Saturday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(2)	Residential landscape irrigation at even-numbered addresses may occur only on Sunday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(3)	Nonresidential landscape irrigation may occur only on Tuesday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(4)	No more than three-fourths inch of water may be applied per irrigation zone on each day that irrigation occurs, and in no event shall irrigation occur for more than one hour per irrigation zone on each day that irrigation occurs. 
(c)	All landscape irrigation shall be limited in amount to only that necessary to meet landscape needs. 
(Ord. No. 03-09, § 1, 5-6-09)  
Sec. 30-288. - Exceptions to the landscape irrigation schedules. 
Landscape irrigation shall be subject to the following irrigation schedule exceptions: 
(1)	Irrigation using a micro-spray, micro-jet, drip or bubbler irrigation system is allowed anytime. 
(2)	Irrigation of new landscape is allowed at any time of day on any day for the initial 30 days and every other day for the next 30 days for a total of one 60-day period, provided that the irrigation is limited to the minimum amount necessary for such landscape establishment. 
(3)	Watering in of chemicals, including insecticides, pesticides, fertilizers, fungicides, and herbicides, when required by law, the manufacturer, or best management practices, is allowed at any time of day on any day within 24 hours of application. Watering in of chemicals shall not exceed one-fourth inch of water per application except as otherwise required by law, the manufacturer, or best management practices. 
(4)	Irrigation systems may be operated at any time of day on any day for maintenance and repair purposes not to exceed 20 minutes per hour per zone. 
(5)	Irrigation using a hand-held hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle is allowed at any time of day on any day. 
(6)	Discharge of water from a water-to-air air-conditioning unit or other water-dependent cooling system is not limited. 
(7)	The use of water from a reclaimed water system is allowed anytime. For the purpose of this paragraph, a reclaimed water system includes systems in which the primary source is reclaimed water, which may or may not be supplemented from another source during peak demand periods. 
(8)	The use of recycled water from wet detention treatment ponds for irrigation is allowed anytime provided the ponds are not augmented from any ground or off-site surface water, or public supply sources. 
(Ord. No. 03-09, § 1, 5-6-09)  
Sec. 30-289. - Variance from specific day of the week limitations. 
A variance from the specific landscape irrigation days or day set forth in section 30-287 may be granted if strict application of the scheduled days or day would lead to unreasonable or unfair results in particular instances, provided that the applicant demonstrates with particularity that compliance with the scheduled days or day will result in a substantial economic, health or other hardship on the applicant requesting the variance or those served by the applicant. Where a contiguous property is divided into different zones, a variance may be granted hereunder so that each zone may be irrigated on different days or day than other zones of the property. However, in no event shall a variance allow a single zone to be irrigated more than two days per week during daylight savings time or more than one day per week during eastern standard time. 
(Ord. No. 03-09, § 1, 5-6-09)  
Sec. 30-290. - Application of article. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to each person located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-09, § 1, 5-6-09)  
Sec. 30-291. - Enforcement officials. 
Law enforcement officials having jurisdiction in the area governed by this article are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. In addition, the city manager may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this ordinance to the city's neighborhood improvement office. 
(Ord. No. 03-09, § 1, 5-6-09)  
Sec. 30-292. - Penalties. 
Violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to the penalties listed in chapter 2, article III, Code Enforcement, of the DeBary Code of Ordinances. 
Each day in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. Enforcement officials shall provide violators with no more than one written warning. In addition to the civil sanctions contained herein, the city may take any other appropriate legal action, including, but not limited to, injunctive action to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-09, § 1, 5-6-09)  
Secs. 30-393—30-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 30-300. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city to establish a process to address the amount of abandoned real property located within the city. It is the city's further intent to specifically establish an abandoned residential and commercial property program as a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods and commercial districts from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned properties. 
(Ord. No. 03-12, § III, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 30-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned real property means any structure, building or dwelling unit, as defined under the City of DeBary Land Development Code, and the land on which it is situated thereon, that is vacant and is under a current notice of default, or subject to a recorded lis pendens, or notice of mortgagee's sale by the lender or a pending tax assessors lien sale and/or properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale. 
Accessible property means real property that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc. 
Accessible structure means a structure, building, or dwelling unit that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
Enforcement officer means any employee or agent of the city whose duty it is to enforce codes and ordinances enacted by the city council, including but not necessarily limited to, the city manager, assistant city manager, chief building official, planning administrator, neighborhood improvement officer, police chief, police officer, fire chief, fire enforcement officer, and any other person designated in writing by the city manager. 
Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of debris or refuse on abandoned real property, as defined herein, statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents, among other evidence that the property is vacant. 
Foreclosure means a procedure in equity whereby a mortgagee either takes title to or forces the sale of the mortgagor's property to satisfy the debt if the mortgagor defaults. 
Private real property means all land and improvements other than public land and improvements. 
Property means any real property approved for residential or commercial use, or portion thereof located in the city, including buildings, structures or dwelling units situated on the property. For purposes of this article only, property does not include property owned or subject to control of the city or any of its governmental bodies. 
Property management company means a local property manager, property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the maintenance of abandoned real property. 
Public property means all canals and waterways, lands and improvements owned by a governmental body or any governmental agency including but not limited to easements and rights-of-way. 
Residential building means any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property. 
Vacant or vacated means a structure, building or dwelling unit deemed to be vacated and to have become vacant whenever an occupying owner or tenant ceases to occupy the structure, building or dwelling unit according to its intended use. 
(Ord. No. 03-12, § III, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 30-302. - Applicability. 
This article shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or subject to any other law or provision for same, but shall rather be an additional remedy available to the city above and beyond any other state, county and/or local provisions for same. 
(Ord. No. 03-12, § III, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 30-303. - Registration of abandoned property. 
(a)	Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the city shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the mortgage, upon default by the mortgagor, prior to the issue of a notice of default. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it shall be deemed abandoned and the mortgagee shall, within ten days of the inspection, register the property with the city manager, or his or her designee, or the city's agent, on forms provided by the city. A registration is required for each vacant residential property, or vacant commercial property. Land that has not been cleared and is in its natural state is not considered improved property for the purposes of this section. 
(b)	Registration pursuant to this article shall contain the name of the mortgagee, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee, a direct contact name and telephone number of mortgagee facsimile number and e-mail address and, in the case of a corporation or out-of-area mortgagee, the local property management company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property. The mailing address shall not be a post office box. 
(c)	The local property management company will be named in the registration and available to be contacted by the city, or the city's agent, Monday through Friday between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(d)	An annual registration fee in the amount of $150.00 per property, shall accompany the registration form(s). 
(e)	This article shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
(f)	Properties subject to this article shall remain under an annual registration requirement, security and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain vacant or until mortgagee no longer has a security interest in the property. 
(g)	Any person or corporation that has registered a property under this article must report any change of information contained in the registration to the city manager, or his or her designee, or the City's agent, within ten (10) days of the change. 
(h)	If the property is owned by a corporate mortgagee, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform bi-weekly inspections to verify compliance with requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws. 
(i)	The property shall be posted with the name and 24-hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than an eight-inch by ten-inch sign. The posting shall contain the following language: 
THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY: 
TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL: 
The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible or, if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location as close as possible to the main door entrance of the property. Exterior posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant materials. 
(j)	Upon the request of the city, the local property management company shall provide a copy of the inspection reports to neighborhood improvement office. 
(k)	Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly maintain the property shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-12, § III, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 30-304. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)	Properties subject to this article shall be maintained according to the City of DeBary Code of Ordinances, including but not limited to Chapter 30 as well as the City of DeBary Land Development Code. 
(b)	The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 03-12, § III, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 30-305. - Security requirements. 
(a)	Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons or animals. 
(b)	A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates, fences, swimming pool enclosures, and other openings of such size that may allow a child or adult to access the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing or boarding of the window. 
(Ord. No. 03-12, § III, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 30-306. - Immunity of enforcement officer. 
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the enforcement officer shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-12, § III, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 30-307. - Additional authority. 
The city manager, or his or her designee, shall have authority to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to: securing any and all door, window or other openings; abatement of any health, safety, or sanitary hazards; additional landscape or lawn maintenance measures; or other measures as may be reasonably required for safety purposes or to help prevent further decline of the property. 
(Ord. No. 03-12, § III, 8-1-12)  
Sec. 30-308. - Penalties and enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced and penalties imposed pursuant to Chapter 2, Article III, of the City of DeBary Code of Ordinances, as well as all other remedies allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 03-12, § III, 8-1-12)  
Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement, § 2-86 et seq.; adoption of the national electric code, § 14-61 et seq.; hazardous materials cost recovery for accidental spills, § 30-191 et seq. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and protection, F.S. ch. 633. 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Adoption of Standard Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code. 
(a)	Standard Fire Prevention Code adopted. The Standard Fire Prevention Code, 1994 edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the county manager, Thomas C. Kelly Administration Center, in the City of DeLand, Florida, is hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this article, as if set forth in extenso, as the Standard Fire Prevention Code for the city. 
(b)	Life Safety Code adopted. The Life Safety Code, 1994 edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the county manager, Thomas C. Kelly Administration Center, in the City of DeLand, Florida, is hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this article, as if set forth in extenso, as the Life Safety Code for the city. 
(c)	Fees. Fees for permits and other related charges shall be set by resolution of the city council after due public notice and hearing thereon. 
(d)	Appeals. Any decision of the fire official pertaining to these codes may be appealed to the building code board of adjustments and appeals pursuant to the Standard Building Code, sections 5, 105 and A105.4. The member of the board from the public sector shall be replaced by an individual with expertise in fire safety standards for an appeal from the Life Safety Code only. 
(e)	Conflicts between adopted codes. In the event the building official and fire official are unable to agree on a resolution of a conflict between the Standard Building Code and the Life Safety Code, the building code board of adjustments and appeals shall resolve the conflict in favor of the code which offers the greatest degree of life safety or alternatives which would provide an equivalent degree of life safety and an equivalent method of construction. 
(f)	Conflicts with state or city regulations. In the event of any conflict between this article, the adopted codes of the city, and any applicable state or city law, ordinance, rule or regulation, the more stringent shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, §§ I—III, 3-2-94) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Minimum required standards, F.S. § 633.025(2).  
Sec. 34-2. - Penalties and enforcement. 
Violations of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the city, in addition to other remedies set forth herein, shall have the right to equitable or injunctive relief or such other legal or equitable remedy provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § III, 3-2-94)  
Sec. 34-3. - Fire inspection fees. 
(a)	The City of DeBary is hereby authorized to charge fire inspection and review fees intended to cover the cost of any such inspections and the administration thereof. For the purposes of this section, "fire department" shall mean and refer to any fire department or agency which provides fire services, inspection, and review to the citizens of DeBary, regardless of whether such fire department provides services as a department or agency of the City of DeBary, pursuant to an interlocal agreement with the City of DeBary, or pursuant to the terms of a mutual aid agreement or any other similar arrangement. 
(b)	Fire inspection fees shall be charged in connection with the following fire inspection and review services ("fire inspection services") provided by the fire department: 
(1)	Inspections: 
Fireworks display; 
Tents; 
Carnivals. 
(2)	Site-plan review; 
(3)	Fire sprinkler plan review; 
(4)	Hydro test; 
(5)	Fire alarm review; 
(6)	Commercial cooking; 
(7)	Annual inspection; 
(8)	Occupational inspections or business tax receipt inspections: 
1st reinspection; 
2nd reinspection; 
3rd reinspection; 
Any subsequent inspection. 
(9)	Additional fire inspection and review services as may be authorized or provided by the fire department. 
(c)	All requests and payments for the services identified in subsection (b) supra shall be made to the city manager or his/her designee. The applicable fire inspection fees must be paid to the city prior to rendition of fire inspection services. Upon receipt of payment, the city manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for instructing the fire department to provide the applicable fire inspection services. No requests for fire inspection services or payments of fire services fees shall be made directly to the fire department. 
(d)	Fire inspection fees shall be imposed, adjusted, and/or revised at rates and amounts as may be established by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 06-09, § 1, 12-2-09)  
Chapter 36 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 36-1—36-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEXUAL OFFENDER RESIDENCY 
 
Sec. 36-31. - Legislative findings and intent. 
(a)	The findings set forth in the recitals (whereas clauses) to Ordinance No. 16-05 are hereby adopted as additional legislative findings. 
(b)	The City Council of the City of DeBary hereby adopts the provisions of F.S. § 775.21(3)(a), which state as follows: 
"Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence, and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant." 
(c)	The City Council of the City of DeBary hereby adopts the provisions of F.S. § 947.1405(7), which provides, in pertinent part, that: 
"It is the finding of the Legislature that the population of offenders released from state prison into the community who meet the conditional release criteria poses the greatest threat to the public safety of the groups of offenders under community supervision. Therefore, the Department of Corrections is to provide intensive supervision by experienced correctional probation officers to conditional release offenders." 
(d)	The City Council of the City of DeBary hereby finds and determines that repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant and a drain on the resources of society. 
(e)	It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residences. 
(f)	. It is the desire of the City Council of the City of DeBary that the Volusia County School District carefully adhere to the provisions of F.S. § 947.1405(7), which relates to the requirement that school bus stops be located at least 1,000 feet of the persons who are the subject of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 9-6-05)  
Sec. 36-32. - Definitions. 
The following terms are defined as follows for the purposes of this Ordinance: 
Permanent residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more consecutive days. 
Temporary residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 2, 9-6-05)  
Sec. 36-33. - Prohibited residences of sexual offenders. 
(a)	It is prohibited and unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of F.S. §§ 794.001 01 800.04, 02 827.071, 03 or 847.0145, 04 [] regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, when the victim of the offense for which the conviction resulted was under 16 years of age at the time the offense was committed, to establish a permanent residence or a temporary residence located within the city when such residence is located within 2,500 feet of any school, day care center, public park, playground, recreational open spaces, library or church regardless of whether the school, day care center, public park, playground, recreational open spaces, library or church lies within the city limits of the City of DeBary, City of Orange City, City of Deltona, or unincorporated Volusia County. 
(b)	For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation requirement, distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outer property line of the school, day care center, public park, playground, recreational open spaces, library or church. 
(c)	A person residing within 2,500 feet of any school, day care center, public park, playground, recreational open spaces, library or church does not commit a violation of this Ordinance if any of the following apply: 
(1)	The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to F.S. §§ 775.21, 05 943.0435 06 or 944.607, 07 [] prior to August 1, 2005. 
(2)	The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)	The person is a minor. 
(4)	The school, day care center, public park, playground, recreational open spaces, library or church was opened after the person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to F.S. §§ 775.21, 08 943.0435 09 or 944.6070 10 []. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 3, 9-6-05) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Sexual battery. 02 Lewd or lascivious offenses committed upon or in the presence of persons less than 16 years of age. 03 Sexual performance by a child. 04 Selling or buying of minors. 

--- () --- 
The Florida Sexual Predators Act. 06 Registration of Sexual Offenders. 07 Notification of Department of Law Enforcement of Information on Sexual Offenders. 

--- () --- 
The Florida Sexual Predators Act. 09 Registration of Sexual Offenders. 10 Notification of Department of Law Enforcement of Information on Sexual Offenders. 
 
Sec. 36-34. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to certain sexual offenders and sexual predators. 
It is prohibited and unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within 2,500 feet of any school, day care center, public park, playground, recreational open spaces, library or church regardless of whether the school, day care center, public park, playground, recreational open spaces, library or church lies within the City Limits of the City of DeBary, City of Orange City, City of Deltona, or within unincorporated Volusia County. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 4, 9-6-05)  
Sec. 36-35. - Application of article/existing contracts. 
The provisions of this article shall not be applied to persons residing at a prohibited location on the effective date of this article such that it is not the intent of this article to impair valid, existing and bona fide contract rights; provided, however, that the provisions of this article shall apply upon termination of any leasehold relationship arising from a landlord tenant relationship or the expiration of a lease. When a person who is the subject of this article changes residences, this article shall fully apply to such persons. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 5, 9-6-05)  
Chapter 38 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement, § 2-86 et seq.; hazardous materials cost recovery for accidental spills, § 30-191 et seq. 
State Law reference— Florida Litter Law, F.S. § 403.413; resource recovery and management, F.S. § 403.702 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Theft or vandalism of recycling containers or recyclable materials. 
(a)	Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated in this subsection: 
(1)	Recycling containers means the receptacles purchased, leased and distributed or placed by or on behalf of the city to city residents or locations for the intended use as a receptacle of recyclable materials. 
(2)	Recyclable materials means those materials which are capable of being recycled and which would otherwise be processed or disposed of as solid waste, including newspaper, glass and plastic containers, aluminum cans and such other materials as designated by resolution of the city council. 
(b)	Ownership of recyclable materials. All recyclable materials once placed at a collection location, or in a recycling container at a collection location, become the exclusive property of the city. Recovery of recyclable materials from any solid waste generated or brought within the city must occur prior to the placing in a recyclable container at a collection location, and such recovery shall be subject to state and local public health and safety laws. 
(c)	Prohibited acts. No person shall be permitted to collect, vandalize or remove either recycling containers or recyclable materials placed in or near the recycling containers or designated collection locations unless previously authorized by the city. 
(d)	Penalty. Violations of this section are punishable as provided in section 1-15.  
Secs. 38-2—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL FROM NONRESIDENTIAL PREMISES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized collector means any person or party who is franchised to collect and transport solid waste in the city. 
Building permit means a permit which allows construction and/or demolition on real property. 
Bulk trash means large cuttings of vegetative and wood matter which are part of normal yard maintenance which shall be placed in a commercial refuse bin. Bulk trash may include for commercial purposes matter or debris resulting from tree removal, land clearing, land development, building demolition or home improvement. Home improvements would include but not be limited to carpeting, cabinets, drywall, lumber, paneling and other such construction-related materials. Bulk trash does not include automobiles and automotive components, boats and internal combustion engines. In the case of a dispute between a collector and a customer as to what constitutes bulk trash, the situation will be reviewed and decided by the director, whose decision will be final. 
Commercial collection service means the solid waste collection and transportation service provided to commercial property, as defined in this section. 
Commercial property shall consist of but not be limited to improved real property utilized for wholesale or retail sales, motels, hotels, mobile home or recreational vehicle parks, bowling alleys, theaters, stores, offices, apartments and condominiums, not meeting the definition of multifamily dwelling unit, restaurants, service stations and garages, laundries and other cleaning establishments, manufacturing, industrial, agricultural and institutional establishments and residential improved real property which is ten acres or more in area and any property where construction or demolition is proceeding. For purposes of this article, the zoning of the property, whether the business is licensed or not or whether the activity is for profit or not, shall not affect its designation as commercial. 
Commercial refuse bin means a large container, made of nonabsorbent material, typically metal, for commercial solid waste or recyclable material, usually of the two-cubic-yard to eight-cubic-yard size, and roll-off containers of larger capacities, which are emptied into collection vehicles by mechanical means. 
Construction and demolition debris means materials generally considered not to be water soluble and nonhazardous in nature, including but not limited to steel, glass, brick, concrete or asphalt roofing material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard and lumber, from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees and other vegetative matter which normally result from land clearing or land development operations for a construction project. 
Container means a container made of nonabsorbent material, provided with a closely fitting cover and side bail handles, and of 30 gallons or less gross capacity. The container shall not weigh more than 60 pounds when loaded. The director may approve alternative containers. 
Customer means all persons occupying commercial property within the city, except those persons granted exemptions. 
Director means that person designated by the city council by interlocal agreement or appointment. 
Disposal area means any site, location, tract of land, area, building or premises used for solid waste accumulation or disposal which has been permitted by the state department of environmental protection. 
Franchise means a nonexclusive grant awarded by the city council to a collector to provide collection and/or transportation service to commercial property within the city. 
Garbage means all putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from growing, processing, marketing and preparation of food items, including containers in which packaged. 
Garden trash means all accumulations of leaves, grass or shrubbery cuttings and other refuse attendant to the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines, trees and tree limbs. Garden trash shall be placed in containers or bundled. Such term does not include those items defined as bulk trash. 
Hazardous waste means waste or a combination of waste and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating, reversible illness, or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. Such terms shall include any substance determined to be a hazardous waste by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the state department of environmental protection. 
Industrial waste means any solid waste accumulations of metal, metal products, minerals, chemicals, rock, cement, asphalt, tar, oil, grease, glass, crockery, rubber, tires, bottles, cans, lumber, sawdust, waste from animal packing or slaughterhouses, or other materials usually created by an industrial enterprise. 
Infectious wastes means those wastes which may cause disease or reasonably be suspected of harboring pathogenic organisms. Included are wastes resulting from the operation of medical clinics, hospitals and other facilities producing wastes which may consist of but are not limited to diseased human and animal parts, contaminated bandages, pathological specimens, hypodermic needles, contaminated clothing and surgical gloves. 
Junk means any tangible item such as furniture, appliances, bicycles (excluding motor vehicles) or similar property not having a useful purpose to the owner or abandoned by the owner and not included within the definition of the term "garbage," "garden trash" or "rubbish." 
Maximum allowable collection rate means the maximum rate established by the city council which collectors may charge their customers for commercial collection service, except for roll-off containers. 
Multifamily dwelling unit means any building or structure containing four or less dwelling units held under common ownership and either under common roof or having common walls or a cooperative agreement for provision of services. 
Occupational license means a license granting the privilege of engaging in any business, profession or occupation at a particular location. 
Occupational waste means solid waste generated on the job by nonstationary businesses, e.g., lawn services, contractors and roofers. 
Packer truck means a vehicle equipped with a packer unit, hydraulically operated for loading and unloading of solid waste. 
Parkway means that portion of the street right-of-way paralleling any public thoroughfare between the curbline or paving line and the abutting property line. 
Refuse means a combination of or mixture of garbage, trash, rubbish or any other solid waste materials. 
Rubbish means refuse, accumulation of paper, excelsior, rags, wooden or paper boxes or containers, sweepings, and all other accumulations of any nature other than garbage, which are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of stores, offices and other business places, and also any bottles, cans or other containers which, due to their ability to retain water, may serve as breeding places for mosquitoes or other water-breeding insects. 
Solid waste is a general term that includes the specific terms "garbage," "garden trash," "junk," "rubbish," "refuse," "construction and demolition debris" and "bulk trash." 
Special waste means any waste that requires special handling due to regulatory requirement or physical properties as determined by the director. 
Street means an open public right-of-way or dedicated right-of-way with passable access. 
Transportation license means a license issued for a period of one year which allows persons to transport solid waste, including occupational waste by the generator of such occupational waste, provided that the person owns and operates an approved vehicle for the collection and transportation of the solid waste. 
Truck means any truck, trailer, conveyance, equipment or vehicle used to collect and/or transport solid waste upon or along a public highway approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-32. - Penalty. 
Violations of this article are punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-33. - Authority. 
Under the authority of F.S. § 166.021, this article is hereby enacted. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94) 
State Law reference— Local government solid waste management responsibilities, F.S. § 403.706.  
Sec. 38-34. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)	The purpose of this article is to ensure that all solid waste generated and accumulated within the city shall be collected, removed and disposed of by an authorized collector, except as otherwise provided in this article, in a proper, sanitary and efficient manner, to eliminate illegal dumping within the city, and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b)	It is the intent of the city that collection and transporting of solid waste is to be done only by those authorized by the city and that disposal shall be done only at a city-designated solid waste disposal area. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-35. - Prima facie evidence of accumulation of waste. 
The fact that any real property is improved and located within the city shall be prima facie evidence that solid waste is being generated or accumulated upon such property and that the property is thus subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-36. - Enforcement. 
Compliance with the requirements of this article shall be regulated through the issuance of occupational licenses, building permits, tipping fee receipts and spot checks. Proof of compliance with this article must be demonstrated before licenses or permits are issued or renewed. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-37. - Duties of owners and occupants of commercial property; containers. 
(a)	Proper disposal of waste required. It shall be the responsibility of all owners/occupants of commercial property to dispose of their solid waste in a manner which would not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b)	Use of collection service. All owners/occupants of commercial property are mandated to subscribe to solid waste commercial collection service with a collector franchised by the city, unless authorized to do otherwise pursuant to this article, at a rate agreed upon by the parties, but not to exceed the maximum allowable collection rate. It shall be a violation of this article to dispose of solid waste except as provided in this article. 
(c)	Provision and maintenance of containers. It shall be the responsibility of the owners/occupants of commercial property to provide approved containers or refuse bins adequate to contain all solid waste generated from the commercial property. The commercial refuse bin may be leased from the franchised collector. The owner/occupant shall maintain the containers or refuse bins and the area of their location in a clean and sanitary condition. Spillage from over-filled containers or refuse bins will not be picked up by the collector. 
(d)	Unacceptable containers. Any privately owned container or refuse bin which is in disrepair due to the lack of a well-fitting cover or the presence of holes, cracks or tears in the bottom or sides may be condemned and so marked by the collector. Any container so marked must be immediately replaced by the owner/occupant with acceptable containers as specified in this article. 
(e)	Obstruction of containers. Customers shall not permit persons, objects, obstructions or vehicles to hinder in any way whatsoever the servicing of the container or refuse bin by the authorized collector's vehicles and personnel. 
(f)	Placement of containers; enclosure; base. All commercial refuse bins, except approved recycling containers, shall be enclosed on at least three sides with a six-foot-high screen. The screen shall consist of a wood or cyclone slat fence or masonry wall or other approved screening material. The bin shall be enclosed in such a manner that said bin will be screened from public streets and adjoining properties. A concrete or asphalt pad or other approved material shall be provided as a base for the bin. The pad shall be at the approximate level of the service vehicle approach area so that the truck loading mechanism can align with the container's sleeves. The screened enclosure area or container shall not be located within any street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-38. - Exemptions. 
(a)	Criteria. Exemptions from the requirement for solid waste collection for owners/occupants of commercial property shall be granted as follows: 
(1)	Exemptions shall be granted by the director only on individual parcels that contain one individual commercial establishment, and where: 
a.	The owner/occupant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the solid waste generated on the property is being disposed of on the property in conformance with all applicable rules and regulations; or 
b.	The owner/occupant collects and transports the solid waste generated on the property, provided that: 
1.	The solid waste is disposed of at a designated solid waste disposal area; 
2.	The vehicles utilized are leased or owned solely by the owner/occupant; 
3.	The personnel utilized are employed solely by the owner/occupant; and 
4.	The owner/occupant has obtained a transportation license from the director in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)	An exemption may be granted where the property is receiving residential service pursuant to article III of this chapter. 
(3)	No individual exemption shall be granted by the director until an application has been made in accordance with the provisions in this section. 
(4)	No individual exemption shall be granted by the director which may result in the degradation of the environment or create unsightly conditions. 
(5)	All individual exemptions granted by the director shall be for one year and may be withdrawn by the director if the conditions under which it was granted have changed. 
(6)	Any person receiving an individual exemption shall not collect and remove solid waste generated on his property except in the manner proposed in the application for the individual exemption. 
(b)	Procedure. The owner/occupant of any parcel of commercial property desiring an individual exemption may make application for such individual exemption to the director. The application shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall provide, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)	The name of the applicant; 
(2)	The legal description of the property for which the individual exemption is sought; 
(3)	The reason the individual exemption is sought; 
(4)	The proposed method of collection, removal and, where applicable, disposal of solid waste if the individual exemption is granted; and 
(5)	The ability to meet the requirements of subsection (a)(1)b of this section, if applicable. 
(c)	Revocation. If the director determines that solid waste is not being collected and disposed of in a proper, sanitary and effective manner from any improved real property for which an individual exemption has been issued, he shall revoke the individual exemption. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-39. - Frequency of collection. 
The frequency, type, nature and cost of the commercial collection service shall be established individually between the commercial property owner/occupant and the collector within the provisions of this article, but the frequency shall not be less than once a week. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-40. - Remote commercial units. 
If remote or isolated commercial properties are unable to attract commercial service, the owner/occupant may contract with the residential collector who has been granted an exclusive residential franchise for that area. The price shall not exceed the maximum allowable commercial rate. In the alternative, the city shall establish a list of all franchised commercial collectors who shall provide annual refuse service to the various isolated commercial properties. The collectors shall be rotated annually. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-41. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful and an offense against the city for any unauthorized person to do any of the following: 
(1)	To place, or cause to be placed, any solid waste upon the property of another. 
(2)	To convey or cause to be conveyed over and upon any of the streets, highways and alleys of the city any solid waste without a franchise or license, or both such franchise and license, unless exempt, as may be required by this article. 
(3)	To deposit or dispose of any solid waste in or upon any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way or alleyway, or any stream, ditch, river, pond, creek, park or public place in the city, except in authorized containers. 
(4)	To burn any solid waste generated or brought within the city unless all applicable permits have been obtained. 
(5)	To place solid waste out for collection in any location not serviced by the collector. 
(6)	To remove solid waste from any refuse bin or container, from a collection location, or from curbside. 
(7)	To accumulate or cause to be accumulated any solid waste in or upon any premises or lot owned by him or in his control for an unreasonable period of time without providing for legal disposal. 
(8)	To place out for collection any hazardous or infectious waste as defined in this article. Such waste shall be disposed of according to applicable law. 
(b)	The city incorporates the provisions of F.S. § 403.413, the Florida Litter Law, as part of this article, and violations of said law may be subject to the enforcement provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94)  
Secs. 38-42—38-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE COLLECTION SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 38-61. - Franchises. 
(a)	Generally. The city council may enter into franchise agreements with one or more persons to provide for commercial collection service within specified areas or the whole city. Applicants for franchises shall apply on forms and upon conditions required by the city. Franchises may only be granted after a duly noticed public hearing after considering the application and upon a resolution of the city council. 
(b)	Franchises not exclusive; term; cancellation. All franchises shall be nonexclusive and be for a term not to exceed five years. Such franchises may be cancelled by either party without cause upon one year's written notice. 
(c)	Fee. Each franchise holder shall pay to the city five percent of its gross revenues received from commercial collections within the city. This fee shall be paid monthly within 15 days of the end of the month. This fee shall go to help recover the costs associated with implementing and administering the mandatory commercial solid waste collection program and provide funds to facilitate the implementation of the Solid Waste Management Act of 1988. 
(d)	Failure to operate. Failure to operate for a period of 30 consecutive days shall be grounds for automatic cancellation of the franchise. 
(e)	Transfer. Franchises shall not be transferred without approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-62. - Establishment of rates. 
(a)	The city council shall hold a public hearing when needed to adopt a commercial rate schedule to include maximum allowable collection rates under this division. Such rate schedule may include: 
(1)	The maximum commercial collection service charge per uncompacted cubic yard of refuse bin. 
(2)	The franchise fee, including amount and conditions of payment. 
(3)	The transportation license fee. 
(b)	The city shall not grant an increase in the maximum allowable collection rate unless the financial statements required are submitted in a timely manner to the director. The director shall determine the financial statements required. 
(c)	The city shall not establish rates for roll-off containers or compacted refuse. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94) 
State Law reference— Local solid waste management fees, F.S. § 403.7049.  
Sec. 38-63. - Performance and operation standards; insurance; complaints. 
(a)	Performance standards. 
(1)	Vehicles and equipment generally. Collectors subject to this division shall use only vehicles commonly referred to as packer trucks, or roll-off vehicles, unless otherwise approved by the director, equipped with bodies which are watertight to a depth of not less than 12 inches, solid metal sides and pneumatic tires. Collectors shall provide sufficient equipment to maintain regular schedules of collection and to promptly and efficiently perform their duties. 
(2)	Vehicle covers. Each vehicle used for the collection of solid waste shall have a fully enclosed metal top. The director shall have the authority to waive the requirement of a fully enclosed top. As an alternative to a fully enclosed metal top, said vehicle may be equipped with a cover which may be a net with mesh not greater than 1½ inches, or a tarpaulin; and such cover shall be kept in good mechanical order and used to cover the load in traveling to, from and during the loading operation and if the contents are likely to be scattered when parked. 
(3)	Maintenance of equipment; identification on equipment. Equipment is to be maintained in a safe working condition and shall be painted uniformly according to standards maintained from time to time by the director. Equipment shall display the name, telephone number and vehicle number of the collector. 
(4)	Cleanup of scattered waste. Vehicles shall not be overloaded so as to scatter solid waste; but, when solid waste is scattered from a collector's vehicle for any reason, it shall be the responsibility of the collector to immediately pick up such scattered solid waste. Collectors shall not be responsible for cleaning up unsanitary conditions around the solid waste containers and refuse bins caused by carelessness of the customer. 
(5)	Washing and sanitizing of vehicles. Vehicles are to be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be washed thoroughly on the inside and sanitized with a suitable disinfectant and deodorant at such times as established by the director. All vehicles are to be washed on the outside at least weekly. 
(6)	Vehicles not to be left unattended; interference with traffic. Collector vehicles shall not interfere unduly with vehicular or pedestrian traffic and shall not be left unattended while in operation. 
(7)	Authority of director. The director shall decide any and all questions which may arise concerning the quality and acceptability of the work and services performed by collectors, the manner of performance, the rate of progress of said work, and the interpretation of the provisions of the franchise. Collectors shall have the right to appeal any decisions or findings of the director to the city council, whose findings and conclusions shall be final and binding. 
(8)	Cooperation with director. Collectors shall furnish the director with every reasonable opportunity for ascertaining whether or not the duties of the collector are being performed in accordance with the terms of the solid waste franchise. Collectors shall designate in writing the person to serve as agent between his organization and the city. 
(9)	Collectors shall make collections with a minimum of noise and disturbance to the occupants of the building and surrounding neighborhoods, and shall not collect from commercial or industrial collection points prior to the hour of 6:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Containers shall be handled carefully by the collectors and shall be thoroughly emptied and returned to their original locations. 
(b)	Operation standards. 
(1)	Supervision of operations; personnel. Collectors shall direct and supervise competent and qualified personnel and shall devote time and attention to the direction of the operation to ensure performance of obligations and duties as set forth in this article. 
(2)	Office; office hours. Collectors shall provide, at their own expense, a suitable office located within the city and shall maintain office hours from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., each weekday. In addition, collectors shall designate a representative for emergency calls during the hours of 5:00 p.m. Friday through 8:00 a.m. Monday. 
(3)	Collectors not to be considered employees or agents of city. Collectors shall perform their duties under the terms and conditions of the solid waste collection franchise as an independent contractor, and it shall not be construed or interpreted by virtue of such franchise that collectors or their employees are employees, agents or representatives of the city. 
(4)	Special contracts. The city may contract with other parties to collect and dispose of all or a portion of excessive amounts of trash, debris or refuse which has accumulated by reason of any hurricane, tropical storm, freeze, natural disaster, severe disturbance, riot or other calamity. 
(5)	Accounts. Collectors shall keep such uniform books and accounts as agreed upon by the city. It shall be the responsibility of collectors to maintain said books and records in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The city shall have the right to audit such books and accounts at any time during normal business hours upon giving reasonable notice to collectors as to the time and place of such audit. Each collector shall maintain separate financial books and records of the operating costs and capital expenses pertaining to the performance of his duties under the solid waste franchise. The collector shall submit any financial statements required by the director. 
(6)	Annual audit. Collectors shall provide annually, no later than July 31, at their own expense, a certified audit performed by an independent certified public accountant. Such audit shall be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards and shall cover the annual period ending not more than 180 days prior to July 31, and shall identify and separate that portion of the collector's business performed in their service areas. Financial statements required shall include a balance sheet, income statement, statement of changes in financial position, and other schedules as may be required. Collectors shall also make available to the city the work papers of the auditor in connection with the certified audit. Collectors shall be advised not to contract for audit services with auditors who will not make work papers available to the city. Failure of collectors to provide these audits timely may result in a fine of $100.00 per day for each day the audit is received after July 31. If the certified audit is not received within the prescribed time, the director shall notify the collector in writing. If the audit is not received within 30 days of such notice, the city may conduct its own audit. In such event, in addition to the late fee set forth in this subsection, the collector shall be liable to the city for all costs, including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, incurred as the result of delinquent audits. Upon request received no later than July 15 of a given year, the collector may obtain an extension not to exceed 30 days for good cause. 
(c)	Insurance. 
(1)	Workers' compensation insurance. Collectors shall provide and maintain workers' compensation insurance as required by law for all employees performing under a solid waste franchise. Collectors shall not subcontract unless subcontractors provide workers' compensation insurance as required by law. 
(2)	Indemnification. Collectors shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability, claims, damages, losses, expenses, proceedings and causes of action of every kind and nature arising out of or connected with the performance of their duties under a solid waste franchise. 
(3)	Public liability insurance. Collectors shall provide and maintain at all times without cost or expense to the city policies of insurance generally known as public liability policies, insuring the collector against any and all claims, demands or causes of action whatsoever for injuries received or damage to property relating to the performance of the duties of the collector under the terms and provisions of a solid waste franchise. Such policies of insurance shall insure the collector in an amount not less than $300,000.00 to cover any and all claims connected with any accident or occurrence that may arise or be claimed to have arisen against the collector. Coverage shall include comprehensive general liability and vehicular liability. The collector shall also obtain property damage insurance insuring the collector in an amount not less than $50,000.00 to cover the claims of any persons from a single or specific act that results in alleged damage to property. The insurance policies shall provide that the city shall be entitled to 30 days' written notice of any changes or cancellations of such policies. 
(4)	Certificate of insurance. A certificate of insurance indicating that the collector has coverage in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section shall be furnished by the collector to the director within ten days from the execution of a solid waste franchise. 
(d)	Complaints. When received, collectors shall record complaints on a form approved by the director and shall take appropriate steps to resolve the complaint within 24 hours after its receipt. If a complaint cannot be resolved within that time period, the collector shall notify the director on the approved forms of action taken to resolve the complaint. Collectors shall provide the director with a full written explanation of the disposition of any customer's complaint involving a claim of damage by a collector's employees or agents. 
(e)	Termination of franchise. The director shall notify, in writing, the collector of deficiencies or default in the performance of his duties under the franchise; and the collector shall have 15 days to correct same or to request, in writing, a hearing. The city council shall hear and act upon same within 60 days from receipt of such request and shall notify the collector of such action. The action by the city council shall be to confirm, in whole or in part, the specified deficiencies or default; or to relieve the collector of responsibilities for such deficiencies or default; or find that there are no deficiencies or default; or to take such action as deemed necessary in the judgment of the city council. Failure of the collector to remedy such specified items of deficiency or default in the notice by either the director or by the decision of the city council, whichever is applicable, within 15 days of receipt of such notice of such decisions, shall result in the termination of the franchise. In such an event, the collector shall have the right to seek a judicial review of such action within 30 days of same. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94; Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 4-2-08)  
Sec. 38-64. - Transportation license. 
(a)	Required; exceptions; fee. No person may transport commercial solid waste within the unincorporated area without possessing a franchise or first obtaining a transportation license from the director. This provision applies to all persons except authorized collectors and collectors for municipalities. Those persons utilizing their personal passenger cars, station wagons or pickup trucks of three-quarter-ton or less capacity to transport waste from property occupied by them to a solid waste disposal area designated by the director shall obtain a license at no cost. All persons operating other trucks, vehicles and trailers shall be required to obtain a license at the cost set by the city council. 
(b)	Businesses generating occupational waste. Certain persons who own businesses for which the transportation of certain occupational waste is an integral part of the performance of that occupation shall obtain a license to transport these wastes to the disposal area designated by the director. Examples of such occupations include but are not limited to building, roofing, demolition and land-clearing contractors; lawn care services; and tree surgeons. 
(c)	Application. Each such person shall make application for a license to the director on forms containing: 
(1)	The name and address of the person; 
(2)	A description of the occupation; 
(3)	A description of the solid waste the occupation produces; 
(4)	A description of the equipment to be utilized; and 
(5)	An agreement to comply with all conditions of the license and provisions of this article. 
(d)	Term. The length of term for a license to transport solid waste shall not exceed one year. 
(e)	Revocation. The director may revoke a license at any time if the person holding such license is in violation of the provisions of this article or the conditions of the license. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-65. - Free service. 
Unless authorized by the city council, there shall be no free services rendered for the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 94-20, § I, 3-23-94)  
Secs. 38-66—38-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL FROM RESIDENTIAL PREMISES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bulk trash means large cuttings of vegetative and wood matter which are part of normal yard maintenance which cannot be cut for placement in a container or bundle due to the material exceeding the weight and size restrictions for regular yard trash. Bulk trash shall be of a type as to be readily handled by the mechanical equipment of the collector. Bulk material shall not exceed four feet in length or 60 pounds in weight. Bulk trash does not include any form of matter or debris resulting from tree removal, land clearing, land development, building demolition or home improvement. For purposes of this subsection, home improvement materials include but are not limited to carpeting, cabinets, drywall, lumber, paneling and other such construction-related materials. Carpeting will be picked up by the collector if cut to lengths of six feet or less and bundled. Bulk trash does not include automobiles and automotive components, boats and internal combustion engines. In the case of a dispute between a collector and a customer as to what constitutes bulk trash, the situation will be reviewed and decided by the director, whose decision will be final. 
Collector means any person or party who is franchised to engage in collection or transportation of solid waste in the city. 
Container means a container made of nonabsorbent material, provided with a closely fitting cover and side bail handles, and of 30 gallons or less gross capacity. The container shall not weigh more than 60 pounds when loaded. The director may approve alternative containers. 
Customer means all persons owning residential improved real property within the district that is within the collector's service area, except for persons granted exemptions. 
Director means the director of the solid waste management division of the county department of public works, or designees. 
Disposal area means any site, location, tract of land, area, building or premises used for solid waste accumulation or disposal which has been permitted by the state department of environmental protection. 
District means the boundaries of the Volusia County Mandatory Solid Waste Collection and Disposal Special Assessment District created under the authority of chapter 110, article IV. 
Franchise means a franchise granted by the city council to a collector to provide collection and/or transportation service in city. 
Garbage means all putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from growing, processing, marketing and preparation of food items, including containers in which packaged. 
Garden trash means all accumulations of leaves, grass or shrubbery cuttings and other refuse attendant to the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines, trees and tree limbs. Garden trash shall be placed in containers or bundled. Such term does not include those items defined as bulk trash. 
Hazardous waste means waste or a combination of waste and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating, reversible illness, or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. Such term shall include any substance determined to be a hazardous waste by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the state department of environmental protection. 
Improved property means all residential improved real property as defined in this section that generates or is capable of generating solid waste. 
Industrial waste means any solid waste accumulations of metal, metal products, minerals, chemicals, rock, cement, asphalt, tar, oil, grease, glass, crockery, rubber, tires, bottles, cans, lumber, sawdust, waste from animal packing or slaughterhouses, or other materials usually created by an industrial enterprise. 
Infectious wastes means those wastes which may cause disease or reasonably be suspected of harboring pathogenic organisms. Included are wastes resulting from the operation of medical clinics, hospitals and other facilities producing wastes which may consist of but are not limited to diseased human and animal parts, contaminated bandages, pathological specimens, hypodermic needles, contaminated clothing and surgical gloves. 
Junk means any tangible item such as furniture, appliances, bicycles (excluding motor vehicles) or similar property not having a useful purpose to the owner or abandoned by the owner and not included within the definition of the term "garbage," "garden trash" or "rubbish." 
Multifamily dwelling unit means any building or structure containing four or less dwelling units held under common ownership and either under common roof or having common walls or a cooperative agreement for provision of services. 
Packer truck means a vehicle equipped with a packer unit, hydraulically operated for loading and unloading of solid waste. 
Parkway means that portion of the street right-of-way paralleling any public thoroughfare between the curbline or paving line and the abutting property line. 
Refuse means a combination of or mixture of garbage, trash, rubbish or any other solid waste materials. 
Residential improved real property means all single-family residences and multifamily dwelling units, as defined in this section. 
Residential service means the collection service provided by a franchise holder to any residential improved real property. 
Rubbish means refuse, accumulation of paper, excelsior, rags, wooden or paper boxes or containers, sweepings and all other accumulations of any nature other than garbage, which are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of stores, offices and other business places; also any bottles, cans or other containers which, due to their ability to retain water, may serve as breeding places for mosquitoes or other water-breeding insects. 
Service area means that exclusive area granted by a franchise issued by the city council to the collector for providing collection services under this article. 
Single-family residence means any building or structure designed or constructed for and capable of use as a residence for one family, regardless of the type of structure. Such term includes a mobile home or trailer that is erected on a separate parcel of property and not located within a commercial rental park. 
Solid waste is a general term that includes the specific terms "garbage," "garden trash," "junk, rubbish," "refuse" and "bulk trash." 
Special service means excessive amounts of debris, bulk trash or junk, as determined by the director to be beyond the annual special assessment charge and for which the customer must contract directly with the collector or have removed and disposed of according to law. 
Special waste means any waste that requires special handling due to regulatory requirements or physical properties as determined by the director. 
Street means an open public right-of-way or dedicated right-of-way with passable access. 
Truck means any truck, trailer, conveyance, equipment or vehicle used to collect and/or transport solid waste upon or along a public highway. Equipment used for residential collection and sources of putrescible waste must be a packer type unit or alternative approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § I, 3-23-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-92. - Penalty. 
Violations of this article are punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-93. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure that all solid waste generated and accumulated within the residential incorporated areas of the city shall be collected, removed and disposed of by an authorized collector, except as otherwise provided in this article, in a proper, sanitary and efficient manner, to eliminate illegal dumping within the city, to provide an effective method of collecting the special assessment charges provided in this article, and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-94. - Prima facie evidence of accumulation of waste. 
The fact that any residential improved real property that is located within the city is designed for occupancy, or is capable of being occupied, shall be prima facie evidence that solid waste is being produced or accumulated upon such property. Collection charges may be levied against newly constructed residential property as a lien immediately following the initial connection of permanent electric utility service or whenever the first solid waste is collected from said property by authorized collectors of the city, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-95. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful and an offense against the city for any unauthorized person to do any of the following: 
(1)	Place, or cause to be placed, any solid waste upon the property of another. 
(2)	Deposit or dispose of any solid waste in or upon any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way or alleyway, or any stream, ditch, river, pond, creek, park or public place in the city, except in authorized containers. 
(3)	Burn any solid waste generated or brought within the city unless all applicable permits have been obtained. 
(4)	Place solid waste out for collection in any location not serviced by the collector. 
(5)	Remove solid waste from any refuse bin or container, from a collection location, or from curbside. 
(6)	Accumulate or cause to be accumulated any solid waste in or upon any premises or lot owned by him or in his control for an unreasonable period of time without providing for legal disposal. 
(7)	Place out for collection any hazardous or infectious waste as defined in this article. Such waste shall be disposed of according to applicable law. 
(8)	Fail to comply with any provisions of this article. 
(b)	The city incorporates the provisions of F.S. § 403.413, the Florida Litter Law, as part of this article, and a violation of said law may be subject to the enforcement provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-96. - Charge imposed; collection. 
(a)	There is hereby imposed a charge for the collection of solid waste on all residential improved real property within the city The amount of such charge for such solid waste collection shall be the rate established by the city council and from time to time amended as provided in this article. The charge shall be imposed against the owners of all residential improved real property in the city, regardless of the occupancy of such property. 
(b)	Should the charge be increased, the city council shall, on or before October 1 of each year, hold a public hearing to adopt a rate resolution incorporating a schedule of the collection charges to be imposed upon the owners of all residential improved real property in the city. In addition, such schedule may also include the monthly rates and charges the collector may charge for providing collection to nonresidential improved real property within the city and special services to residential improved real property. 
(c)	Notice of said public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. Such public hearing may be continued to a date certain without the necessity of further newspaper advertisement or public notice. 
(d)	Collection charges incorporated in the rate resolution adopted under this section, applicable to each parcel of residential improved real property within the city, shall be the rate and charge for each such parcel for the collection of all solid waste generated on each such parcel except for special services. 
(e)	The owner and description of each parcel of residential improved real property shall be that designated on the real property assessment roll maintained by the county property appraiser. The charge shall be due and payable as provided on the bill. The charge shall become delinquent if not fully paid by the date on the bill for which the charge is imposed. All delinquent collection charges shall bear an initial penalty of three percent of the full amount of the charge if not paid by the date on the bill for which the charge is imposed, and an additional penalty of one percent per month on the delinquent principal amount on the first day of each month thereafter until such charge is paid in full. 
(f)	Residential improved real property not included on the property appraiser's assessment roll and not billed as a charge on the bill as provided in this section shall be billed a pro rata portion of the charge, if applicable. The total amount shall be collected by the city when permanent electrical service is authorized (certificate of occupancy issued) or solid waste collection service is authorized, whichever shall occur first. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § I, 3-23-94) 
State Law reference— Local solid waste management fees, F.S. § 403.7049.  
Sec. 38-97. - Charge to constitute lien; delinquency. 
(a)	Pursuant to F.S. § 180.135, all charges imposed against the owners of residential improved real property within the city under the provisions of this article shall constitute and are hereby imposed as liens against such residential improved real property as of the date the charge is imposed or when service is provided. Until fully paid and discharged or barred by law, such charges shall remain liens equal in rank and dignity with the lien of ad valorem taxes and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the residential real property involved. 
(b)	If any charges become delinquent by not being fully paid by the due date for which the charge is imposed and remains delinquent, the charge shall be subject to penalties for delinquent payment and issuance of liens with the potential for loss of title, as provided in F.S. ch. 173. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-98. - Compensation of collectors. 
(a)	For purposes of this section, the term "annual rate of compensation" shall mean the amount of money per residential improved real property within the area served by the contract collector for full solid waste collection services to be rendered by the contract collector to the residential improved real property within the city. The number of residential improved real properties entitled to full service in each service area beginning October 1 of each year shall be multiplied times the annual rate of compensation, and the result shall be the measure of contract compensation paid to each contract collector for providing full service within the collection contract area. Compensation shall be payable to each contract collector in monthly installments on the first of the month after which service has been provided, less any outstanding debt or administrative charges owed to the city by the contract collector. Based upon the property appraiser's records and the contract collector's records submitted, the director shall determine the number of residential improved real properties. The director shall provide monthly a list of certificates of occupancy issued for residential improved real property not billed for the service so that service may be provided and billed and the collector paid. 
(b)	In the event there exists residential improved real property entitled to full service and such residential improved real properties are not billed for the service, or at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy, referred to in this section as the unassessed residential improved real property, then each contract collector shall submit to the director for review and approval a list of all such unassessed residential improved real property within the collection contract areas. Upon approval of such list by the director, the contract collector may be directed to bill each of the unassessed residential improved real property within the collection contract area an amount equal to the rate of compensation, or a pro rata amount if the residential improved real property has not received full service for the entire period, or the city may issue the bill. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-99. - Exemptions. 
(a)	Criteria. Exemptions from the charge imposed by this article may be granted by the director on individual parcels of residential improved real property meeting either of the following guidelines: 
(1)	The property is ten acres in area or more and is a single-family residence; or 
(2)	The director determines that it would be in the best interest of the individual and the city to exempt the property from collection. 
In addition, each residence applying for an exemption under this section must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the owner has a proper, sanitary, effective method of removing, collecting and, where applicable, disposing of the solid waste generated on the owner's property, and that such disposal is being achieved in conformance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations. Residents receiving individual exemptions shall not collect and remove solid waste generated on their property except in the manner proposed in the application for the individual exemption. 
(b)	Procedure. The director shall review the application, and, if it meets the criteria set out in this section, the director shall grant an individual exemption. Upon the issuance of an individual exemption, the director shall have the property removed from the solid waste collection charge records. 
(c)	Appeals. If the director denies the application for an individual exemption, then within ten working days of the denial the applicant may make a formal written appeal to the city council. The decision of the city council shall be binding and final. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-100. - Duties of customers; placement of materials for collection. 
(a)	All garbage, garden trash and rubbish generated from a residential improved real property shall be placed by the customer in one or more garbage containers and placed at the applicable collection point on the designated collection day. Each residential improved real property shall be entitled to up to four 30-gallon containers twice a week for garbage, garden trash and rubbish. Any bulk trash or junk shall be placed at the collection point on the collection day designated for such collection. Excessive amounts of bulk trash or junk may require special service. 
(b)	Hazardous, industrial or infectious waste and special waste generated on residential improved real property shall not be placed for collection by the contract collector, but shall be disposed of according to law. 
(c)	Tree removal, land clearing, land development, building demolition or home improvement debris shall be disposed of as a special service. 
(d)	The customer shall place all solid waste at the following collection points for the specified categories of property: 
(1)	For a single-family residence, waste shall be placed at a point within the parkway abutting such residence no further than ten feet from the curbline or paving line, or, if no parkway exists which abuts the customer's property, at a point no greater than ten feet from the curbline or paving line, or, in the case of the existence of a drainage ditch, at a point within such dimensions adjacent to the nearest driveway. A customer who resides on a private road must allow access or place the container on the nearest public right-of-way. 
(2)	For multifamily dwelling units, waste shall be placed at a point designated by the collector in consultation with the customer, which will maximize economy of collection of the solid waste while considering the public health and the convenience of the customer. 
(3)	Collectors shall provide rear-door collection to certified handicapped residents unable to place containers pursuant to subsection (d)(1) of this section without extra charge for this service. 
(4)	Customers must ensure that containers may be picked up without interference from pets or other sources and that the safety of the collector not be threatened. 
(5)	Containers shall be removed within 12 hours after collection and shall not be placed at the collection point more than 12 hours prior to collection. 
(6)	Where road access is not passable by the collector, the customer must place solid waste at nearest passable public right-of-way. 
(e)	In the event of a dispute between the collector and a customer regarding the location of the collection point, the collector's decision shall be subject to review by the director. The director's decision shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § I, 3-23-94)  
Secs. 38-101—38-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE COLLECTION SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 38-131. - Collection contract required; terms and conditions. 
Contract collectors shall enter into a solid waste collection contract in the form of a franchise with the city for the sole and exclusive right and duty to provide for the collection of all solid waste from residential improved real property in a service area. The solid waste collection contract shall set forth the following terms and conditions: 
(1)	Service area. The service area shall be that area within the city agreed upon between the contract collector and the city in which the collector has the sole and exclusive right and duty to provide for the collection of all solid waste from residential improved real property located therein. If annexation by the city should occur, the contractor collector shall be bound by F.S. § 171.062(4). 
(2)	Term of contract. Solid waste collection contracts will be issued for a maximum period of two years with an option to renew annually for up to three additional years. Application for renewal must be made within 180 days of expiration of the contract. The contract shall automatically expire at the end of the term if the contract collector does not make application for renewal. All contracts and renewals may be granted by resolution only after a public hearing, and upon approval of the city council. Such contracts and any extensions thereof may be canceled by either party without cause upon one year's written notice. Contracts for renewal are at the discretion of the city council. The city council has the authority to enter into a contract for a service area by negotiation or by the bid process, lowest and best bid, after the expiration of the initial two-year term. 
(3)	Performance standards. 
a.	Routes; customer information card. Collectors shall establish routes within their service areas to obtain maximum efficiency of operation and shall file a copy of such routes with the director. Collectors shall supply residents in their collection areas printed cards containing information on rates, if applicable, general information, consumer responsibility, complaint procedure, collection schedules, holiday schedules, etc. All information on the cards must be approved by the director and may not be distributed prior to approval. 
b.	Right of city to deny routes. The city reserves the right to deny routes submitted by any contract collector. Collector vehicles may be denied access to certain streets, alleys and public ways where it is in the interest of the general public to do so because of street conditions, bridge location, or the nature of development of a particular area. Notice shall be given to the collectors by the director prior to such denial so as not to unduly interfere with a collector's normal operations. 
c.	Collection schedule. With the exception of solid waste defined as bulk trash and junk, contract collectors shall pick up and deliver to a solid waste disposal facility all solid waste placed by a customer at designated collection points on residential improved real property not less than two times per week with collections at least three days apart. The collectors shall notify the customers within their collection areas of the applicable schedule of collection at least ten days prior to an alteration in said schedule. 
d.	Collection of bulk trash and junk. Collectors shall pick up and deliver to the solid waste disposal facility all bulk trash or junk generated from residential improved real property and placed at the applicable collection point on specified days, twice a month, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. Customers placing excessive amounts of bulk trash or junk as determined by the director shall contract with the collector for special service to have such removed. The director shall arbitrate the reasonableness of the fee charged the customer. 
e.	Collection on holidays. Collectors shall not be required to furnish collection services on the following specified holidays: the Fourth of July, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. The collectors shall notify all customers whose normal collection day falls upon such holiday that no collection service will be provided on such day, and of the date of the makeup collection day, at least ten days and not more than 30 days prior to said holiday. Such notice shall be in the form of an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation published within the city, or individual notice; except individual notice must be given if the substitute collection day is not the next calendar day. 
f.	Required vehicles and equipment. Collectors shall use only vehicles commonly referred to as packer trucks, unless otherwise approved by the director, equipped with bodies which are watertight to a depth of not less than 12 inches, solid metal sides and pneumatic tires. Collectors shall provide sufficient equipment to maintain regular schedules of collection and to promptly and efficiently perform their contracted duties. 
g.	Maintenance of equipment; identification on equipment. Equipment is to be maintained in a clean and safe working condition and shall be painted uniformly according to standards maintained from time to time by the director. Equipment shall display the name, telephone number and vehicle number of the collector. 
h.	Vehicle covers. Each vehicle used for the collection of solid waste shall have a fully enclosed metal top. The director shall have the authority to waive the requirement of a fully enclosed metal top in the event of an emergency. As an alternative to a fully enclosed metal top, such vehicle may be equipped with a cover which may be a net with mesh not greater than 1½ inches, or a tarpaulin; and such cover shall be kept in good mechanical order and used to cover the load in traveling to, from and during the loading operation, or when parked if the contents are likely to be scattered if not covered. 
i.	Cleanup of scattered waste. Vehicles shall not be overloaded so as to scatter solid waste; but, when solid waste is scattered from a collector's vehicle for any reason, it shall be the responsibility of the collector to immediately pick up such scattered solid waste. Collectors shall not be responsible for cleaning up unsanitary conditions around the solid waste containers caused by carelessness of the customer. 
j.	Washing and sanitizing of vehicles. Vehicles are to be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be washed thoroughly on the inside and sanitized with a suitable disinfectant and deodorant at such times as established by the director. All vehicles are to be washed on the outside at least weekly. 
k.	Vehicles not to be left unattended; interference with traffic. Collector vehicles shall not interfere unduly with vehicular or pedestrian traffic and shall not be left unattended while in operation. 
l.	Time and manner of collection. Collectors shall make collections with a minimum of noise and disturbance to the occupants of the building and shall not collect from residential collection points prior to the hour of 6:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Containers shall be handled carefully by the collectors and shall be thoroughly emptied and returned and placed at least three feet from the edge of the pavement where possible, standing upright and with covers securely in place. If pushcarts are used, the containers shall be placed in the carts. 
m.	Protection of customer's property. Collectors shall use pedestrian walkways while on private property. No trespassing or crossing property to a neighbor's premises is permitted unless residents or owners of both such properties have approved. Care shall be taken to prevent damage to containers by unnecessarily rough treatment, and to property, including flowers, shrubs and other plantings. 
n.	Authority of director. The director shall decide any and all questions which may arise concerning the quality and acceptability of the work and services performed by collectors, the manner of performance, the rate of progress of said work, the interpretation of the provisions of the contract and the acceptable fulfillment of contract duties. In addition, the director shall determine the amount, quality and character of the work performed. Collectors shall have the right to appeal any decisions or findings of the director to the city council, whose findings and conclusions shall be final and binding. 
o.	Cooperation with director. Collectors shall furnish the director with every reasonable opportunity for ascertaining whether or not the duties of the collector are being performed in accordance with the terms of the solid waste collection contract. Collectors shall designate in writing the person to serve as agent between his organization and the city. 
(4)	Operation standards. 
a.	Supervision of operations; personnel. Collectors shall direct and supervise competent and qualified personnel and shall devote time and attention to the direction of the operation to ensure performance of obligations and duties as set forth in this article. 
b.	Office; office hours. Collectors shall provide, at their own expense, a suitable office located within the city and shall maintain office hours from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. each weekday. In addition, collectors shall designate a representative for emergency calls during the hours of 5:00 p.m. Friday through 8:00 a.m. Monday. 
c.	Accounts. Collectors shall keep such uniform books and accounts as agreed upon from time to time by the city. It shall be the responsibility of collectors to maintain said books and records in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The city shall have the right to audit said books and accounts at any time during normal business hours upon giving reasonable notice to collectors as to the time and place of such audit. Collectors shall maintain separate financial books and records of the operating costs and capital expenses pertaining to the performance of his duties under the solid waste collection contract. 
d.	Collectors not to be considered employees or agents of city. Collectors shall perform their duties under the terms and conditions of the solid waste collection contract as an independent contractor; and it shall not be construed or interpreted by virtue of such contract that collectors or their employees are employees, agents or representatives of the city. 
e.	Special contracts. The city may contract with other parties to collect and dispose of all or a portion of excessive amounts of trash, debris or refuse which has accumulated by reason of any hurricane, tropical storm, freeze, natural disaster, severe disturbance, riot or other calamity. Collectors may offer to remove and dispose of the excess debris or refuse within their collection areas at a rate to be established between the director and the collectors. 
f.	Annual audit. If required by the city, collectors shall provide annually, at their own expense, a certified audit performed by an independent certified public accountant. Such audit shall be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards and shall cover the annual period ending not more than 180 days prior to May 31, and shall identify and separate that portion of the collector's business performed in their service areas. Audits shall include a balance sheet, income statement, statement of changes in financial position and other schedules as may be required. Collectors shall also make available to the city the work papers of the auditor in connection with the certified audit. Collectors shall be advised not to contract for audit services with auditors who will not make work papers available to the city. Failure of collectors to provide these audits timely may result in a fine of $100.00 per day for each day the audit is received after May 31. If the certified audit is not received within the prescribed time, the director shall notify the collector in writing. If the audit is not received within 30 days of such notice, the city may conduct its own audit. In such event, in addition to the late fee set forth in this subsection, the collector shall be liable to the city for all costs, including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, incurred as the result of delinquent audits. Upon request received no later than May 15 of a given year, the collector may obtain an extension not to exceed 30 days for good cause. 
(5)	Insurance; performance bond. 
a.	Workers' compensation insurance. Collectors shall provide and maintain workers' compensation insurance as required by law for all employees performing under a solid waste collection contract. Collectors shall not subcontract unless subcontractors provide workers' compensation insurance as required by law. 
b.	Indemnification of city. Collectors shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability, claims, damages, losses, expenses, proceedings and causes of action of every kind and nature arising out of or connected with the performance of their duties under a solid waste collection contract. 
c.	Public liability insurance. Collectors shall provide and maintain at all times without cost or expense to the city policies of insurance generally known as public liability policies, insuring the collector against any and all claims, demands or causes of action whatsoever for injuries received or damage to property relating to the performance of the duties of the collector under the terms and provisions of a solid waste collection contract. Such policies of insurance shall insure the collector in an amount of not less than $300,000.00 to cover any and all claims connected with any accident or occurrence that may arise or be claimed to have arisen against the collector. Coverage shall include comprehensive general liability and vehicular liability. The collector shall also obtain property damage insurance insuring the collector in an amount not less than $50,000.00 to cover the claims of any persons from a single or specific act that results in alleged damage to property. Such insurance policies shall provide that the city shall be entitled to 30 days' written notice of any changes or cancellations of such policies. 
d.	Certificate of insurance. A certificate of insurance indicating that the collector has coverage in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section shall be furnished by the collector to the director within ten days from the execution of a solid waste collection contract. 
e.	Performance bond. The collector shall deposit with the city a performance bond or cash or certificate of deposit in lieu of such bond, in an amount up to $100,000.00. Interest earned on any certificate of deposit shall be delivered to the collector in accordance with the terms of such certificate. The deposit shall stand as a guaranty to the city of the faithful performance of the contract and shall be forfeited to the city in the event the collector refuses to perform his duty under the terms and conditions of the contract or the contract is breached by the collector. The amount of the bond shall be set by the director, depending on the number of customers, and shall cover a one-month period. 
(6)	Complaints. 
a.	When received, collectors shall record complaints on a form approved by the director and shall take appropriate steps to resolve the complaint within 24 hours after its receipt. If a complaint cannot be resolved within that time period, the collector shall notify the director on the approved forms of action taken to resolve the complaint. Collectors shall provide the director with a full written explanation of the disposition of any customer's complaint involving a claim of damage by a collector's employees or agents. 
b.	Administrative charges shall be assessed against collectors if complaints exceed two percent of the total residential customers within the area served by a collector during any city fiscal year, or if complaints exceed one percent of the total residential customers during any one calendar month. A schedule of administrative charges for failure to perform specific contract duties shall be attached and made a part of the standard solid waste collection contract. 
c.	Administrative charges shall be assessed on a monthly basis, and collectors will be notified at the end of each month in writing of any administrative charges assessed and the basis for each assessment. The collector may contest such assessments in writing to the city manager within five days of receipt of the assessment notice. Appeals from the city manager's decision shall be to the city council. The city council shall notify the collector in writing of action taken with respect to the collector's appeal. Decisions of the city council shall be final and binding. 
(7)	Termination of contract. The director shall notify, in writing, the collector of deficiencies or default in the performance of his duties under the contract; and the collector shall have 15 days to correct same or to request, in writing, a hearing. The city council shall hear and act upon same within 30 days from receipt of such request, and shall notify the collector of such action. The action by the city council shall be either to confirm, in whole or in part, the specified deficiencies or default, or to relieve the collector of responsibilities for such deficiencies or default, or find that there are no deficiencies or default, or such action as deemed necessary in the judgment of the city council. Failure of the collector to remedy said specified items of deficiency or default in the notice by either the director or by the decision of the council, whichever is applicable, within 15 days of receipt of such notice of such decisions shall result in the termination of the contract; and the city shall be relieved of any and all responsibilities and liabilities under the terms and provisions of the contract. In such an event, the collector shall have the right to seek a judicial review of such action within 30 days of such action. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § I, 3-23-94)  
Sec. 38-132. - Service areas. 
The city council shall have the power and authority to create exclusive service areas for any portion or the entire city, and to enter into contracts for the collection of solid waste within the area. The exclusive service areas may be for the collection of residential solid waste or commercial solid waste, or both. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § I, 3-23-94)  
Chapter 42 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Public safety advisory committee, § 2-66 et seq.; code enforcement, § 2-86 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited, § 6-5; property numbering system, § 14-196 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited, § 6-5. 
 
Sec. 42-36. - Use of rights-of-way. 
(a)	Consent required. Pursuant to the police power of the city, the city council hereby determines, in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, that the use of any city right-of-way, including appendages thereto, and the use of any public lands under the authority of the city council, except for their intended purpose, without prior written consent of the city shall be prohibited, except as necessary for the maintenance responsibilities set forth in section 30-53(b) of this code. 
(b)	Commercial use. The prohibition set out in subsection (a) of this section includes any commercial use, including but not limited to the sale of and display for sale of any merchandise, the servicing or repair of any vehicles except the rendering of emergency service, the storage or parking of vehicles and the display of advertising of any sort. 
(c)	Recreational use. Unless specifically designed for such purpose, the prohibition set out in subsection (a) of this section shall also include camping, sleeping, parking (except for emergency reasons), and any other use that would tend to obstruct traffic along the city rights-of-way, including appendages thereto, and to any other public lands under the authority of the city council, without prior written approval by the city. 
(d)	Penalty. Violations of this section are punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 94-30, § I, 4-6-94; Ord. No. 03-11, § 2, 4-20-11; Ord. No. 03-12, § II, 8-1-12)  
Secs. 42-37—42-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
Sec. 42-55. - Definitions. 
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Advertise means the act of publicly announcing or calling public attention to a person, thing, place or event and shall include, but not be limited to, the distribution of handbills or mass mailings, the use of outdoor advertising and announcements by radio, television or newspaper. 
Bicycle path means a public way intended primarily for bicyclists, at the side of a street or in or through a public park or other public property. 
Discrimination means any difference in the treatment or favor extended to a natural person, including exclusion or segregation because of race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry or sex. 
Outdoor assembly permit (also referred to herein as permit) means a permit as required by this article. 
Outdoor public assembly (also referred to herein as assembly or public assembly) means any ceremony, circus, show, exhibition, concert, pageant, rally, demonstration or parade which is held in or on any street, sidewalk, any public property or park. 
Parade means any procession, march or assembly wherein the participants travel by foot, vehicle or otherwise in or upon any street, or public parking facility within the city. 
Parks means those areas designed on the City Charter Park and Waterfront Property Map on file with the clerk of city council and incorporated by reference in the City Charter. 
Public issue or political speech or conduct means that noncommercial expression of ideas of public concern related to government, religion, economics, society, culture and matters of a similar nature as determined by the courts of controlling jurisdiction be entitled to the greatest protection of the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. 
Public property means any property generally open to the public owned by the United States, the county, or the state and any property owned by the city other than a street, a park or a sidewalk. 
Sidewalk means any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved. 
Street means any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any curb or shoulder, parkway, right-of-way or median strip thereof. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 1, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-56. - Activities exempt from this article. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)	Funeral processions. 
(2)	Lawful picketing or other orderly processions on the sidewalks that do not constitute loitering. 
(3)	A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 2, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-57. - Compliance by permittee with regulations. 
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions, and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The assembly chairperson or other person heading or leading such assembly shall carry the permit upon his person during the conduct of the assembly and shall display the permit upon demand to any officer of the Volusia County Sheriff's Office. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 3, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-58. - Regulations of parking on parade route. 
The Volusia County Sheriff or his designee shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The Volusia County Sheriff shall cause signs to be posted to such effect and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 4, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-59. - Required. 
(a)	No person shall conduct a parade or outdoor public assembly without obtaining a permit in accordance with this article. 
(b)	No person shall knowingly participate in a parade or public assembly on the city streets or in a city park or other public property for which a permit has not been granted. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 5, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-60. - Application. 
(a)	Any person seeking the issuance of an outdoor public assembly permit for the use of a park or for a parade shall file an application therefor with city manager or designee. 
(b)	The application shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the time on which the parade or public assembly is to be held. An application for a public assembly permit for a parade shall not be filed more than 180 days prior to the event. 
(c)	Where an applicant/intends to engage in public issue speech or conduct and the parade has been planned or scheduled by the applicant for less than 30 days prior to the time on which the public assembly is to be held, the application shall be filed at least five working days prior to the event. If, however, an application is filed in a shorter time frame due to the exigency of the nature of the issue, the city shall process such an application. 
(d)	The application shall be signed by the applicant under oath, and shall indicate whether the applicant intends to engage in public issue speech. 
(e)	Applications shall be on forms provided by the city manager or his designee and shall set forth the following information and such other information as from time to time may be required in order to allow the city manager to evaluate the application for compliance with this article: 
(1)	The name, place of residence, mailing address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the assembly. 
(2)	If the assembly is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)	The date when the assembly is to be conducted. 
(4)	The type of assembly, including a description of the activities which will occur during the event. 
(5)	The hours when such assembly will start and terminate. 
(6)	A description of any and all recording equipment, sound-amplification equipment, banners, signs or other attention-getting devices, including dimensions of and description of materials of any such banners, signs or devices which will be utilized in connection with the assembly. 
(7)	The approximate number of participants, including spectators, which can be reasonably anticipated. 
(8)	If the assembly is designed to be held by, on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the city manager a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the assembly, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(9)	The exact location of the assembly and, if the assembly is a parade, the location by streets of any marshaling area or areas for such parade. 
(10)	A designation of any public facilities or equipment proposed to be utilized. 
(11)	If the application is for a parade, the application shall also contain the following information: 
a.	The time at which units of the parade will begin to arrive at the marshaling area or areas, and the times at which all such units will be disbursed therefrom. 
b.	The starting time of the parade and the approximate length of time that the parade will last. 
c.	The route to be traveled, including the starting and ending points. 
d.	The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade and the type of animals and description of the vehicles. 
e.	A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets or sidewalks to be used. 
(12)	Whether alcoholic beverages will be sold or consumed at the event. 
(13)	A statement that the purpose of the assembly and the expected conduct of the participants will conform to all requirements of law, and all ordinances of the county and the city. 
(14)	A statement whether the assembly is for the purpose of public issue or political speech or conduct and if so, the specific purpose of the assembly and a general description of the proposed public issue or political speech or conduct. 
(15)	If the assembly is for the purpose of public issue or political speech or conduct, the amount of funds available to pay the cost of city services and whether a claim of indigence is made on behalf of the applicant or the person on whose behalf the application is made and whether the applicant requests a waiver of fees, costs and insurance requirements. 
(16)	The identity of the individual or entity which will be responsible for payment of city services. 
(17)	Such parade or public assembly is not for the primary purpose of advertising any product, goods or event that is primarily for private profit, and the parade itself is not primarily for profit. The prohibition against advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used in the parade. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 6, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-61. - Standards for issuance. 
(a)	The city manager or his designee shall issue a permit as provided for under this division [article] when, from a consideration of the application and from other information as may otherwise be obtained, it appears that: 
(1)	The conduct of the assembly will not unduly disturb the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic contiguous to the route or location of the assembly. 
{2)	The concentration of persons, animals and/or vehicles at the assembly will not interfere unduly with proper fire and law enforcement protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly area or other areas of the city. 
(3)	Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available in or adjacent to the assembly area and, if applicable, the marshaling area or areas. 
(4)	There are reasonable adequate parking places near the site of the assembly and, if applicable, marshaling area or areas, to accommodate the approximate number of vehicles reasonably expected to be driven to the assembly. 
(5)	The applicant has secured the law enforcement and other City services, if any, required under section 42-64 or has obtained a waiver of fees pursuant to subsection 42-62(c). 
(6)	If the assembly is a parade, such parade is not to be held for the primary purpose of advertising any product or goods or is not primarily for profit; provided, however, the prohibition against advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used in the conduct of the assembly. 
(7)	No outdoor public assembly permit application for the same time and location has been received which has been or will be granted. 
(8)	No outdoor public assembly permit application for the same time but in another location has been or will be granted where the law enforcement resources required for that prior public assembly are so great that, in combination with the subsequent proposed application, the resulting deployment of law enforcement services would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property. 
(9)	No event is scheduled elsewhere in the city where the law enforcement or other city resources required for that event are so great that the deployment of law enforcement or other city services for the proposed assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property. 
(10)	If alcoholic beverages are to be sold or served, proper permits must have been or will be obtained. Approval of a permit under this division [article] shall not eliminate the necessity for any other approvals for such sale or dispensation of alcoholic beverages as required by law or ordinance. 
(11)	Participants in the assembly shall not use sticks, lumber, metal poles or other objects to display signs or banners at the public assembly. 
(12)	Participants in the assembly will not violate the law in connection with the assembly. 
(13)	The content of signs, banners or speech, whether written or oral, except to the extent that such content constitutes a violation of any applicable law or ordinance, will not be considered by the city manager in acting upon the application. 
(b)	No permit shall be granted that allows for the erection or placement of any structure whether permanent or temporary, on a city street, sidewalk, or right-of-way unless advance approval for the erection or placement of the structure is obtained from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 7, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-62. - Permit fees, costs; waiver. 
(a)	Where an outdoor public assembly permit is requested, a nonrefundable fee of $40.00 to cover the administrative costs of processing the permit shall be paid to the city by the person applying for the permit at the time of filing of the application. 
(b)	If the application is for the use of city property or if city services shall be required for the assembly, the applicant shall pay for the charges in accordance with a schedule of fees approved by the mayor and city council prior to the issuance of the permit; provided, if the applicant is indigent and is engaged in public issue speech or conduct within the meaning of section 42-55 the applicant shall not be required to pay any fee described in this section. 
(c)	If the applicant is claiming indigency and is applying for an outdoor public assembly permit for the purpose of public issue speech or conduct the applicant shall apply to the mayor and city council stating that the applicant wishes a waiver of a portion or all of the costs of processing the permits and other City services. The city manager or the designee thereof, or the city attorney or the designee thereof, shall determine if the applicant fulfills the public issue and indigency requirement in order to receive a waiver of costs of the processing fee and city services. 
(d)	An applicant, who is indigent and intends to engage in public issue speech or conduct, shall not be required to meet the requirements of section 42-63. 
(e)	An applicant is indigent within the meaning of this section when the applicant is unable to pay the cost of city services required for a public assembly after the payment of basic expenses necessary for the continued operation and existence of the organization including, but not necessarily limited to, rent and utilities. As proof of such indigency, the applicant shall supply an affidavit of indigency together with such other information as is reasonably required in support thereof. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 8, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-63. - Financial responsibility. 
(a)	The applicant for an outdoor public assembly permit for a parade and any other person on whose behalf the application is made, by filing the application, does represent, stipulate, contract and agree to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the city and all of its officers and employees, including employees of the County of Volusia who provide contractual law enforcement services for the city from all suits, actions, damages, loss, liability and claims of any character, name or description brought for, or on account of, any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person or property arising out of the applicant's negligence, or negligence of its officers, agents, representatives, guests, employees, invitees or persons contracting with the applicant, whether it be sole negligence or joint negligence with others in connection with performance under the public assembly permit or by or on account of any act or omission, neglect or wrongdoing of the applicant, its officers, agents, representatives, guests, employees, invitees or persons contracting with the applicant. 
(b)	In addition to the requirements of subsection (a), no outdoor public assembly permit shall be issued for parades unless the applicant shall obtain and maintain for any and all activities associated with the parade, not limited to the staging of the parade, parade route, and disbanding of the parade, such commercial general liability insurance as shall provide coverage for the applicant for bodily injury and personal injury, including accidental death, as well as from claims for property damage which may arise from operations under the permit, whether such operations be by the applicant or by any of its agents, representatives, guests, employees, invitees or anyone contracting with the applicant or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them, except to the extent that claim arises from the negligent or wrongful conduct of the city or its employees. An occurrence type policy is preferred. The city shall be named as a certificate holder and as an additional insured on the policy. The policy limits of insurance shall not be less than $500,000.00 combined single limit each occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
(c)	At the time of the application for an outdoor public assembly permit for a parade, satisfactory proof that the insurance required by subsection (b) has been obtained shall be presented to the city manager or his designee. The requirement for satisfactory proof may be complied with either by depositing the insurance policy itself or by furnishing a certificate of insurance meeting the following specifications to the city manager: 
(1)	The insurance policy issued shall be listed and for each policy, the type of insurance, policy number, expiration date and limits of liability shall be shown. 
(2)	The certificate shall designate the city as certificate holder and as an additional insured and shall contain a statement to the effect that the policies listed are in force and that in the event of cancellation or any material change in a policy affecting the certificate holder at least ten days prior written notice shall be given to the certificate holder. 
(3)	Below the schedule of insurance in force, the certificate shall include a statement substantially as follows: "The comprehensive general liability policy listed above includes coverage of designated premises and coverage for contractual liability in compliance with the provisions of Section 42-63 of the DeBary City Code, for a parade to be held on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ ." 
(4)	The certificate of insurance shall be signed by an authorized agent of the issuing company or companies and shall have attached a copy of a power of attorney evidencing the agent's authority. 
(d)	If motor vehicles are to be included, evidence of public liability insurance with the same limits on vehicles may be accepted in lieu of the insurance required in subsections (b) and (c). 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 9, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-64. - Procedures for consideration. 
Upon receipt of a filed application, the city manager or his designee shall determine the extent to which law enforcement and other city services will be necessary for the assembly for the purposes of traffic control and public safety. This determination shall be based upon the size, location, duration, time and date of the event, the expected sale of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and intersections to be blocked and the need to detour or preempt ordinary citizen travel and use of the streets or sidewalks. If possible without disruption of ordinary city services or compromise to public safety, the event will be policed by regularly scheduled on-duty personnel. If additional city services for the assembly are deemed necessary, the applicant for the permit shall be so informed. The applicant shall have the duty to secure law enforcement and other city services deemed necessary at the sole expense of the applicant, who shall prepay or guarantee to prepay the expense of such protection unless a waiver of fees and costs has been granted pursuant to section 42-62, at the discretion of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 10, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-65. - Notice of denial. 
The city manager or designee shall act promptly upon a timely filed application for a permit. If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the action, stating the reason for the denial at least 48 hours prior to the event. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 11, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-66. - Public issue speech—Procedure. 
(a)	If a proposed parade or event involves a public issue speech, the city manager shall within seven calendar days of the filing date of the application, or by the date requested for the parade, or event, whichever comes first, either: 
(1)	Issue the public assembly permit and notify the applicant and appropriate city departments; 
(2)	Issue an alternative permit and notify the applicant and appropriate city departments; or 
(3)	Refuse to issue the permit and notify the applicant of the refusal. 
(b)	A refusal to issue the permit shall be based on the standards stated in section 42-61. 
(c)	The city manager shall, after consulting with the appropriate city departments, and after considering the fee schedule approved by city council, notify the applicant of an estimate of the dollar amount city services will cost. 
(d)	The notification required by subsection (a)(3) shall occur within three days of the filing date of the application, but no later than the scheduled date of the parade. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 12, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-67. - Public issue speech—Judicial review. 
(a)	If an application for a permit for engaging in an event, parade or demonstration conducted for the purpose of public issue speech or conduct is denied or if an alternative permit for such speech is tendered by the city and rejected by an applicant or applicants, the city shall either issue the requested permit or promptly initiate judicial proceedings for a determination of the lawfulness of the denial of the permit or, where an alternative permit has been rejected, the lawfulness of the tender of the alternative permit. Failure to notify the city within five days of the acceptance or rejection of the alternative permit shall be deemed a withdrawal of the permit application. 
(b)	If the issue for judicial determination described in subsection (a) is not heard and decided on the merits by a court of competent jurisdiction within ten days from the date that the action is filed or by the date for which the permit is requested, whichever comes first, the requested permit shall be deemed issued. 
(c)	The applicant may, but shall not be required to, comply with section 42-69 prior to judicial proceedings being instituted or concluded. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 13, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-68. - Alternative permits. 
(a)	Where an application for permit is denied by the city manager in the interest of traffic control and/or public safety, the city manager may authorize the conduct of the assembly on a date, at a time, or over a route or in a location different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternative permit shall within five days after notice of authorization accept or reject such alternative permit. Failure of the applicant to accept or reject the alternative permit within these five days shall be deemed to be a withdrawal of the permit application. In considering an alternative permit, the city manager shall consider the express purpose and the intent of the applicant's initial request and shall not act to deny the applicant an appropriate forum for the event through the alternative permit. An alternative permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a permit under this division [article]. 
(b)	In the event the mayor and city council grant a partial waiver of fees and costs pursuant to subsection 42-62(c), the clerk shall notify the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, that payment of any fees must be paid or payment guaranteed prior to the issuance of the permit. The mayor and city council shall instruct the city manager to recommend to the applicant an alternative permit whereby the event may be held without payment of any unwaived fees or costs. In recommending the alternative permit the purpose of the event shall be considered in order to provide the applicant with an appropriate forum. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 14, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-69. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)	Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade or public assembly permit to the mayor and city council. The denied applicant shall make the appeal within five days after receipt of the denial by filing a written notice with the city manager and city clerk. The mayor and city council shall act upon the appeal at the next scheduled meeting following receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(b)	In the event that the mayor and city council reject an applicant's appeal, the applicant may file a petition for writ of certiorari to the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 15, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-70. - Notice to city officials. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a permit, the city manager or his designee, shall send a copy thereof to each of the following: 
(1)	Mayor. 
(2)	City clerk. 
(3)	Volusia County Transportation Engineer. 
(4)	Volusia County Sheriff. 
(5)	Volusia County Chief of the Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 16, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-71. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)	The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to revoke a permit for a parade issued under this division [article] instantly upon violation of any one or more of the conditions or standards for issuance as herein set forth or when a public emergency arises where the law enforcement resources are required for that emergency are so great that deployment of law enforcement services for the assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or property. 
(b)	Where public issue speech or conduct is involved, the revocation of a permit shall be treated for all purposes as a denial of a permit under section 42-67, and all provisions of such section shall apply thereto. Notice of revocation hereunder shall be given to the permittee by the most practicable and expeditious means available under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 17, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-72. - Parks. 
No additional permit must be obtained for a public assembly in a park other than a permit pursuant to this division [article]. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 18, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-73. - Contents of permit. 
Each parade or public assembly permit shall state the following information: 
(1)	Starting and approximate ending time; 
(2)	Minimum speed of parade units; 
(3)	Maximum speed of parade units; 
(4)	Maximum interval of space to be maintained between parade units; 
(5)	The portions of the streets that may be occupied by the parade or public assembly; 
(6)	The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and 
(7)	Such other information as the city manager shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 19, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-74. - Public conduct during assemblies. 
(a)	Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any duly licensed assembly, or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in such assembly. 
(b)	Driving through parades. No driver of any vehicle, unless specifically permitted by an officer of the Volusia County Sheriff's Department, shall drive between the vehicles of persons comprising a duly licensed parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)	Parking on parade route or in area near assembly. The Volusia County Sheriff shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a parade or an area needed for the safe and efficient flow of traffic to or from an assembly. The Volusia County Sheriff shall post signs to such effect and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 20, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-75. - Discrimination prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any permittee, or any agent or employee of the permitee, either directly or indirectly: 
(1)	To discriminate against any natural person by refusing, withholding, or denying to such person any of the services, advantages, facilities or privileges offered or available to any other person attending the assembly, or by setting different rates or charges therefor, or by placing or attempting to place any such natural person in a separate and segregated section or area at the assembly. 
(2)	To publish, circulate, display, post or mail any written or printed communication or notice to the effect that any of the services, advantages, facilities or privileges of the assembly will be refused, withheld or denied to any natural person on account of the person's race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, or sex, or that the person's attendance and presence at the assembly is unwelcome or objectionable, or that the person will be prohibited from mingling with other persons at the assembly because of the person's race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry or sex. 
(3)	To aid, abet, incite or coerce the doing of any act declared herein to be unlawful, or to prevent or attempt to prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 21, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 42-76. - Penalties. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any assembly or block party without first having obtained permits therefor as herein provided. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to participate in an assembly or block party for which permits have not been granted. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of or responsible for the conduct of a duly licensed assembly or block party to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of a permit. 
(d)	Any person violating the provisions of any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment of not more than 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 19-96, § 22, 11-6-96)  
Chapter 46 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; ad valorem taxation, F.S. ch. 192 et seq.; occupational license tax, F.S. ch. 205. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 20-96, § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 1996, amended Art. II in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said article to read as herein set out. The former Art. II, §§ 46-36—46-43, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 94-18, §§ II—IX, adopted March 2, 1994.   Section 3 of Ord. No. 20-96, adopted Nov. 6, 1996, states: "Section 1 of this Ordinance, however, so much of Ordinance No. 94-18, City Code, as currently exists shall remain in effect insofar as it imposes a ten percent (10%) public service tax on local telephone service until such time as it is superseded by the imposition of a seven percent (7%) public service tax on telecommunications service as contained in Section 2 above [codified as Art. III of this chapter]. Section 2 above shall take effect 120 days after the City shall notify the companies responsible for collecting the public service tax on telecommunications service." 
State Law reference— Public service tax, F.S. § 166.231. 
 
Sec. 46-36. - Levied; amount. 
Pursuant to the authority and provisions of F.S. § 166.232, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each purchase of electricity and metered or bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured) within the corporate limit of the city a public service tax in the amount of ten percent. Such tax shall be calculated, levied and imposed upon each separate bill or statement for purchases rendered by the seller of the taxable item to each purchaser of such service. The tax shall not be applied against any fuel adjustment charge, which shall be stated separately on each bill. The term "fuel adjustment charge" means all increases in the cost of utility services to the ultimate consumer resulting from the increase in cost of fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973. The tax shall in every case be paid by the purchaser for the use of the city, to the seller at the time of paying the charge by the seller thereof, but not less often than monthly. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 1, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-37. - Seller to collect, pay over, discount for sellers. 
It shall be the duty of every seller of such utility service in acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the city as established by F.S. § 166.231, to collect from the purchaser at the time of payment for each service any tax imposed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this article. It shall be the responsibility of the seller/collector to remit all such taxes imposed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this article, whether or not such taxes were collected from the purchaser by the seller, to the city by the 15th of the month following the month of collection accompanied by a form as required by the city for the orderly reporting and certification of the necessary information. Such collections shall be paid to the city by the 15th of the month in accordance with the provisions of this article by the seller/collector for all such taxes levied and collected the immediately preceding month. If such tax collections are not received by the city until after the 15th of the month, taxes not received shall be delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 1, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-38. - Sellers failing to collect, report or pay over to city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to continue to sell or deliver any electricity or gas within the city who shall fail to collect, report and pay over to the city the taxes imposed and levied pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 1, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-39. - Exception for United States, churches, etc. 
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to purchases of electricity or gas by the United States government, the State of Florida and its political subdivisions as defined in F.S. § 1.01, (1991); or to any recognized church for use exclusively for church purposes; the purchase of natural gas or fuel oil by a public or private utility, either for resale or for use as fuel in the generation of electricity, or the purchase of fuel oil or kerosene for uses in aircraft engine fuel or propellant or for use in internal combustion engines. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 1, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-40. - Maintenance of records and inspection by the city. 
Each and every seller of an item or service referred to herein in section 46-36 above shall keep complete records showing all sales within the municipal boundaries of the city of such commodities or services, which records shall show the price charged upon each sale, the date thereof, and the date of payment thereof; and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during business hours on all business days, and such duly authorized agents shall have the right, power, and authority to make such transcripts or copies thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 1, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-41. - Fee allowed to seller for collection and record keeping. 
For the purpose of compensating the seller, the seller shall be allowed one percent of the amount of tax collected and due to the city in the form of a deduction from the amount collected for timely remittance. The deduction shall be allowed as compensation for keeping records and collection of tax and remitting the same. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 1, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-42. - Tax may be computed on aggregate amount of sales. 
In all cases where the seller of a taxable commodity or service collects the price thereof in monthly periods, the tax hereby levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of sales during such period: providing, that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 1, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-43. - Penalty for violation. 
Any purchaser willfully failing or refusing to pay the tax hereby imposed, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller violating the provisions hereof, or any officer, agent, or employee of any seller violating the provisions hereof, may be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the Volusia County Correctional Facility for a period not exceeding 60 days or by both such fines and imprisonment. The city may further bring suit to restrain, enjoin, or otherwise prevent the violation of this article, and shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees if it prevails in such suit. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 1, 11-6-96)  
Secs. 46-44—46-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TELECOMMUNICATION TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— See the editor's note to Art. II. 
Cross reference— Telecommunications, ch. 48. 
 
Sec. 46-66. - Levied; amount. 
Pursuant to the authority and provisions of F.S. § 166.231, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each and every purchase of telecommunications service, as defined by F.S. § 203.012, which occurs within the city and originates and terminates in this state, a public service tax in the amount of seven percent. Such tax shall apply to the total amount charged for any telecommunications service provided within the city or, if the location of the telecommunications service provided cannot be determined, the total amount billed for such telecommunications service, to a telephone or telephone number, a telecommunications number or device, or a customer's billing address located within the city, excluding public telephone charges collected on site, charges for any foreign exchange service or any private lien service except when such services are used or sold as a substitute for any telephone company switched service or dedicated facility by which a telephone company provides a communications path, access charges, and any customer access line charges paid to a local telephone company. However, telecommunications service as defined in F.S. § 203.012(5)(b), shall be taxed only on the monthly recurring customer service charges excluding variable usage charges. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 2, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-67. - Seller to collect, pay over, discount for sellers. 
It shall be the duty of every seller of such telecommunications service, in acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the city as established by F.S. § 166.231, to collect from the purchaser at the time of payment for such services any tax imposed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this article. It shall be the responsibility of the seller/collector to timely remit all such taxes imposed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this article, whether or not such taxes were collected from the purchaser by the seller, to the city by the 15th of the month immediately following the month of the levy and collection accompanied by a form as required by the city for the orderly reporting and certification of the necessary information. For the purpose of compensating the seller, the seller shall be allowed one percent of the amount of the tax collected for remittance. The deduction shall be allowed as compensation for the establishment of record keeping systems, for keeping the records, and for the collection and remittance of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 2, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-68. - Seller failing to collect, report or pay over to the city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to continue to provide any telecommunications service within the city who shall fail to collect, report and pay over to the city the taxes imposed and levied pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 2, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-69. - Exemption for governmental entities, churches, etc. 
(a)	The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to purchases of telecommunications services by the United States government, the State of Florida and its political subdivisions, or to any recognized church for use exclusively for church purposes. 
(b)	Purchases of local telephone service or other telecommunications service for use in the conduct of a telecommunications service for hire or otherwise for resale are exempt from the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 2, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-70. - Audit and remittance of taxes. 
(a)	The city may at its sole discretion conduct an audit of a seller/collector at such times as it deems necessary, to determine if the tax imposed and levied has been properly collected and remitted pursuant to the provision of this article. Each seller/collector of a taxable telecommunications service shall provide to the city, upon 60 days notice, access to all applicable records for such telecommunications service. In an audit, the telecommunications service provider shall be liable for only its taxable accounts collected corresponding to the information provided to it by the city. Any information received by the City or its agent in connection with such audit is confidential and exempt from the provisions of F.S. ch. 119.07(1), pursuant to the provisions of the Open Government Sunset Review Act in accordance with F.S. ch. 119.14. Records not located within the municipal limits of the city must be furnished by the seller to the city within 14 days of written demand. Should the seller fail to comply with the written demand, the city may authorize an agent or officer of the city to conduct an audit at the location where said records are maintained at the seller's expense. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the seller/collector to remit all such taxes whether collected or not. The city reserves the right to bill and collect from the seller/collector for unremitted taxes as may be discovered from an audit. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 2, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-71. - Penalty for violation. 
Any purchaser willfully failing or refusing to pay the tax hereby imposed, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller violating the provisions hereof, or any officer, agent, or employee of any seller violating the provisions hereof, may be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the Volusia County Correctional Facility for a period not exceeding 60 days or by both such fines and imprisonment. The city may further bring suit to restrain, enjoin, or otherwise prevent the violation of this article, and shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees if it prevails in such suit. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 2, 11-6-96)  
Sec. 46-72. - Rules and regulations authorized. 
The city manager or designee is hereby authorized to promulgate and establish reasonable rules and regulations for the reporting and payment of the tax imposed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 20-96, § 2, 11-6-96)  
Secs. 46-73—46-84. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION 
 
Sec. 46-85. - Exemption granted. 
(a)	In accordance with article VII, subsection 6(d), Florida Constitution, and F.S. § 196.075, the City Council of the City of DeBary authorizes an additional homestead exemption for any person who has the legal or equitable title to real estate and maintains thereon the permanent residence of the owner, who has attained age 65, and whose household income does not exceed $20,000.00 as adjusted annually by the CPI beginning January 1, 2001. 
(b)	In accordance with Article VII, subsection 6(d)(2), Florida Constitution, and F.S. § 196.075(2)(b), any person who has the legal or equitable title to real estate with a just value less than $250,000.00, has maintained permanent residency thereon for at least 25 years, who has attained age 65, and whose household income does not exceed $20,000.00, as adjusted annually by the CPI beginning January 1, 2001, shall be entitled to make application for an additional homestead exemption equal to the amount of the assessed value of the homestead. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 5-7-03; Ord. No. 08-13, § I, 8-7-13 )  
Sec. 46-86. - Applicability. 
The additional homestead exemption available under subsection 46-85(a) and/or 46-85(b) applies only to ad valorem taxes levied by the city. The additional homestead exemption available under subsection 46-85(a) shall apply to the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2004, and the additional homestead exemption available under subsection 46-85(b) shall apply to the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2014, and shall continue until this article or F.S. § 196.075 is repealed. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 2, 5-7-03; Ord. No. 08-13, § I, 8-7-13 )  
Sec. 46-87. - Exemption amount. 
The amount of the additional homestead exemption available under subsection 46-85(a) shall be $25,000.00. The amount of the additional homestead exemption available under subsection 46-85(b) shall be equal to the amount of the assessed value of the homestead. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 3, 5-7-03; Ord. No. 08-13, § I, 8-7-13 )  
Sec. 46-88. - Requirements. 
A taxpayer claiming the additional homestead exemption available under either or both subsection 46-85(a) or subsection 46-85(b) must comply with all requirements set forth in F.S. § 196.075, and complete all forms and provide all documents required by the Department of Revenue and the property appraiser. A taxpayer claiming either or both of the available additional homestead exemptions must file an application with the Volusia County Property Appraiser no later than March 1 of each year and supporting documentation no later than June 1 of each year for which such exemption is claimed. Failure of a taxpayer to file the required application and supporting documentation by March 1 and June 1, respectively, shall constitute a waiver of the additional homestead exemption available for that year. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 4, 5-7-03; Ord. No. 08-13, § I, 8-7-13 )  
Chapter 48 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Telecommunications tax, § 46-66 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 48-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "DeBary Telecommunications Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Franchise means the rights granted by the city to a grantee by which the city authorizes such grantee to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use and maintain a telecommunications system in the city. Any franchise awarded by an ordinance in accordance herewith shall be a nonexclusive franchise. 
Franchise agreement means an ordinance enacted by the city in favor of a grantee which is enforceable by the city and grantee and which sets forth the rights and obligations between the city and grantee arising out of the franchise. 
Grantee means the natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, association, joint venture, or organization of any kind granted a franchise by the city under this chapter and its lawful and approved successors. 
Grantor or city means the city as represented by the city council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
Public Service Commission or PSC means the agency charged with the powers and duties conferred on it by P.S. ch. 364, to regulate telecommunications companies and their facilities. 
Public way means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, easement, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or driveway now or hereafter existing as such within the city. 
Telecommunications system or communications system means a system of cables, conduits, poles, wires, supports and other structures and appurtenances as may be reasonably necessary for the construction, maintenance and operation of a communications system to be used by the grantee to provide for the transport of voice, data and video signals over a fiber optic network as permitted by the grantee's state and federal certifications, subject to the terms, conditions and exceptions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-3. - Intent. 
The city finds that the development of fiber optic communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents and business community of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with fiber optic telecommunications, the city further finds that the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city shall designate. It is the intent of this chapter and amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in these matters and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-4. - Rights reserved. 
The city hereby expressly reserves the following rights to: 
(1)	Exercise its governmental powers, now or hereafter, to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city. 
(2)	Adopt, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in the franchise and in any existing ordinances, such additional reasonable regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power. 
(3)	Renegotiate any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter should substantial sections of the chapter be rendered void by the Federal Communications Commission, Florida Public Service Commission, or by subsequent changes in applicable federal or state laws. The grantee shall also have the right to renegotiate the franchise in the circumstances set forth in this subsection (3). 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-5. - Compliance. 
A grantee shall not be relieved of any obligation to comply with any of the provisions of the franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder because of any failure of the city or its officers, agents or employees to enforce prompt compliance. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-6. - Alternative remedies. 
No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to bar the right of the city to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provisions of this chapter, the franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated under the franchise, whether administratively, judicially or both. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this chapter nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the city to recover fines, penalties or monetary damages (except where liquidated damages are otherwise prescribed) for such violation by the grantee or judicial enforcement of the grantee's obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief or mandate or any other administrative remedy or judicial remedy at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-7. - Existing franchises. 
All telecommunications system franchises, including amendments and extensions thereof, in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall remain in effect. This chapter shall apply to such franchises to the full extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Secs. 48-8—48-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 48-21. - Required. 
No telecommunications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the public ways in the franchise area or be allowed to operate without a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless exempt by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-22. - Authority to grant; terms and conditions of granting. 
(a)	The city may grant a telecommunications system franchise for all or any defined portion of the city. The service area shall be the entire area defined in the franchise agreement. The initial service area shall be that portion of the franchise area scheduled to receive initial service, as stated in the franchise agreement. 
(b)	If the city shall grant to a grantee a nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct, a telecommunications system within the franchise area, or a renewal of an existing franchise, the franchise shall constitute a right to provide the services of telecommunications system as required by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement shall include those provisions of the grantee's application for franchise that are finally negotiated and accepted by the city and grantee. Any franchise granted under the terms and conditions contained in this chapter shall be consistent with federal laws and regulations and state general laws and regulations. If a conflict occurs in the terms and conditions of the franchise and the terms and conditions on which the city can grant a franchise, the general law or statutory requirements shall, without exception, control. Any franchise granted is hereby made subject to the general ordinance provisions in effect in the proper exercise of the city's police power. 
(c)	Neither this chapter as a whole, nor any of its parts, portions or terms, shall be construed as granting or intending to grant to a grantee a franchise to use the city's public ways or other public places of the city, or any portion of the system for cable television, including, but not limited to, interactive and pay-per-view television, or any other uses not specified herein; but nothing herein shall preclude a grantee from entering into a contract for the use of any portion of the system with any person, firm, partnership or corporation; provided that such person, firm, partnership or corporation first obtains an appropriate franchise from the city and required certification from the state. 
(d)	Nothing in this franchise ordinance shall vest in grantee any property rights in city-owned property, nor shall the city be compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than, or in any fashion other than, in the city's judgment its own business or needs may require. 
(e)	The city shall not be liable to grantee or any other person or persons for any damage occurring to the property of grantee caused by employees of the city in the performance of their duties, nor shall the city be held liable to grantee or any other person or persons for the interruption of the company's service by actions of city employees in the performance of their duties. 
(f)	It is understood that there are within the city various streets which the city does not have the unqualified right to authorize grantee to use, because of reservations in favor of the dedicators or because of other legal impediments; therefore, in making this grant, the city does not warrant or represent as to any particular street or portion of a street that it has the right to authorize grantee to install or maintain portions of its system therein, and in each case the burden and responsibility for making such determination in advance of the installation shall be upon grantee. Upon request, city shall make available to grantee such information as to a particular property as it may have with respect to such reservations or other impediments. 
(g)	The right to use the streets herein granted is subject to the terms of all rights or franchises heretofore granted by the city, and to the terms of all rights or franchises hereafter granted by the city to companies primarily engaged in the rendering of public utilities service. 
(h)	The city, in the proper exercise of its municipal powers and duties with respect to its public rights-of-way, shall have access to all manholes of the grantee in such public rights-of-way. 
(i)	In accepting the franchise, the grantee acknowledges that at all times during the term of this franchise, its rights shall be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city, and to such reasonable regulation of public rights-of-way as the city shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the public. Any inconsistency or ambiguity between the provisions of this chapter and any lawful exercise of the city's police power shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-23. - Establishment of requirements. 
The city may establish appropriate requirements for new franchises or franchise renewals and may modify these requirements from time to time to reflect changing conditions. To the extent permitted by law and required in furtherance of the city's police power, such requirements shall be retroactive to franchises then in effect and shall, in any event, become applicable when a franchise is renewed. Any such requirements shall apply to all franchises granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-24. - Franchise nonexclusive. 
Any telecommunications system franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a communications system as it deems appropriate; provided, however, that such additional grants shall not operate to materially modify, revoke or terminate any rights previously granted to any grantee. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-25. - Applications. 
(a)	Applicants for a telecommunications system franchise shall submit to the city an original and ten copies of written applications and including an application fee in the amount of $5,000.00. The application fee for renewal of a telecommunications system franchise shall be $3,000.00. 
(b)	Applications for a franchise or renewal thereof shall include at a minimum the following: 
(1)	A clear up to date description of the identity of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the name of the applicant, the address and telephone number of the applicant, the nature of the business entity, evidence of the compliance of the business entity with all applicable law, and a detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.	The name and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant and of any other business entity owning or controlling in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant. 
b.	A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, prepared by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or an annual report of grantee for such fiscal year (or if grantee is a wholly-owned subsidiary, an annual report of the parent company), which report sets forth audited consolidated statements of operations, balance sheets, and cash flows. 
(2)	Evidence that all aspects of the applicant's communications system comply with applicable zoning laws of the city. 
(3)	If franchise area does not include the entire city, a map or maps of a scale of not less than one inch equaling 100 feet showing the precise geographic area for which applicant seeks a franchise. 
(4)	The nonrefundable application fee, which amount shall be used by the city to offset direct expenses incurred in the franchising and evaluation procedures including, but not limited to, staff time and consulting assistance. 
(5)	A schedule of construction, as established by the applicant, showing by a logical geographic progression which public ways within the franchise area upon which applicant's system shall be constructed by the applicant within each calendar quarter during the period of construction. 
(6)	A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and understandings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation which may affect control or operation of the system contrary to this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
(7)	A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing, between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of any facilities of the public utility, including, but not limited to, poles, lines or conduits. 
(8)	A copy of the applicant's current and up to date certificates of authorization issued by the Florida Public Service Commission and all other authorities of jurisdiction for the provision of telecommunications services in the city. 
(9)	Any other reasonable information which could materially affect the granting of the franchise as requested by the city. 
(c)	All of the materials and information required by the applicant shall be submitted no later than 45 days prior to the scheduled first hearing on the request for a new franchise. Failure to do so shall preclude the matter from being heard at a public hearing. 
(d)	The applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the city its costs and expenses, including attorneys, accountants, experts and outside consultants' fees, incurred in reviewing and evaluating the application. An invoice shall be sent to the applicant for these costs and must be paid prior to final consideration of the request by the city council. Unless paid, any approval of the city council shall be void ab initio. The application fee and costs reimbursement are to defray a portion of the city's cost in processing an application. They are therefore intended to be charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of a franchise, and shall not be deducted from the franchise fees imposed in a franchise agreement. The costs shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-26. - Grant procedure. 
All franchise applications when filed shall be available for public inspection at places designated by the city. No later than 60 days after the application is submitted, the first of two or more public hearings shall be held on the application. A decision shall be made by the city not later than ten days after the conclusion of the last of such public hearings based upon an evaluation of the application, the hearings, and other information that the city may deem relevant. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-27. - Publication costs. 
The applicant shall assume the cost of publication of any ordinance to grant a franchise, as such publication is required by law, and such is payable prior to final consideration of the request by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-28. - Duration. 
The term of any new franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be as established in the franchise agreement, not to exceed ten years, unless terminated sooner as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-29. - Limit on grantee's recourse. 
(a)	Except as expressly provided in this chapter and the franchise agreement, the grantee shall have no recourse against the city for any loss, expense or damage resulting from the terms and conditions of this chapter or the franchise because of the city's enforcement thereof. The grantee expressly agrees that upon its acceptance of the franchise it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city to grant the franchise. 
(b)	The grantee, by accepting the franchise, acknowledges that it has not been induced to accept same by any promise, verbal or written, by or on behalf of the city or by any third person regarding the franchise not expressed therein. The grantee further pledges that no promise or inducement, oral or written, has been made to any city employee or official regarding receipt of the franchise. 
(c)	The grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that the grantee has carefully read the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement and accepts without reservation the obligations imposed by the terms and conditions herein and in the franchise agreement. 
(d)	The grantee shall not apply for any waivers, exceptions or declaratory rulings regarding the system from the PSC or any other state or federal regulatory agency without prior written notice to the city. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-30. - Fees imposed. 
For the use of the public ways and for the purposes of providing revenue with which to defray the costs of regulation arising from the granting of communications system franchises under this chapter, each grantee shall pay franchise fees in the amount prescribed by section 48-31. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-31. - Amount and payment of fees. 
(a)	The grantee, in consideration of the privilege granted under the franchise for the operation of a communications system within the public ways of the city and the expense of regulation pursuant to the franchise incurred by the city, shall pay to the city a sum equal to one percent of its gross receipts on recurring local service revenues derived during each quarter from calls originating within the corporate limits of the city, excluding revenues derived from calls made by the city. In the event the maximum franchise fee authorized by the laws of the state shall be increased beyond the current amount of one percent of the gross receipts on recurring local service revenues as prescribed in F.S. § 337.401, the city shall be authorized to unilaterally amend this chapter and increase the franchise fee provided for herein to the maximum franchise fee authorized by the laws of the state; provided that the city increases the franchise fees for all communications system franchisees by an equal amount. Further, in the event the maximum franchise fee authorized by the laws of the state shall be decreased below the current amount of one percent or eliminated in its entirety, the city shall unilaterally amend this chapter and decrease or eliminate the franchise fee provided for herein to the maximum franchise fee authorized (if any) by the laws of the state, provided that the city decreases or eliminates the franchise fees for all communications system franchisees by an equal amount. 
(b)	Within 30 calendar days after the close of each fiscal quarter, the grantee shall pay the franchise fee as provided in subsection (a) of this section and file with the city's finance director a statement, signed by an authorized accountant or financial representative of the grantee of the gross receipts on recurring local service revenues derived in the preceding quarter. Acceptance of any franchise fee payment shall not be deemed a waiver or release of any claims the city may have for additional sums, nor be construed as an accord that the amount paid is correct. 
(c)	In the event the grantee generates recurring local service revenues in any calendar year less than $1,000,000.00, such that annual franchise fees would be less than $10,000.00 paid to the city, then the franchise fee shall be $10,000.00 per lineal mile of cable, fiber optic or other pathway that makes physical use of the municipal right-of-way, and in no event shall the franchise fee be less than $10,000.00 on an annual basis. Said fee represents the city's determination of costs reasonably related to the inconvenience or impairment solely caused by the disturbance of the municipal right-of-way, and the reasonable cost of the regulatory activity of the city and the proportionate share of cost of land for such right-of-way utilized by the grantee. 
(d)	The sums of money to be paid by the grantee to the city under this section are compensation and consideration for the use by the grantee of the city's public ways for the construction, maintenance and operation of the system and are not taxes as allowed by the Florida Constitution, the general or special laws of the state, or any other ordinances of the city. The grantee shall at all times continue to be subject to public service taxes (F.S. § 166.231), ad valorem taxes (F.S. § 166.211) and such other taxes, charges or fees as may be lawfully authorized by the Florida Constitution, the general or special laws of the state, the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act (F.S. ch. 166) or the ordinances of the city. 
(e)	The grantee, and its agents and outside contractors, shall make available to the city or its authorized representative or agent, during normal business hours the books, records, and accounts and other documentation of the grantee (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "reports") that, as reasonably determined by the city, are necessary to audit and determine the accuracy of the gross receipts on recurring local service revenues or determination of lineal mileage of cable, fiber optic or other pathway upon which the franchise fee payment is based. In the event the reports are not made available in the city, the grantee shall reimburse the city for the reasonable travel expense of the city's representative resulting from such representative's travel to the location where the reports are maintained and shall permit the city to make and remove copies from the reports, including computer printout or other data. Upon request by the city, or its designated representative, the grantee shall provide a copy of its annual report to the PSC and a copy of all telephone service reports required to be filed with the PSC. The city, or its designated representative, shall have the right during the term of this franchise to examine the reports; provided, however, that the grantee shall be obligated to maintain its billing records only for the period of time required by the PSC and that any examination conducted after such period shall be confined to the billing records then available. No later than 30 days after the request of the city or its representative, the grantee shall supply to the city a copy of the reports. Such copy shall be in the media requested by the city provided that it is economical and practical for the grantee to do so; however, in no event shall paper copies of requested documentation be deemed uneconomical or impractical. The city agrees to keep all documentation and reports confidential, except as otherwise provided by state law. 
(f)	The cost of the audit will be borne by the grantee if as a result of the audit, the city determines the grantee has underpaid the franchise fees owed in an amount equal to or exceeding two percent of the franchise fees actually paid. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-32. - Interest on delinquent fees. 
Any franchise fees which remain unpaid after the dates specified in section 48-31 above shall be delinquent and shall thereafter accrue interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum compounded monthly, or whatever greater or lesser rate as allowed by law until paid to the city and the grantee shall reimburse the city for the actual out-of-pocket costs of the city, together with reasonable attorney's fees associated with collecting any sums of money that grantee is required to remit to the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-33. - Transfers. 
(a)	A franchise shall not be sold, assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased or sublet, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person (other than a parent corporation of grantee, a wholly-owned subsidiary of grantee or a corporation under common control with grantee) without the prior written consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld nor unduly delayed. No such consent shall be required for a mortgage, or other hypothecation as a whole or in part to secure an indebtedness. 
(b)	The proposed assignee must show technical ability, financial capability, legal qualifications and general character qualifications as reasonably determined by the city and must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise and such conditions as may be prescribed by the city council. The city shall be deemed to have denied a proposed transfer or assignment in the event that its consent is not communicated in writing to grantee within 60 days following receipt of written notice of the proposed transfer or assignment. 
(c)	The grantee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed change in or transfer of or acquisition by any other party of more than 50 percent of the ownership interest of the grantee or the grantee's parent corporation. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee (other than to or by a parent corporation of grantee, a wholly-owned subsidiary of grantee or a corporation under common control with grantee) shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld nor unduly delayed. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the city may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party and the grantee shall assist the city in any such inquiry. 
(d)	The consent or approval of the city council to any transfer of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the public ways, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of a franchise. 
(e)	In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor in interest becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-34. - Indemnification by grantee. 
(a)	Each grantee shall, at the grantee's sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, and in their capacity as such, the officers, agents, boards, council members, consultants and employees thereof, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, proceedings, liability and judgments for damages or otherwise: 
(1)	Arising out of or alleged to arise out of the award of a franchise to the grantee and/or the grantee's operation of the communications system under the franchise; 
(2)	For actual or alleged injury to persons or property, including loss of use of property due to an occurrence, whether or not such property is physically damaged or destroyed, in any way arising out of or through, or alleged to arise out of or through, the acts or omissions of the grantee or its officers, agents, employees, or contractors; 
(3)	Arising out of or alleged to arise out of any claim for damages for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation resulting from, or alleged to result from, the operation of the system in the city; and 
(4)	Arising out of or alleged to arise out of grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of any statute, regulation or ordinance of any federal, state or any local agency applicable to the grantee in its business. 
(b)	Indemnification expenses shall include, but not be limited to, all out-of-pocket expenses, such as reasonable attorneys' fees, and shall include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the city attorney or his or her assistants or any consultants, agents and employees of the city. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the parties indemnified and held harmless herein from participating in the defense of any litigation by their own counsel. Such participation shall not under any circumstances relieve the grantee from its duty of defense against liability or of paying any judgment entered against such party. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-35. - Grantee insurance. 
(a)	During the term of this franchise and all extensions thereof; the grantee shall provide, pay for and maintain satisfactory to the city the types of insurance described herein. All insurance shall be from responsible companies duly authorized to do business in the State of Florida and having a rating in Best's Insurance Guide of A+ or better. All liability policies shall provide that the city is an additional insured as to the operations under this franchise. The required coverages must be evidenced by properly executed certificates of insurance forms. The certificates must be signed by the authorized representative of the insurance company and shall be filed and maintained with the city annually during the term of this franchise. Thirty days advance written notice by registered or certified mail must be given to the city of any cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in the policy coverages. 
(b)	The limits of coverage of insurance required shall be not less than the following: 
(1)	Worker's Compensation and Employer's Liability Insurance: 
Worker's Compensation—Florida Statutory Requirements. 
Employer's Liability—$500,000.00 limit each accident. 
$500,000.00 limit per accident. 
$500,000.00 limit per each employee. 
(2)	Comprehensive General Liability: 
Bodily injury and property damage— 
$5,000,000.00 combined single limit each occurrence. 
(3)	Automobile Liability: 
Bodily injury and property damage— 
$5,000,000.00 combined single limit each accident. 
(4)	Copyright Infringement: 
$1,000,000.00 combined single limit each occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-36. - Bonds. 
Grantee shall exercise none of the rights granted by this chapter until evidence of compliance with the following bonding and preceding insurance requirements has been filed with the City of DeBary, Florida. Should the grantee fail to comply with said requirements, it shall acquire no rights, privileges or authority under the franchise whatsoever. 
(a)	Bond. 
(1)	The bond shall provide the following conditions: 
a.	There shall be recoverable by the city jointly and severally from the principal and surety any and all fines and penalties due to the city and any and all damages, losses, costs and expenses suffered or incurred by the city resulting from the failure of the grantee to: faithfully comply with the provisions of the franchise or this chapter; comply with all lawful orders, permits issued by any city agency or body having jurisdiction over grantee's acts or defaults; pay fees due to the city; pay any claims due the city as resulting from judicial action; pay any claims, liens or taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the telecommunications system. 
(2)	In the event the grantee abandons the telecommunications system at any time during the term of this franchise or any extension thereto, the bond shall be forfeited in favor of the city in an amount necessary to compensate city for any damage, loss, expense, attorney's fees and costs it has suffered as a result of such abandonment. 
(3)	At any time the telecommunications system is upgrading or rebuilding all or any portion of the system, the grantee shall provide a performance bond in the amount of $250,000.00 until all construction is completed. 
(4)	The grantee shall also maintain, at all times during the time of this franchise, a performance bond in the amount of $200,000.00 to guarantee the payment of all sums which may become due to the city and also guarantee the removal of the system upon termination of the franchise. 
(b)	Notice. The performance bonds required herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the city and shall require 30 days prior written notice to the city and the grantee of an intention of non-renewal, alteration or cancellation. The grantee shall, in the event of any such intended cancellation notice, obtain, pay all premiums for, and file replacement bonds or policies within 30 days following receipt by the city or the grantee of any notice of intended cancellation. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-37. - Termination. 
In the event the grantee violates any of the material provisions of this chapter, the grantee shall cease to operate the system within the city for any consecutive period of 180 days during the term of this franchise, except for causes beyond the grantee's control, or the grantee is precluded by governmental authority from charging the franchise fee provided in this chapter to its customers and it provides the city with written notice of its desire to terminate the franchise, the city, at its option, may forthwith declare a forfeiture and termination of and revoke and cancel all rights granted under this franchise; provided that prior to termination by the city resulting from a violation by the grantee of any of the provisions of this chapter, the grantee shall be served written notice by the city with respect thereto. The grantee shall have 60 days after service of such notice within which to cure the violation, or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the city, to accomplish the same. In the event of such termination, the grantee shall, within a reasonable time following demand by the city, remove or abandon the system and take such steps as are necessary to render every portion of the system remaining within the public ways of the city safe, and shall thereupon be deemed to have abandoned same in its entirety; and the same shall thereupon become the sole property of the city without payment to the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Secs. 48-38—48-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATIONAL RULES 
 
Sec. 48-51. - Compliance with state and federal law. 
The grantee shall, at all times, comply with all laws of the state and federal government and the rules and regulations of any federal or state or administrative agency. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-52. - Authority for use of public ways. 
(a)	Prior to the installation, placement or removal of any conduits, cables or pole lines, or the start of any other type of construction on the public ways, the grantee shall, pursuant to the requirements of existing or subsequently enacted city ordinances, obtain all permits from, and pay all fees to, the city's department of public works. Such permits shall set out the place, date and time where the conduits, cables, or pole lines, or other form of construction, are to be installed, or removed or where the construction is to be conducted. All permit applications submitted by the grantee shall contain plans showing known utility facilities and specifications, and letters of no conflict as provided by other utilities having facilities located where the grantee desires to place its conduits, cable or pole lines or begin construction. The grantee will not assert the existence of any vested rights if the city issues a permit. Further, issuance of a permit by the city shall not be construed by the grantee as a warranty that the placement by the grantee of its conduits, cables or pole lines, or the start of construction, is in compliance with any applicable rules, regulations or laws. The grantee shall file with their permit applications to the city, bonds solely for the protection of the city with a surety company or trust company or companies as surety or sureties in the amount of $250,000.00 to protect the city from any and all damages or costs suffered or incurred by the city as a result thereof; including but not limited to attorney's fees and costs of any action or proceeding, and including the full amount of compensation, indemnification, cost of removal or abandonment of any property or other costs which may be in default, up to the full principal amount of such bond; and the condition shall be a continuing obligation during the entire term of any permit issued in accordance herewith and thereafter until the permittee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to the city which arise out of or pertain to the permit. 
(b)	Any type of construction proposed by the grantee shall be subject to the city code and other regulations of the city pertaining thereto, and shall be performed with the least possible interference with the use of the public way and to adjoining property owners and in compliance with the rules and regulations of the state department of transportation. 
(c)	Any conduits, cables or pole lines installed or placed without first having obtained the permits hereinbefore provided for shall be removed within 30 days written notice by the city to remove the same and, in default of compliance with such notice, the conduits, cables or poles may be removed by order of the city, and the cost of removal shall be borne and paid by the grantee. 
(d)	The grantee shall construct and maintain a communications system so as not to interfere with other lawful uses of the public ways. To the extent possible, grantee shall make use of existing poles and other facilities available to the grantee. The grantee may erect additional poles so long as all applicable permits and consents are obtained. The grantee shall use its best efforts to individually notify all adjacent property owners affected by the proposed construction prior to the commencement of that work. Such notification shall not be required for emergencies necessitating immediate repairs. 
(e)	Notwithstanding the grant to use public ways, no public way shall be used by a grantee if the city, in its sole discretion, determines that such use is inconsistent with the terms, conditions or provisions by which the public way was created or dedicated or is being used. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-53. - Conditions on public way occupancy. 
(a)	All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee within the city shall be so located to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property adjoining any such streets, alleys or other public ways and places. 
(b)	The grantee shall not in any way displace, damage or destroy any sewer, water main, pipe or any other facilities belonging to the city, or to any third party who placed such facilities therein by express authority of the city, without the consent of the city, and the grantee shall be liable to the city or to the third party owner, as the case may be, for the cost of any repairs made necessary by any such displacement, damage or destruction and shall pay such costs within 30 days of grantee's receipt of an invoice for same. 
(c)	The grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, replace and repair without delay any sidewalk, public way, alley, highway, waterway, bridge or any other public place that has been excavated, broken, removed, displaced or disarranged by the grantee in the conduct of its construction, maintenance and operation of any portion of the system, or as a result of the deterioration of any portion of the system, and restore the same to as good a condition as it existed prior to the grantee commencing its work. Upon failure of the grantee to do so after 30 days written notice by the city, the city may make such repairs and replacements as it deems reasonably necessary, and the grantee shall pay the city upon demand all costs of such repairs and replacements. The grantee shall, to the satisfaction of the city, maintain any repairs it makes pursuant to this section for a period of one year following the date of such repair. 
(d)	The grantee shall use all proper and reasonable care in connection with any work which it may do in, over, under or across any public way, alley, highway, waterway, bridge, easement or other public place of the city in seeking to prevent harm, damage or injury to persons or property therefrom. 
(e)	The grantee shall: 
(1)	Produce and maintain a complete set of "as built" plans including, but not limited to, horizontal and vertical profiles within 45 days after completion of construction of any portion of the system; 
(2)	Comply with all applicable laws, regulations and codes promulgated for the protection of the public including, but not limited to, the National Electric Code, the National Electrical Safety Code, the Florida Department of Transportation Utilities Accommodations Guide, the State of Florida Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways and such other design or regulatory manuals which regulate the insulation of structures within public rights-of-way; 
(3)	Make such plans available to the city within 45 days after construction of any portion of the system; 
(4)	Become a member of and maintain membership in a utility notification one-call system. 
(f)	The grantee shall not and shall prohibit any officer; agent, employee, contractor or subcontractor which the grantee retains from removing or substantially trimming any tree or major portion thereof, either above, at, or below ground level, which is located within a public way without the prior written approval of the city. Such consent may be given or withheld upon such terms and conditions as the city deems appropriate. Each grantee shall be responsible for and shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents and employees from and against any and all damages arising from or resulting from the removal, trimming, mutilation of or any injury to any tree proximately caused by the grantee or its officers, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors. 
(g)	In the event the city requires the grantee to adapt or conform any portion of the system, or in any way to alter, temporarily or permanently relocate or to change any portion of same to enable any other person to use a public way, avenue, alley, sidewalk, highway, bridge, easement or other public place of the city, the grantee shall be reimbursed by the person desiring or occasioning such change for any loss, cost or expense caused by or arising out of such change, alteration or relocation of any portion of the system. 
(h)	In an emergency, as determined by the city, when the grantee or its representative is immediately unavailable or unable to provide the necessary immediate repairs to any portion of the system that is damaged or malfunctioning or to any faults or settled or sunken areas that may develop in any area over, around or adjacent to same, the city, when apprised of such an emergency, shall have the right to make the repairs with the total cost of same being charged to the grantee. 
(i)	In an effort to minimize the number of facilities within the city's public ways, the disruption of traffic and roadway destruction, the grantee shall enter into joint use agreements with the city and other parties who are expressly authorized by the city to use its public ways provided such agreements are satisfactory to the grantee. Nothing herein contained shall mandate that the grantee enter into joint use agreements. 
(j)	The grantee shall maintain and operate all parts of the system in good, safe and operable condition and shall render efficient service in accordance with the rules and regulations as are, or may be, set forth by the PSC or by other agencies of the state lawfully empowered to regulate the activities of the grantee. 
(k)	Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary, in the reasonable judgment of the city, to remove or damage any of the grantee's facilities, no charge shall be made by the grantee against the city for restoration and repair reasonably necessary under the circumstances. The city shall endeavor to avoid or limit damage to the extent necessary under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-54. - Erection of poles. 
(a)	No communications system franchise shall be deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize the grantee to construct or install poles or wire-holding structures within a public way for the purpose of placing cables, wires, lines or otherwise, without the written consent of the city for the public way within which the poles or structures are situated. Such consent shall be given upon such terms and conditions as the city council, in its sole discretion, may prescribe, which shall include a requirement that the grantee perform, at the grantee's sole expense, all tree trimming required to maintain the poles clear of obstructions. 
(b)	With respect to any poles or wire-holding structures which a grantee is authorized to construct and install within public ways, a public utility or public utility district serving the city may, if denied the privilege of utilizing such poles or wire-holding structures by the grantee, apply for such permission from the city council. If the city council finds that such use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the grantee's operations, the city council may authorize such use subject to such terms and conditions as the council deems appropriate. Such authorization shall include the condition that the public utility pay to the grantee any and all actual and necessary costs incurred by the grantee in permitting such use, together with a reasonable return thereon as determined by the grantee and the public utility. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-55. - Underground construction. 
The grantee shall comply with the following provisions of this section unless otherwise approved by the city. Facilities shall be installed underground where existing power or telephone facilities are installed underground, and shall be relocated underground concurrently, at grantee's sole expense, where existing power or telephone facilities are hereafter so relocated. To the maximum extent practicable, all facilities shall be constructed underground. Poles, underground cables or other facilities of the system shall be placed between the property line and the curb line of all streets and avenues and shall not be within the roadway recovery area. Underground cable shall have consistent alignment parallel with the edge of pavement, at least a 36-inch depth of cover for and shall have at least two-foot horizontal clearance from other underground utilities and the appurtenances. The lowest wire on any poles placed in any public rights-of-way used by vehicle traffic generally shall not be less than 18 feet from the ground and, whenever telephone and electric power wires cross each other, wires shall cross and be maintained in accordance with the National Electrical Code, the National Electrical Safety Code and the "Safety Rules for the Installation and Maintenance of Electrical Supply and Communication Lines" established by the Department of Commerce, Bureau of Standards of the United States in force at the time of the effective date of this chapter and as amended. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-56. - Relocation. 
Except in an emergency, the grantee shall, within 180 days after receipt of written notice from the city, adjust, alter or relocate at its own cost and expense any portion of the system in the event the city determines that such adjustment, alteration or relocation is necessary for the city's use of its property and rights-of-way, or if same unreasonably interferes with the convenient, safe or continuous use or the maintenance, improvement, extension or expansion of any public street, alley, highway, waterway, bridge, easement or other public place in the city. In the event such adjustment, alteration or relocation is incidental to work to be done by the city on a city road, such notice shall be given 60 days prior to the commencement of such work by the city. In the event such a contingency occurs and the company fails to cause the aforementioned adjustment, alteration or relocation as required herein, the city may remove such portion of the system and the total cost and expense therefor shall be charged to the grantee. The city shall provide the grantee with a notice and order as provided for in F.S. § 337.404, or any subsequently enacted law of the state, in the event it may charge the grantee for the cost and expense of removing such portion of the system pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-57. - Movement of buildings. 
Each franchise grantee shall, upon request by any person holding a building moving permit, franchise or other approval issued by the city, temporarily remove, raise or lower its wire to permit the movement of buildings. The expense of such removal, raising or lowering shall be paid by the person requesting same, and a grantee shall be authorized to require such payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than five working days oral or written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-58. - Removal. 
(a)	Upon expiration or termination of a communications system franchise, if the franchise is not renewed and if an assignee does not purchase the system, the grantee may remove any underground cable from the public ways which has been installed in such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or other opening of the public ways along the extension of cable to be removed. The grantee shall not remove any underground cable or conduit which requires trenching or other opening of the public ways along the extension of cable to be removed, except as provided in this section. The grantee shall remove, at the grantee's sole cost and expense, any underground cable or conduit by trenching or opening of the public ways along the extension thereof or otherwise which is ordered to be removed by the city based upon a determination, in the sole discretion of the city, that removal is required in order to eliminate or prevent a hazardous condition or promote future utilization of the public ways for public purposes. Any order by the city to remove cable or conduit shall be mailed to the grantee not later than 30 calendar days following the date of expiration of the franchise. A grantee shall file written notice with the city clerk not later than 30 calendar days following the date of expiration or termination of the franchise of its intention to remove cable intended to be removed and a schedule for removal by location. The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to approval and regulation by the director of public works. Removal shall be completed not later than 12 months following the date of expiration of the franchise. Underground cable and conduit in the public ways which is not removed shall be deemed abandoned and title thereto shall be vested in the city. 
(b)	Upon expiration or termination of a franchise, if the franchise is not renewed and if an assignee does not purchase the system, the grantee, at the grantee's sole expense, shall either (1) remove from the public ways all aboveground elements of the system, or (2) render every portion of the system safe, and abandon same in its entirety, and the same shall thereupon become the sole property of the city without payment to grantee. 
(c)	The grantee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits, licenses, authorizations or other approvals and pay such fees and deposit such security as required by applicable ordinance, regulations or policies of the city; shall conduct and complete the work of removal in compliance with all such applicable ordinances, regulations and policies; and shall restore the public ways to the same condition they were in before the work of removal commenced. The work of removal shall be completed not later than one year following the date of expiration of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-59. - Inspection; correction of defects in system; breach by grantee. 
(a)	The city shall have and maintain the right upon 48 hours notice to grantee (which notice shall not be required in the event of an emergency) to inspect the construction and location of the system by the grantee to insure the proper performance of the terms of this chapter. At grantee's option, representatives of grantee may accompany city personnel during any such inspection. 
(b)	If the grantee should violate any of the terms of this chapter or any federal, state or local law or regulation, or any of the rules and regulations as may hereafter be from time to time lawfully adopted, or any provision of the franchise agreement, the city shall promptly give the grantee written notice of the violation, breach, default or noncompliance. The grantee shall within 30 days of the date of written notice from the city to substantially undertake and promptly correct such default, breach, violation or noncompliance and certify the same to the city. In the event that the grantee fails to substantially undertake such corrective action within 30 days of the date of such written notice and promptly complete the corrective action, the city may, notwithstanding any other remedies provided for in this chapter, or otherwise available under law: 
(1)	Make such correction itself and charge the cost of the same to the grantee; and/or 
(2)	Secure the proceeds from any financial performance instrument posted by the grantee or impose the sum of $100.00 per day for each day as liquidated damages following the cure date that grantee fails to complete the corrective action; and/or 
(3)	For a material breach of this chapter or the franchise agreement, declare the grantee in default and terminate the franchise and rights granted under the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-60. - Communications with regulatory agencies. 
(a)	Copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted by a franchise grantee to the PSC or any other state or federal regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting construction or operation of the system or services provided through the system shall, if requested by the city, be filed with the city. Copies of responses or any other communications from the regulatory agencies to a grantee likewise shall, if requested, be filed with the city immediately on receipt. 
(b)	Copies of all certificates of approval issued by the PSC or any other state or regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction of construction or operation of the system shall be filed with the city and the information supplemented within 45 days after modification, renewal and or revocation of any such certificate(s). 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-61. - Service provided to city. 
If city desires to utilize grantee's communications system, grantee shall offer such service to the city on terms no less favorable than the most favorable terms offered by grantee to local governments in Volusia, Orange, Seminole and Osceola Counties. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Sec. 48-62. - Confidentiality. 
The city shall keep all documents and information required to be submitted to city by grantee confidential, except as otherwise required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
Chapter 50 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Public safety advisory committee, § 2-66 et seq.; code enforcement, § 2-86 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited, § 6-5; junked, wrecked and abandoned vehicles, § 30-101 et seq.; hazardous materials cost recovery for accidental spills, § 30-191 et seq. 
State Law reference— Uniform traffic control law, F.S. ch. 316. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 50-1—50-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing, parking regulations, F.S. § 316.1945 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 50-36 has been deleted by the editor, inasmuch as it appears to have been superseded by Ord. No. 13-99, § 6, adopted Oct. 6, 1999, codified as § 50-76 of this chapter. Said § 50-36 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10-96, § 3, adopted June 5, 1996.  
Sec. 50-37. - Penalties. 
(a)	In this section, a violation means any of the following: 
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful or an offense by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	In this section, violation does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless the context requires otherwise. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. For violations of this article that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense in the absence of provisions to the contrary. 
(d)	The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise, the imposition of civil penalties or other administrative actions. 
(e)	Violations of this article may be abated by injunctive or other equitable or civil relief, and no bond shall be required nor proof of intent or scienter. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. Violations of this article are also subject to code enforcement board action. 
(Ord. No. 10-96, § 4, 6-5-96)  
Secs. 50-38—50-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRAILERS, TRUCKS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 50-51. - Restrictions. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or stand any motor home, truck tractor, road tractor, truck, semi-trailer, travel trailer, boat trailer, stock trailer, any other type of trailer, or any other commercial motor vehicle with a rated capacity in excess of one ton according to the manufacturer's classification, upon any public street, alley, parkway, boulevard, or right-of-way adjacent to any area zoned as RR, RE, R-1 through R-9, MH-1 through MH-7, and residential use areas of RPUD and MPUD, as established by the zoning ordinance of the city. This section shall not prevent the parking or standing of the above-described vehicles in such zoned areas for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight, merchandise, or services. Any such vehicle so unlawfully parked after having been ticketed with a notice by the city of the violation of the foregoing prohibition on any previous occasion may be towed from its location or detained at the operator's expense. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person or any owner to leave, park or stand any motor home, truck tractor, road tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, bus or any other commercial motor vehicle, or any house trailer, boat trailer, stock trailer, equipment trailer or any other type of trailer upon any public street, alley, parkway or boulevard or street right-of-way in such a manner as to block the flow of traffic upon such public street, alley, parkway or boulevard. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person or any owner to leave, park or stand any motor home, truck tractor, road tractor, truck, semi-trailer, travel trailer, boat trailer, stock trailer, any other type of trailer, or any other commercial motor vehicle with a rated capacity in excess of one ton according to the manufacturer's classification, in any street, alley or right-of-way, situated within zoning areas B-1 through B-4 and B-8, for a longer continuous period of time than one hour, except for loading and unloading. 
(Ord. No. 10-96, § 1, 6-5-96)  
Sec. 50-52. - Exceptions. 
The provisions in section 50-51 shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Street construction and maintenance. Street construction, maintenance and repair, trucks, rollers and implements. 
(2)	Public service utilities. Truck equipment, trailers and vehicles used by public service utility companies engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities. 
(3)	Buses. Motorbuses when taking on or discharging passengers at the customary bus stops. 
(4)	Loading zones. All other vehicles when actually parked at a designated loading zone in those areas of limited parking where loading zones are designated. 
(5)	Emergency repairs. Any vehicle which develops a mechanical defect after such vehicle has commenced to operate en route, making it unsafe to proceed further. In such event, it shall be unlawful to stand or park the vehicle during the time necessary to make emergency repairs. 
(6)	Construction site. The city council may grant a special exception for construction sites. 
(Ord. No. 10-96, § 2, 6-5-96)  
Secs. 50-53—50-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 50-71. - Definitions. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driveway means an area of land which provides vehicular access from a street to the off-street parking of a premises. 
Parking. All references to parking shall include standing and stopping. 
Parkway means that area from the right-of-way line to the edge of the pavement of the lateral lines of roadway, including any grassy or unpaved median between two paved areas. 
Public rights-of-way means a land dedicated, deeded, used or to be used for a street, alley, walkway, boulevard, access or other purpose by the public, certain designated individual, or governing body. 
Registered owner means the person who is lawfully registered with the state department of highway and safety motor vehicles by state law on the day such violation occurs. 
Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and protected or marked by adequate signs or authorized pavement markings as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
Shoulders, slopes and ditches shall mean that portion of a highway other than that part improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicle travel. 
Street means a public or private right-of-way which affords a primary means of vehicular access to abutting lots or spaces, It is intended to include as synonymous, the term "avenue", "highway", "road", "boulevard", " thoroughfare", "easement" or other similar term. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 1, 10-6-99) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-72. - Stopping, standing and parking prohibited in specified places. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflicts with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a law enforcement officer or traffic control devise; 
(1)	In non-residential areas, on anything other than site plan approved parking; 
(2)	On a sidewalk or in such manner any part of such vehicle is protruding over sidewalk or any part of the sidewalk area; 
(3)	In front of a public or private driveway; 
(4)	Within an intersection; 
(5)	Within 15 feet of a hydrant; 
(6)	On a crosswalk; 
(7)	Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, or on any crosswalk, unless permitted to do so by appropriate or devises posted in such areas; 
(8)	Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or other official traffic control devise located at the side of the roadway, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings; 
(9)	Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)	Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite such a station, if prohibited by a sign; 
(11)	On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street or on the roadway of any vehicle parked at an angle to curb or street edge, except commercial vehicles engaged in loading or unloading from 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. only; 
(12)	Alongside or opposite any street, excavation or obstruction, when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(13)	Upon any bridge or any elevated structure upon a highway; 
(14)	At any place where an official sign prohibits stopping, standing or [parking]; 
(15)	At any place in such a manner as to block the access to commercial refuse containers by city authorized refuse removal equipment; 
(16)	Alongside curb which has been painted yellow, red or white unless otherwise permitted by appropriate signs or devised posted by the city; 
(17)	In any parking space specifically designed and marked for the disabled unless such vehicle displays a parking permit, or license plate, as required by state law; or in such a manner as to block or obstruct a wheelchair ramp; 
(18)	In a designed bus stop or taxi stand, unless the vehicle is a bus or taxi cab respectively; 
(19)	A person shall not park a vehicle upon private property, whether improved or vacant, without the express or implied permission or invitation of the owner or person in control of the property. Permission or invitation to park on private property may be implied only when the area where the vehicle is parked is adjacent to a business establishment, and is normally used for parking by patrons of that business, only when the parking does not violate any parking restrictions clearly noted on a sign or signs in the area where the vehicle is parked. 
(20)	On any property owned or controlled by the city not designed for parking; 
(21)	In painted safety zones on roadways within the city, except for emergency purposes. Any vehicle parked in such an area for more than one hour will be towed at the owners expense pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(22)	On shoulders or medians of Interstate 4 and all state, county and other public roadways within the city limits except for emergency purpose. And vehicle parking on such a shoulder or median for more than 24 hours will be towed at the owners expense pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 2, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-73. - Stopping or parking so as not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop momentarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulation, a traffic sign or signal, or law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 3, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-74. - Parking prohibited sign. 
No person shall park a vehicle at any place where an official sign or marking prohibits parking. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 4, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-75. - Parking prohibited at all times on certain designed streets. 
When a sign is erected prohibiting parking, no person shall park vehicle, at any time, upon any of the streets or portion of the streets as designated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 5, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-76. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon a public street or private street, public parking lot, public right-of-way or any other public property for the purpose of: 
(1)	Displaying such vehicle therein for sale, hire or rental; 
(2)	Painting, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(3)	Displaying advertising; 
(4)	Selling merchandise from the motor vehicle, except in a duly established marketplace and when so authorized under the laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 6, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-77. - Stopping or parking for loading only. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any place marked as a passenger loading zone, for a period of time longer than the time indicated by signs or other appropriate markings or devices. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 7, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-78. - Parking on public right-of-way or parkways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on a parkway or public right-of-way except; 
(1)	Motor vehicles owned, operated or authorized by the city, by the public or private utility, or by the city, county, state or federal government when such vehicles are engaged in the performance of work by employees of said agencies in the course and scope of their employment; 
(2)	Parkway areas which have been officially designed and signed by the city as permissible for parking. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 8, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-79. - Vehicles parked parallel to curb. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle legally stopped or parked upon a two-way street or highway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the street or highway in the same direction as the flow of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 9, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-80. - Abandonment. 
No person being the owner or in control of a motor vehicle shall abandon any dismantled partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, or non-operating vehicle on any roadway, street, alley, highway, or other public right-of-way or easement. The vehicle shall be deemed to have been abandoned if it remains at that location for 24 consecutive hours. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 10, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-81. - Impoundment and redemption of illegally parked vehicles. 
City or county law enforcement shall be vested with the authority and it shall be their duty to impound any unoccupied vehicle parked in violation of any of the parking regulations of the city where the vehicle impedes traffic, creates a safety hazard, or appears to be abandoned. Thereafter the vehicle shall be released to the duly identified owner thereof only upon the payment of any fine and the storage, towing and other impounding charges. The sheriff's office or police department shall exercise due diligence to identify and notify the owner. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 11, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-82. - Liability for violations. 
(a)	In any prosecution charging a violation of this division or any other state law governing the parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parking in violation of this division or state law adopted pursuant to it, together with proof that the defendant name in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute a prime facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked such vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such violation occurred. The registered owner, or a person other than the registered owner who admits to being the operator of such vehicle, or a person to whom the registered owner left the care, custody or control of such vehicle, is hereby declared to be directly responsible to the city for payment of the fine for the vehicle so parked. 
(b)	A person other than the registered owner may admit to being the operator of the vehicle at the time and place of the alleged offense and may contest the allegations of the complaint. Such a admission shall discharge the presumption that the registered owner was the operator at the time and place of the offense. 
(c)	If the owner can prove that the vehicle was in the care, custody or control of another person, the owner is required, within a reasonable time after notification of the parking violation, to furnish to the appropriate law enforcement authorities the name and address of the person who leased, rented or otherwise had the care, custody or control of the vehicle. The owner of a vehicle is not responsible for a parking violation if the vehicle was at the time, stolen or in the care, custody or control of some person who did not have the permission of the owner to use the vehicle. The operator of a vehicle which is in his care, custody or control without permission of the owner shall be responsible for any parking violation notice which occurs while the vehicle is in the care, custody or control. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 12, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-83. - Prosecution of violation. 
Violations of this division or of state law duty adopted pursuant to it's provisions shall be prosecuted in the county court. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 13, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-84. - Amount of fines; responses to violation notice court appearance. 
When a law or traffic enforcement finds a vehicle parked in violation of this division, or state law adopted pursuant to this division; 
(1)	He shall issue a notice of violation to the vehicle and place the notice in a conspicuous place on the vehicle. 
(2)	The fines shall be levied follows: 
a.	The fine for overnight parking is $10.00. 
b.	The fine for handicapped parking violation is $250.00. 
c.	The fine for any other violations is $15.00. 
(3)	Any person receiving a parking violation notice pursuant to this division shall respond to the violation notice by either of the following methods within ten days after the date of issuance of the citation; 
a.	Payment of the penalty indicated on the violation notice may be remitted to the clerk of court of the county court pursuant to the directions on such violation notice; or 
b.	A hearing may be required by the person receiving such violation notice or cited vehicles registered owner for the purpose of presenting evidence before a county judge or hearing officer concerning a parking violation. Any person requesting a hearing shall execute a statement on a form provided by the finance department, including his willingness to appear at such hearing at a time and place specified thereon. Any person who requests a hearing and does not appear in accordance with said statement shall be subject to contempt proceedings or to such other penalties as the court may, in its discretion, impose to require compliance with this division. 
(4)	An election requesting a hearing constitutes a waiver of the right to pay the civil penalty indicated on the parking violation noticed; and a hearing officer or county judge, after said hearing, upon making a determination that a parking violation has been committed, may impose a fine not to exceed $100.00 plus court costs, for each parking violation. 
(5)	If the clerk of the county court receives a complete parking violation notice submitted by a law or traffic enforcement officer pursuant to this division, and if there has been no response to the violation notice within ten-day period set forth in subsection (3) of this section, the original fine shall be doubled (except for a fine for handicapped parking violation) and the clerk of the county shall issue a summons. The clerk shall have a person whom the violation notice was issued served with a summons requiring payment of the fine or attendance at a hearing at a time and place specified in such notice of summons. The amount of any fine imposed for violation of this division shall be increased by an additional $10.00 upon the issuance of a summons by the clerk of the county court to the person charged with a parking violation. 
(6)	A hearing officer or county judge, after a hearing on a parking violation notice, shall make a determination as to whether or not a parking violation has been committed and may impose a fine not to exceed $250.00 plus court costs. Any violator upon whom service is obtained pursuant to this division who does appear at the hearing as directed shall be subject to contempt proceedings or to such other compliance with the court's directive. 
(7)	The clerk of the county court is hereby authorized to dismiss violations where the violator illegally parking in a parking space provided for people who have disabilities where proof that the person committing the violation has a valid parking permit or license plate or a signed affidavit that the owner of the disabled parking permit or license plate was present at the time the violation occurred, and that such a parking or license plate was valid at the time the violation occurred. The clerk upon determining that all required documentation has been submitted verifying that the required parking permit or license plate was valid at the time of the violation, upon provision of the affidavit of compliance and a payment of a five-dollar dismissal fee to the clerk the violation shall be dismissed by the clerk of the county court. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 14, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-85. - Disposition of fines. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, all moneys received by the clerk of the county court for violations shall be paid to the city, except for a fee of ten percent of collections which will be retained by the clerk of the county court for administration of this section. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 15, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-86. - Failure to pay. 
The clerk of the county court shall supply the County of Volusia Department of Finance monthly with an alphabetized list of persons who have three or more outstanding parking violations. The provisions of F.S. § 316.1967, said section being hereby adopted, shall apply to each person whose name appears on such list. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 16, 10-6-99)  
Sec. 50-87. - Florida Statutes adopted. 
The city hereby adopts F.S. ch. 316 in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 13-99, § 17, 10-6-99)  
Chapter 53 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Control of illicit discharges to the stormwater system and waters of the state, § 30-235 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 53-1—53-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER  
DIVISION 1. - INTRODUCTION 
 
Sec. 53-35. - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly otherwise requires: 
Annual rate resolution means the resolution described in section 53-62, establishing the rate at which a stormwater utility assessment for a specific fiscal year will be computed. The final assessment resolution shall constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year in which a stormwater utility assessment is imposed or reimposed. 
Article means this stormwater utility assessment ordinance. 
Assessed property means all parcels of land included on the assessment roll that receive a special benefit from the delivery of the stormwater utility services, programs or facilities identified in the initial assessment resolution or the preliminary rate resolution. 
Assessment roll means the special assessment roll relating to a stormwater utility assessment approved by a final assessment resolution pursuant to section 53-60 or an annual rate resolution pursuant to section 53-62. 
Building means any structure, whether temporary or permanent, built for support, shelter enclosure of persons chattel, or property of any kind. This term shall include mobile homes or any vehicles serving in any way the function of a building. 
Certificate of occupancy means the written certification issued by the city that a building is suitable for occupancy for its intended use. For the purposes of this article, a set-up permit or its equivalent issued for a mobile home shall be considered a certificate of occupancy. 
City means the City of DeBary, Florida. 
City clerk means the City Clerk of DeBary, Florida or duly authorized representative. 
City council means the governing body of the City of DeBary, Florida. 
City manager means the City Manager of DeBary, Florida or duly authorized representative. 
County means Volusia County, Florida. 
Developed property means property which has been altered from its natural state by the addition of any improvements including, but not limited to, building structures or improvements including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, or impervious surfaces. For new construction, a property shall be considered developed pursuant to this article upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a building, forming a separate and independent housekeeping establishment, arrangement, designed or intended to be used or occupied by one family and having no enclosed space or cooking or sanitary facilities in common with any other dwelling unit with no ingress or egress through any other dwelling unit, and containing permanent provisions for sleeping facilities, sanitary facilities, and not more than one kitchen. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means the statistical average horizontal impervious area of residential units. The horizontal impervious area includes, but is not limited to, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways and sidewalks. The common denominator used for relating runoff is the ERU. 
Final assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 53-60 which shall confirm, modify, or repeal the initial assessment resolution and which shall be the final proceeding for the initial imposition of stormwater utility assessments. 
Fiscal year means that period commencing October 1 of each year and continuing through the next succeeding September 30, or such other period as may be prescribed by law as the fiscal year for the city. 
Government property means property owned by the United States of America or any agency thereof, a sovereign state or nation, the state or any agency thereof, a county, a special district, or a municipal corporation. 
Impervious area means an area covered by material which does not permit infiltration or percolation of water into the ground. Such impervious areas may include, but are not limited to, areas covered by roofs, roof extensions, slabs, patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks, parking areas and athletic fields. 
Initial assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 53-56 which shall be the initial proceeding for the identification of the stormwater utility assessed cost for which an assessment is to be made and for the imposition of a stormwater utility assessment. 
Lot means an area of land which abuts a street or other means of legal access and which either complies with or exempt from the Land Development Code as amended, is sufficient in size to meet the minimum area and width requirements for its zoning classification, and a portion of subdivision or any other tract or parcel of land, including the air space above contiguous thereto, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both. The word "lot" includes the word plot, tract or parcel. 
Nonresidential developed property means any developed property that is classified by the Property Appraiser as land use as types 10 through 99 using the Florida Department of Revenue Land Use codes, as may be amended from time to time. 
Owner means the person reflected as the owner of assessed property on the tax roll. 
Parcel of land means any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, which is designated by its owner or developed as a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit, or which may be developed into a unit or units. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, organization, corporation, association, or any other legal entity, whether singular or plural, masculine or feminine, as the context may require. 
Preliminary rate resolution means the resolution described in section 53-62 initiating the annual process for updating the assessment roll and directing the reimposition of stormwater utility assessments pursuant to an annual rate resolution. 
Property appraiser means the property appraiser of the county. 
Residential developed property means developed property that is classified by the Property Appraiser of Volusia County as land use 00 through 09 using the Florida Department of Revenue Land Use Codes, as may be amended from time to time. 
Stormwater means that part of the precipitation that travels over natural, altered or improved surfaces to the nearest stream channel or impoundment, and that which appears in surface waters. 
Stormwater utility assessed cost means the amount determined by the city council to be assessed in any fiscal year to fund all or any portion of the cost of the provision of stormwater utility services, facilities, or programs which provide a special benefit to assessed property, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following components: 
(1)	The cost of physical construction, reconstruction or completion of any required facility or improvement; 
(2)	The costs incurred in any required acquisition or purchase; 
(3)	The cost of all labor, materials, machinery, and equipment; 
(4)	The cost of fuel, parts, supplies, maintenance, repairs, and utilities; 
(5)	The cost of computer services, data processing, and communications; 
(6)	The cost of all lands and interest therein, leases, property rights, easements, and franchises of any nature whatsoever; 
(7)	The cost of any indemnity or surety bonds and premiums for insurance; 
(8)	The cost of salaries, volunteer pay, workers' compensation insurance, or other employment benefits; 
(9)	The cost of uniforms, training, travel, and per diem; 
(10)	The cost of construction plans and specifications, surveys and estimates of costs; 
(11)	The cost of engineering, financial, legal, and other professional services; 
(12)	The cost of compliance with any contracts or agreements entered into by the city to provide stormwater utility services; 
(13)	All costs associated with the structure, implementation, collection, and enforcement of the stormwater utility assessments, including any service charges of the tax collector, or property appraiser and amounts necessary to offset discounts received for early payment of stormwater utility assessments pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act or for early payment of stormwater utility assessments collected pursuant to section 53-81; 
(14)	All other costs and expenses necessary to incidental to the acquisition, provision, or construction of stormwater utility services, facilities, or programs, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any related financing authorized by the city council by subsequent resolution; 
(15)	A reasonable amount for contingency and anticipated delinquencies and uncollectible stormwater utility assessments; and reimbursement to the city or any other person for any moneys advanced for any costs incurred by the city or such person in connection with any of the foregoing components of stormwater utility assessed cost. In the event the city also imposes an impact fee upon new growth or development for stormwater utility related capital improvements, the stormwater utility assessed cost shall not include costs attributable to capital improvements necessitated by new growth or development. 
Stormwater utility assessment means a special assessment lawfully imposed by the city against assessed property to fund all or any portion of the cost of the provision of stormwater utility services, facilities, or programs providing a special benefit to property as a consequence of possessing a logical relationship to the value, use, or characteristics of property identified in the initial assessment resolution or the preliminary rate resolution. 
Tax roll means the real property ad valorem tax assessment roll maintained by the property appraiser for the purpose of the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes. 
Uniform Assessment Collection Act means F.S. §§ 197.3632 and 197.3635, or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of nonad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. I, § 1.01, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-36. - Interpretation. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, words importing the singular number include the plural number, and vice versa; the terms "hereof," "hereby," "herein," "hereto," "hereunder," and similar terms refer to this article; and the term "hereafter" means after, and the term "heretofore" means before, the effective date of this article [February 28, 2005]. Words of any gender include the correlative words of the other genders, unless the sense indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. I, § 1.02, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-37. - General findings. 
It is hereby ascertained, determined, and declared that: 
(1)	Pursuant to article VIII, section 2(b), Florida Constitution, and F.S. §§ 166.021 and 166.041, and F.S. § 403.0893, the city council has all powers of local self government necessary to perform municipal functions, render municipal services except when prohibited by law, and such power may be exercised by the enactment of legislation in the form of city ordinances. Said powers specifically include the authority to construct, reconstruct, improve and extend stormwater management systems, or create stormwater utilities and to finance in whole or in part the costs of such systems and to establish just and equitable rates, fees, and charges for the services and facilities provided by such systems. 
(2)	The city council may exercise any governmental, corporate, or proprietary power for a municipal purpose except when expressly prohibited by law, and the city council may legislate on any subject matter on which the Florida Legislature may act, except those subjects described in F.S. § 166.021(3)(a)—(d). The subject matter of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of F.S. § 166.021(3), is not relevant to the imposition of assessments related to stormwater utility services, facilities, or programs of the city. 
(3)	The purpose of this article is to: 
a.	Provide procedures and standards for the imposition of citywide stormwater utility assessments under the general home rule powers of a municipality to impose special assessments; 
b.	Authorize a procedure for the funding of stormwater utility services, facilities, or programs providing special benefits to property within the city; and 
c.	Legislatively determine the special benefit provided to assessed property from the provision of stormwater utilities. 
(4)	The annual stormwater utility assessments to be imposed pursuant to this article shall constitute nonad valorem assessments within the meaning and intent of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(5)	The stormwater utility assessment imposed pursuant to this article is imposed by the City of DeBary, not the Volusia County Board of County Commissioners, Property Appraiser or Tax Collector. Any activity of the property appraiser or tax collector under the provisions of this article shall be construed as ministerial. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. I, § 1.03, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-38. - Legislative determinations of special benefit. 
It is hereby ascertained and declared that the stormwater utility services, facilities, and programs of the city provide a special benefit to property within the city based upon the following legislative determinations: 
(1)	The City Council of the City of DeBary, Florida, does hereby find that the Legislature of the State of Florida has adopted F.S. § 403.893, which encourages proper management of stormwater runoff and water quality. 
(2)	The stormwater utility services possess a logical relationship to the use and enjoyment of property by: 
a.	Providing availability and use of facilities or improvements by owners and occupants of property to properly and safely detain, retain, convey or treat stormwater discharge from such property; 
b.	Stabilizing or increasing of property values; 
c.	Increasing safety and better access to property; 
d.	Improved appearance; 
e.	Rendering property more adaptable to a current or reasonably foreseeable new and higher use; 
f.	Alleviating burdens caused by use of property; and 
g.	Fostering and enhancing environmentally responsible use and enjoyment of natural resources within the city. 
(3)	The benefits provided by the stormwater utility services bear a logical relationship to the value, use and characteristics of the property located within the city. 
(4)	The stormwater assessments authorized by this article provide an equitable method of funding stormwater utility services by fairly and reasonably allocating such costs to such benefited property classified on the basis of the stormwater burden expected to be generated by the physical characteristics and use of such property. 
(5)	The City Council of the City of DeBary finds that there is a desire to develop a stormwater management program to be responsible for the operation, construction, and maintenance of stormwater devices and for stormwater system planning. 
(6)	The City Council of the City of DeBary finds that the cost of operating and maintaining all stormwater management systems and the financing of existing and future necessary repairs, replacements, improvements, and extensions thereof, should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the benefits enjoyed and to be enjoyed and services received and to be received therefrom. 
(7)	The city council has recognized and determined that there exists a pressing need for stormwater improvements within the city; 
(8)	The City Council of the City of DeBary finds that property, including occupied residential property within the city is presently flooded or in danger of flooding and that said flooding is reoccurring and worsening; 
(9)	The City Council of the City of DeBary finds that stormwater control is an essential element of the public health, safety and welfare; 
(10)	The City Council of the City of DeBary finds that there are in excess of 2,300 vacant parcels of property within the city which may be developed and for which stormwater facilities will be required; 
(11)	The City Council of the City of DeBary finds that there exists a need to enhance the existing stormwater program by extending the stormwater assessments to vacant property in order to ensure proper drainage and future drainage for such sites. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. I, § 1.04, 2-28-05)  
Secs. 53-39—53-54. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ANNUAL STORMWATER UTILITY ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 53-55. - General authority. 
(a)	The city council is hereby authorized to impose an annual stormwater utility assessment to fund all or any portion of the stormwater utility assessed cost upon benefited property at a rate of assessment based on the special benefit accruing to such property from the city's provision of stormwater utility services, facilities, stormwater control, conservation, and aquifer recharge (also referred to as stormwater management). All stormwater utility assessments shall be imposed in conformity with the procedures set forth in this division. 
(b)	The amount of the stormwater utility assessment imposed in a fiscal year against a parcel of assessed property shall be determined pursuant to an apportionment methodology based upon a classification of property designed to provide a fair and reasonable apportionment of the stormwater utility assessed cost among properties on a basis reasonably related to the special benefit provided by stormwater utility services, facilities, or programs funded with assessment proceeds. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to require the imposition of stormwater utility assessments against government property. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.01, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-56. - Initial proceedings. 
The initial proceeding for the imposition of a Stormwater Utility Assessment shall be the adoption of an Initial Assessment Resolution by the City Council 
(1)	Contain a brief and general description of the stormwater utility services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(2)	Estimating the stormwater utility assessed cost to be assessed; 
(3)	Describing the method of apportioning the stormwater utility assessed cost and the computation of the stormwater utility assessment for specific properties; 
(4)	Providing a summary description of the parcels of property (conforming to the description contained on the tax roll) located within the city that receive a special benefit from the provision of stormwater utility services, facilities, or programs or describing a specific geographic area in which such service, facility, or program will be provided; 
(5)	Establishing an assessment rate for the upcoming fiscal year; and 
(6)	Directing the city manager to: 
a.	Prepare the initial assessment roll, as required by section 53-57, 
b.	Publish the notice required by section 53-58, and 
c.	Mail the notice required by section 53-59 using information then available from the tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.02, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-57. - Initial assessment roll. 
(a)	The city manager shall prepare, or direct the preparation of, the initial assessment roll, which shall contain the following: 
(1)	A summary description of all assessed property conforming to the description contained on the tax roll. 
(2)	The name of the owner of the assessed property. 
(3)	The amount of the stormwater utility assessment to be imposed against each such parcel of assessed property. 
(b)	The initial assessment roll shall be retained by the city manager and shall be open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the assessment roll be in printed form if the amount of the stormwater utility assessment for each parcel of property can be determined by use of a computer terminal available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.03, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-58. - Notice by publication. 
Upon completion of the initial assessment roll, the city manager shall publish, or direct the publication of, once in the newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice stating that at a meeting of the city council on a certain day and hour, not earlier than 20 calendar days from such publication, which meeting shall be a regular, adjourned, or special meeting, the city council will hear objections of all interested persons to the final assessment resolution which shall establish the rate of assessment and approve the aforementioned initial assessment roll. The published notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Such notice shall include: 
(1)	A geographic depiction of the property subject to the stormwater utility assessment; 
(2)	A brief and general description of the stormwater utility services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(3)	The rate of assessment; 
(4)	The procedure for objecting provided in section 53-60; 
(5)	The method by which the stormwater utility assessment will be collected; and 
(6)	A statement that the initial assessment roll is available for inspection at the office of the city clerk and all interested persons may ascertain the amount to be assessed against a parcel of assessed property at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.04, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-59. - Notice by mail. 
In addition to the published notice required by section 53-58, the city manager shall provide notice, or direct the provision of notice, of the proposed stormwater utility assessment by first class mail to the owner of each parcel of property (except government property) subject to the stormwater utility assessment. Such notice shall include: 
(1)	The purpose of the stormwater utility assessment; 
(2)	The rate of assessment to be levied against each parcel of property; 
(3)	The unit of measurement applied to determine the stormwater utility assessment; 
(4)	The number of such units contained in each parcel of property; 
(5)	The total revenue to be collected by the city from the stormwater utility assessment; 
(6)	A statement that failure to pay the stormwater utility assessment will cause a tax certificate to be issued against the property or foreclosure proceedings to be instituted, either of which may result in a loss of title to the property; 
(7)	A statement that all affected owners have a right to appear at the hearing and to file written objections with the city council within 20 days of the notice; and 
(8)	The date, time, and place of the hearing. The mailed notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
Notice shall be mailed at least 20 calendar days prior to the hearing to each owner at such address as is shown on the tax roll. Notice shall be deemed mailed upon delivery thereof to the possession of the United States Postal Service. The city manager may provide proof of such notice by affidavit. Failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a stormwater utility assessment imposed by the city council pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.05, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-60. - Adoption of final assessment resolution. 
At the time named in such notice, or to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken by the city council, the city council shall receive any written objections of interested persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the city council adopt the final assessment resolution which shall: 
(1)	Confirm, modify, or repeal the initial assessment resolution with such amendments, if any, as may be deemed appropriate by the city council; 
(2)	Establish the rate of assessment to be imposed in the upcoming fiscal year; 
(3)	Approve the initial assessment roll, with such amendments as it deems just and right; and 
(4)	Determine the method of collection. 
The adoption of the final assessment resolution by the city council shall constitute a legislative determination that all parcels assessed derive a special benefit from the stormwater utility services, facilities, or programs to be provided or constructed and a legislative determination that the stormwater utility assessments are fairly and reasonably apportioned among the properties that receive the special benefit. All objections to the final assessment resolution shall constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year in which stormwater utility assessments are imposed or reimposed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.06, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-61. - Effect of final assessment resolution. 
The stormwater utility assessment for the initial fiscal year shall be established upon adoption of the final assessment resolution. The adoption of the final assessment resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit and fair apportionment to the assessed property, the method of apportionment and assessment, the initial rate of assessment, the initial assessment roll, and the levy and lien of the stormwater utility assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the city council action on the final assessment resolution. The initial assessment roll, as approved by the final assessment resolution, shall be delivered to the tax collector, as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in section 53-81 is used to collect the stormwater utility assessments, or such other official as the city council by resolution shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.07, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-62. - Adoption of annual rate resolution. 
(a)	The city council shall adopt an annual rate resolution during its budget adoption process for each fiscal year following the initial fiscal year for which a stormwater utility assessment is imposed hereunder. 
(b)	The initial proceedings for the adoption of an annual rate resolution shall be the adoption of a preliminary rate resolution by the city council: 
(1)	Containing a brief and general description of the stormwater utility services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(2)	Estimating the stormwater utility assessed cost to be assessed for the upcoming fiscal year; 
(3)	Establishing the assessment rate for the upcoming fiscal year; 
(4)	Authorizing the date, time, and place of a public hearing to receive and consider comments from the public and consider the adoption of the annual rate resolution for the upcoming fiscal year; and 
(5)	Directing the city manager to: 
a.	Update the assessment roll, 
b.	Provide notice by publication and first class mail to affected owners in the event circumstances described in subsection (f) so require, and 
c.	Directing and authorizing any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper, necessary or convenient by the city. 
(c)	The annual rate resolution shall: 
(1)	Establish the rate of assessment to be imposed in the upcoming fiscal year; and 
(2)	Approve the assessment roll for the upcoming fiscal year with such adjustments as the city council deems just and right. 
The Assessment roll shall be prepared in accordance with the method of apportionment set forth in the initial assessment resolution together with modifications, if any, an as confirmed in the final assessment resolution or as provided in the preliminary rate resolution. 
(d)	Nothing herein shall preclude the city council from providing annual notification to all owners of assessed property in the manner provided in either or both sections 53-58 or 53-59. 
(e)	Nothing herein shall preclude the city council from establishing by resolution a maximum rate of assessment provided that notice of such maximum assessment rate is provided pursuant to sections 53-58 and 53-59. 
(f)	In the event 
(1)	The proposed stormwater utility assessment for any fiscal year exceeds the maximum rate of assessment adopted by the city council and included in the notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 53-58 and 53-59; 
(2)	The method of apportionment is changed or the purpose for which the stormwater utility assessment is imposed is substantially changed from that represented by notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 53-58 and 53-59; 
(3)	Assessed property is reclassified in a manner which results in an increased stormwater utility assessment from that presented by notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 53-58 and 53-59; or 
(4)	An assessment roll contains assessed property that was not included on the assessment roll approved for the prior fiscal year, 
notice shall be provided by publication and first class mail to the owners of such assessed property. Such notice shall substantially conform with the notice requirements set forth in sections 53-58 and 53-59 and inform the owner of the date, time, and place for the adoption of the annual rate resolution. The failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence, shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a stormwater utility assessment imposed by the city council pursuant to this article. 
(g)	As to any assessed property not included on an assessment roll approved by the adoption of the final assessment resolution or a prior year's annual rate resolution, the adoption of the succeeding annual rate resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented as to such assessed property (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit and fair apportionment to the assessed property, the method of apportionment and assessment, the rate of assessment, the assessment roll, and the levy and lien of the stormwater utility assessment), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the city council action on the annual rate resolution. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to affect the finality of any stormwater utility assessment not challenged within the required 20-day period for those stormwater utility assessments imposed against assessed property by the inclusion of the assessed property on an assessment roll approved in the final assessment resolution or any subsequent annual rate resolution. 
(h)	The assessment roll, as approved by the annual rate resolution, shall be delivered to the tax collector as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in section 53-81 is used to collect the stormwater utility assessments, such other official as the city council by resolution shall designate. If the stormwater utility assessment against any property shall be sustained, reduced, or abated by the court, an adjustment shall be made on the assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.08, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-63. - Lien of stormwater utility assessments. 
Upon the adoption of the assessment roll, all stormwater utility assessments shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims, until paid. The lien for a stormwater utility assessment shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the city council of the final assessment resolution or the annual rate resolution, whichever is applicable. The lien for a stormwater utility assessment collected under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act shall attach to the property included on the Assessment Roll as of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the tax roll. The lien for a stormwater utility assessment collected under the alternative method of collection provided in section 53-81 shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the city council of the final assessment resolution or the annual rate resolution, whichever is applicable, and shall attach to the property of such date of adoption. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.09, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-64. - Revisions to stormwater utility assessments. 
If any stormwater utility assessment made under the provisions of this article is either in whole or in part annulled, vacated, or set aside by the judgment of any court, of if the city council is satisfied that any such stormwater utility assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the city council has omitted any property on the assessment roll which property should have been so included, the city council may take all necessary steps to impose a new stormwater utility assessment against any property benefited by the stormwater utility assessed costs, following as nearly as may be practicable, the provisions of this article and in case such second stormwater utility assessment is annulled, vacated, or set aside, the city council may obtain and impose other stormwater utility assessments until a valid stormwater utility assessment is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.10, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-65. - Procedural irregularities. 
Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any stormwater utility assessment under the provision of this article shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any stormwater utility assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such stormwater utility assessment was duly levied, that the stormwater utility assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings adequate to such stormwater utility assessment were duly had, taken, and performed as required by this article; and such variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.11, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-66. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(a)	No Uniform Assessment Collection Act of error or omission on the part of the property appraiser, tax collector, city manager, city council, or their deputies or employees, shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment of a stormwater utility assessment imposed by the city council under the provision of this article. 
(b)	When it shall appear that any stormwater utility assessment should have been imposed under this article against a parcel of property specially benefited by the provision of stormwater utility services, facilities, or programs, but that such property was omitted from the assessment roll or was not listed on the tax roll as an individual parcel of property as of the effective date of the assessment roll approved by the annual rate resolution for any upcoming fiscal year, the city council may, upon provision of a notice by mail provided to the owner of the omitted parcel in the manner and form provided in section 53-59, impose the applicable stormwater utility assessment for the fiscal year in which such error is discovered, in addition to the applicable stormwater utility assessment due for the prior two fiscal years. Such stormwater utility assessment shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims in and to or against the real property involved, shall be collected as provided in division 3, and shall be deemed perfected on the date of adoption of the resolution imposing the omitted or delinquent assessments. 
(c)	Prior to the delivery of the assessment roll to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the city manager shall have the authority at any time, upon his or her own initiative or in response to a timely filed petition from the owner of any property subject to a stormwater utility assessment, to reclassify property based upon presentation of competent and substantial evidence, and correct any error in applying the stormwater utility assessment apportionment method to any particular parcel of property not otherwise requiring the provision of notice pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any such correction shall be considered valid ab initio and shall in no way affect the enforcement of the stormwater utility assessment imposed under the provisions of this article. All requests from affected property owners of any such changes, modifications or corrections shall be referred to, and processed by, the city manager and not the property appraiser or tax collector. 
(d)	After the assessment roll has been delivered to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, any changes, modifications, or corrections thereto shall be made in accordance with the procedures applicable to correcting errors and insolvencies on the tax roll upon timely written request and direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.12, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-67. - Interim assessments. 
An interim stormwater utility assessment shall be imposed against all property for which a certificate of occupancy is issued after adoption of the annual rate resolution. The amount of the interim stormwater utility assessment shall be calculated upon a monthly rate, which shall be one-twelfth of the annual rate for such property computed in accordance with the annual rate resolution for the fiscal year's stormwater utility assessment. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until full payment of the interim stormwater utility assessment is received by the city. Issuance of the certificate of occupancy by mistake or inadvertence, and without the payment in full of the interim stormwater utility assessment, shall not relieve the owner of such property of the obligation of full payment. For the purpose of this provision, such interim stormwater utility assessment shall be deemed due and payable on the date the certificate of occupancy was issued and shall constitute a lien against such property as of that date. Said lien shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved and shall be deemed perfected upon the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. II, § 2.13, 2-28-05)  
Secs. 53-68—53-79. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COLLECTION AND USE OF STORMWATER UTILITY ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 53-80. - Method of collection. 
(a)	Unless otherwise directed by the city council, the stormwater utility assessments shall be collected pursuant to the uniform method provided in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any hearing or notice required by this article may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(b)	The amount of a stormwater utility assessment to be collected using the uniform method pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act for any specific parcel of benefited property may include an amount equivalent to the payment delinquency, delinquency fees and recording costs for a prior year's assessment for a comparable service, facility, or program provided: 
(1)	The collection method used in connection with the prior year's assessment did not employ the use of the uniform method of collection authorized by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; 
(2)	Notice is provided to the owner as required under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; and 
(3)	Any lien on the affected parcel for the prior year's assessment is supplanted and transferred to such stormwater utility assessment upon certification of a nonad valorem roll to the tax collector by the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. III, § 3.01, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-81. - Alternative method of collection. 
In lieu of utilizing the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the city may elect to collect the stormwater utility assessment by any other method which is authorized by law or under the alternative collection method provided by this section: 
(1)	The city shall provide stormwater utility assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of property, other than government property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
a.	A brief explanation of the stormwater utility assessment; 
b.	A description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the stormwater utility assessment; 
c.	The number of units contained within the parcel; 
d.	The total amount of the stormwater utility assessment imposed against the parcel for the appropriate period; 
e.	The location at which payment will be accepted; 
f.	The date on which the stormwater utility assessment is due; and 
g.	A statement that the stormwater utility assessment constituted a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and other nonad valorem assessments. 
(2)	A general notice of the lien resulting from imposition of the stormwater utility assessments shall be recorded in the official records of the county. Nothing herein shall be construed to require that individual liens or releases be filed in the official records. 
(3)	The city shall have the right to foreclose and collect all delinquent stormwater utility assessments in the manner provided by law for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property or appoint or retain an agent to institute such foreclosure and collection proceedings. A stormwater utility assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date any installment is due. The city or its agent shall notify any property owner who is delinquent in payment of his or her stormwater utility assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state in effect that the city or its agent will either: 
a.	Initiate a foreclosure action or suit in equity and cause the foreclosure of such property subject to a delinquent stormwater utility assessment in a method now or hereafter provided by law for foreclosures of mortgages on real property; or 
b.	Cause an amount equivalent to the delinquent stormwater utility assessment, not previously subject to collection using the uniform method under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, to be collected on the tax bill for a subsequent year. 
(4)	All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any foreclosure action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the city may be the purchaser to the same extent as any person. The city or its agent may join in one foreclosure action the collection of stormwater utility assessments against any or all property assessed in accordance with the provisions hereof. All delinquent owners whose property is foreclosed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city and its agents, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent stormwater utility assessments and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent stormwater utility assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of, or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(5)	In lieu of foreclosure, any delinquent stormwater utility assessment and the costs, fees and expenses attributable thereto, may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, provided however, that: 
a.	Notice is provided to the owner in the manner required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and this article; and 
b.	Any existing lien of record on the affected parcel for the delinquent stormwater utility assessment is supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of the assessment roll, as applicable, to the tax collector. 
(6)	Notwithstanding the city's use of an alternative method of collection, the city manager shall have the same power and authority to correct errors and omissions as provided to him or county officials in section 53-66. 
(7)	Any city council action required in the collection of stormwater utility assessments may be by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. III, § 3.02, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-82. - Government property. 
(a)	If stormwater utility assessments are imposed against government property, the city shall provide stormwater utility assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of government property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
(1)	A brief explanation of the stormwater utility assessment; 
(2)	A description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the stormwater utility assessment; 
(3)	The number of units contained within the parcel; 
(4)	The total amount of the parcel's stormwater utility assessment for the appropriate period; 
(5)	The location at which payment will be accepted; and 
(6)	The date on which the stormwater utility assessment is due. 
(b)	Stormwater utility assessments imposed against government property shall be due on the same date as all other stormwater utility assessments and, if applicable, shall be subject to the same discounts for early payment. 
(c)	A stormwater utility assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date any installment is due. The city shall notify the owner of any government property that is delinquent in payment of its stormwater utility assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state that the city will initiate a mandamus or other appropriate judicial action to compel payment. 
(d)	All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any mandamus or other action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. All delinquent owners of government property against which a mandamus or other appropriate action is filed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent stormwater utility assessments and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent stormwater utility assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of, or in action to, the costs of the action. 
(e)	As an alternative to the foregoing, a stormwater utility assessment imposed against government property may be collected as a surcharge on a utility bill provided to such government property in periodic installments with a remedy of a mandamus action in the event of nonpayment. The city council may contract such billing services with any utility, whether or not such utility is owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. III, § 3.03, 2-28-05)  
Secs. 53-83—53-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 53-95. - Applicability. 
This article and the city's authority to impose assessments pursuant hereto shall be applicable throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. IV, § 4.01, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 53-96. - Alternative method. 
(a)	This article shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized hereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarding as in derogation of any powers not existing or which may hereafter come into existence. This article, being necessary for the welfare of the inhabitants of the city, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(b)	Nothing herein shall preclude the city council from directing and authorizing, by resolution, the combination with each other of: 
(1)	Any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper, necessary, or convenient by the city; 
(2)	Any notice required by this article; or 
(3)	Any notice required by law, including the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, art. IV, § 4.02, 2-28-05)  
APPENDIX A - FEE SCHEDULE[1] 
Description 	Fee 	Section 
This Code 
Chapter 10. Animals 		
Article II. Animal Control 		
(a) 	Impoundment 	[Fees are on file 
in the city 
clerks office] 	10-36(d) 
Chapter 26. Emergency Services 		
Article II. Alarm Systems 		
(a) 	Failure to terminate false alarm 	$ 25.00 	26-37 
(b) 	Failure to register alarm 	25.00 	26-37 
False alarms: 	
	First or second response in 6 months from last false alarm 	no charge 	26-38 
	Third response or more in 6 months from second response, each 	  50.00 	26-38 
	Third response or more in 6 months from second response where disconnection for repeated failure is not possible 	 100.00 	26-38 
Chapter 30. Environment 		
Article II. Property Maintenance 		
(a) 	Appeal of nuisance notice 	50.00 	30-40 
(b) 	Abatement of nuisance, cost plus 	100.00 	30-42 
Article IV. Noise 		
(a) 	Permit for loudspeaker 	5.00 	30-139 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fees and funds, § 2-216 et seq. 

LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE FOR THE CITY OF DEBARY, FLORIDA 
____________ 
FIRST PUBLIC HEARING 
2007 
SECOND PUBLIC HEARING 
2007 
____________ 
Preparation of this document was aided through financial assistance received from the State of Florida authorized by the 1995 Session of the Florida Legislature and administered by the Florida Department of Community Affairs. 
____________ 
 
2007 
City of Debary 
City Council 
  
  George Coleman, Mayor 
Christopher Carson 
Patrick Fulton, Vice Mayor 
Danny Tillis 
Jack Lenzen 
  
  
  
  
  
  
2007 
City Staff 
  
  Maryann Courson, City Manager 
  
  
  
  
  
  
PREFACE 
This volume constitutes a republication of the Land Development Code for the City of DeBary, Florida, as amended through Ordinance No. 08-07, adopted March 7, 2007. The original "articles" of the Land Development Code have been converted to "chapters," a uniform system of section and subsection numbering has been imposed, and documents adopted by reference in the Land Development Code (portions of the Volusia County Land Development Code and the Volusia County Zoning Ordinance) have been included. 
Source materials used in the preparation of this volume were the City of DeBary, Florida, Land Development Code, adopted on November 3, 1999, being Ordinance No. 01-99, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is indicated in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. By use of the comparative table appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of Ordinance No. 01-99 and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 4-1 and 4-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 4-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CCT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index appearing in the back of this book is an extremely useful tool for locating information. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology and others in legal terminology. There are cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of David D. Beach, Code Attorney, and James Gager, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Maryann Courson, City Manager, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of DeBary, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of DeBary, Florida. 
©  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of DeBary, Florida. 2007. 
ORDINANCE NO. 01-99 
  
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DeBARY, FLORIDA, ADOPTING THE LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE FOR THE CITY OF DeBARY, FLORIDA AND ADOPTING THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE CITY OF DeBARY; AUTHORIZING RECODIFICATION AND, PROVIDING FOR CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY AND AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
WHEREAS, the City of DeBary as authorized and directed by Chapter 163, F.S., did prepare and adopt a comprehensive plan to direct the appropriate growth and development of the City; and 
WHEREAS, the City conducted an extensive process of citizen participation, conducted studies, and prepared a proposed plan; and 
WHEREAS, the Mayor and City Council adopted the Comprehensive Plan pursuant to Ordinance No. 03-97 on March 5, 1997, revised the Comprehensive Plan pursuant to Ordinance No. 15-97 on September 3, 1997 and pursuant to State Statute the Comprehensive Plan became effective on November 5, 1997; and 
WHEREAS, F.S. 163.3194 mandates that all land developments regulation enacted or amended shall be consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan; and 
WHEREAS, the intent of F.S. 163.3201 is that adopted comprehensive plans shall be implemented in part, by the adoption and enforcement of appropriate local regulations on the development of lands and waters within the area. 
IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF DeBARY AS FOLLOWS: 
SECTION 1. The Land Development Code for the City of DeBary is hereby adopted. The Code shall consist of Articles 1 through 5 and the official zoning map of the City of DeBary hereto attached as Exhibit "A" and Exhibit "B" respectively. 
SECTION 2. The City Manager and City Attorney are hereby authorized to codify the Land Development Code Ordinance so as to incorporate the related ordinance and regulations, including but not limited to the Landscaping Ordinance, the Sign Ordinance and the Fence Ordinance. 
SECTION 3. That all ordinance or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith be and same are hereby revoked. 
SECTION 4. If any section or portion of a section of this Ordinance proves to be invalid, unlawful, or unconstitutional, it shall not be held to impair the validity, force, or effect of any other section or part of a section of this Ordinance. 
SECTION 5. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its adoption. 
FIRST READING this 6th day of October, 1999. 
SECOND READING this 3rd day of November, 1999. 
  
CITY COUNCIL     CITY OF DeBARY, FLORIDA 
  
	/s/ Donald E. Smith 
      Mayor 
 	 
  
ATTEST: 
/s/ Maryann Yaskanich 
      City Clerk 	
 	 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Short title. 
This Code shall be known as the "Land Development Code for the City of DeBary, Florida" and may be referred to as the "Land Development Code," "this Code," or the "LDC." 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(101), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 1-2. - Authority and purpose. 
(a)	Authority. This Code is enacted pursuant to F.S. § 163.3202, and F.S. ch. 166, and the Charter and ordinances of the City. 
(b)	Purpose. 
(1)	In accordance with F.S. § 163.3202, this Code is adopted to implement the Comprehensive Plan of the City by insuring that all development orders issued by the City are consistent with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)	This Code establishes regulations for the use of land and water, redevelopment, subdivision of land, site design, stormwater management, floodplain management, protection of environmentally sensitive lands, protection of potable water well fields, prevention of blight and deterioration of property, preservation of historic resources, prevention of the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population; and provides for transportation, public utilities, schools, parks, and other public infrastructure, the maintenance of levels of service for infrastructure, and other regulations necessary to promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the people. 
(3)	Land owned by the City of DeBary and developed or used for public parks or any City governmental function that promotes or benefits the comfort, convenience, safety, general welfare and happiness of citizens may not be regulated by this Code as such use of lands is considered to be for the best interest of the citizens of DeBary. 
(c)	Conflict. In the event of a conflict between any regulations of this Code, or between these regulations and any other regulations governing the same activity, the most restrictive regulation shall apply. Where there is a conflict between this Code and the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City, the provision of the Comprehensive Plan shall prevail as determined by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(102), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)	Generally. The words used in this Code shall be construed to effect the intended purposes. Definitions of various words and phrases used throughout the Code are provided in this article. Other definitions may be found in specific sections of the Code and apply only to that section or portion of the Code. All words or phrases not specifically defined shall be given their common and usual meanings as determined by general usage and standard dictionary references. 
(b)	Usage; general rules of construction. The following general rules of interpretation shall apply: 
(1)	The present tense includes the future, and, where appropriate, the past. 
(2)	The singular number includes the plural, and vice versa. The male gender includes the female, and vice versa. 
(3)	The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
(4)	Reference in one section of this Code to another section of this Code by section number shall include all subsections within that section. 
(5)	Where appropriate to the context, words and terms defined in F.S. chs. 163 and 380 shall apply here. Some sections of this Code contain separate definitions sections intended primarily for use in connection with the relevant section or portion of the Code. 
(6)	Webster's Merriam Collegiate Dictionary (G. & C. Merriam Co., 11th edition, 2003) shall be used for the definitions of any words not defined in this Code or as provided in the preceding subsections. 
(7)	Determinations as to the meaning of a word or term shall be the responsibility of the City Manager, whose decision may be appealed as provided herein. 
(c)	Words and terms defined. The following words and phrases, as used in this Code, shall have the following meanings: 
Abandon shall mean any cessation of an existing use of land or of any structure thereon for a period greater than that specified by this Code, other than a cessation necessarily incident to probate, bankruptcy or mortgage foreclosure proceedings, or to the temporary absences of part-time residents. 
Abandoned sign shall mean any sign face or sign structure which advertises a business no longer conducted on the premises for over 90 days. In making the determination that a sign advertises a business no longer being conducted, the City Manager shall consider any or all of the following: the existence or absence of a current occupational license, utility service deposit or account, use of the premises, and relocation of the business. 
Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) shall mean a structure that is located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal investment, may not be used for human habitation with the exception of garage apartments as defined herein, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are swimming pools, detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds. 
Accessory use shall mean a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building, and located on the same lot with the principal use or building. 
Addition (to an existing building) shall mean any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing walls is new construction. 
Add-on sign shall mean any additional sign added to a previously permitted and/or conforming sign. 
Adult bookstore shall mean any corporation, partnership, or business of any kind which restricts or purports to restrict admission only to adults, which has as part of its stock, books, magazines, other periodicals, videos, discs, or other graphic media, and which offers, sells, provides, or rents for a fee, any sexually oriented material. 
Adult theatre shall mean a premises which exhibits any motion picture, exhibition, show, live show, representation, or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse and is harmful to minors, as defined in F.S. § 847.013, as may be amended, and admission of minors to which is unlawful in accordance with F.S. § 847.013, as may be amended. This includes any exhibition to one or more persons, including facilities commonly known as peep booths or peep shows. 
Advertising structure shall mean any structure installed for advertising purposes, with or without any advertisement display thereon, situated upon or attached to real property upon which any poster, bill, printing, painting, device or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed, posted, painted, tacked, nailed or otherwise fastened, affixed or displayed; provided, however, that said term shall not include buildings. 
A-frame sign shall mean a movable sign not secure or attached to the ground as required by this Code. 
Agricultural use shall mean the use of land in horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, forestry, dairy, livestock, poultry, beekeeping, pisciculture and all forms of farm products and farm production. 
Air curtain incinerator shall mean a portable or stationary combustion device that directs a plane of high-velocity forced draft air through a manifold head into a pit with vertical walls in such a manner as to maintain a curtain of air over the surface of the pit and a recirculating motion of air under the curtain. 
Alteration shall mean any changes in structural parts; type of construction; kind or class of occupancy. The term "alteration" shall include the term "alter" or "reconstruct." 
Altered wetlands shall mean wetlands which have been substantially affected by man, but which continue to be dominated by wetland or transitional vegetation. 
Alternative support structure shall mean structures other than communication towers, which may include, but are not limited to, buildings, water towers, light poles, power poles, telephone poles, and other essential public utility structures. 
Animals shall mean and include, but is not limited to, both household pets and farm animals. 
Animated sign shall mean a sign with physical or light action or motion or the appearance thereof, including lenticulation, wind actuated elements, rotating, oscillating, fluttering, flashing, or swinging signs, or banners, but excluding permitted flags. 
Antenna shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephone, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Apartment, garage, shall mean an accessory building containing a storage area for one or more motor vehicles and one single-family dwelling occupying not more than 800 square feet of living area for residential use by family members of the occupants of the primary residential structure and shall not be rented to unrelated persons or used as a rental apartment. 
Appeal shall mean a request for a review of the City Manager's interpretation of any provision of this Code. It shall also mean a request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this Code. 
Applicant shall mean any person applying for or who has been granted a development order and/or permit to proceed with a project, or an owner or owner's authorized agent who submits an application or project to the City. 
Application shall mean and refer to an application or petition or proposal submitted to the City for review or approval of: 
(1)	A preliminary subdivision plan; 
(2)	A subdivision plan or plat, including any revisions to a previously approved or existing subdivision or plat; 
(3)	A rezoning (with or without a Comprehensive Plan amendment); 
(4)	A Comprehensive Plan amendment; 
(5)	A variance; 
(6)	A special exception; 
(7)	A Planned Unit Development; 
(8)	A subdivision review exemption; 
(9)	A site plan; 
(10)	A development permit for construction, inspection and testing of subdivision improvements; 
(11)	A conceptual site plan review; 
(12)	A stormwater management permit; 
(13)	A tree removal permit; 
(14)	A wetland alteration permit; 
(15)	A development agreement; 
(16)	Other development related matters for which City approval or review is required. 
Aquaculture shall mean cultivation of animal and plant life in a water environment. 
Area of shallow flooding shall mean a designated AO, AH or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard shall mean the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This term is synonymous with the phrase "special flood hazard area." 
Arterial shall mean a public road, the primary, though not sole, purpose or use of which is to facilitate through movement of vehicles in moderate to substantial volume, rather than the providing of direct access to abutting properties. 
Arterial corridor shall mean the land area comprised of an arterial and its intersections, and that part of any intersecting nonarterial street and its intersections which is within 660 feet of the arterial as measured along the centerline of the nonarterial street from the centerline of the arterial. 
Arterial road shall mean a route providing service which is or has the potential of relatively continuous and/or relatively high traffic volume, long average trip length, high operative speed, and high mobility importance. In addition, all United States or state numbered highways shall be considered arterial roads. 
Artificial drainage system shall mean any canal, ditch, culvert, dike, storm sewer or other manmade facility which tends to control the surface flow of water. 
Artificial lighting shall mean any source of temporary, fixed or movable light emanating from a manmade device, including, but not limited to, incandescent mercury vapor, metal halide, or sodium lamps, spotlights, streetlights, construction security lights or lights which illuminate signs. This definition shall not include handheld or vehicular lighting. 
As-built plans shall mean the amended final site plans specifying the locations, dimensions, elevations, capacities and capabilities of structures or facilities as they have been constructed. 
Assisted living facility shall mean a licensed group residential facility that provides assistance with activities of daily living for senior citizens. Assisted living facilities can also include those facilities which provide a continuum of care from independent living to nursing assistance. 
Automobile service station. 
(1)	Type A shall mean any premises used for the servicing of motor vehicles, including engine tuneups and repair; wheel balancing, alignment, brake service; the retail sale of fuel, lubricants and other products necessary to the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles, and the installation of such products, plus the sale of refreshments, but excluding the rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, and body repair. 
(2)	Type B shall mean in addition to Type A uses, any repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of any motor vehicle. 
Background area of sign shall mean the entire background area of a sign upon which copy could be placed. In computing the area of a sign background, only that face or faces which can be seen from any one direction at one time shall be counted. 
Background traffic shall mean traffic on the public arterial roads network not attributable to the proposed development order. 
Banner shall mean any sign having the characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, balloons or fabric of any kind with such material serving as the foundation. The term "banner" shall also include pennant or any animated, rotating and/or fluttering device, with or without lettering for design, and manufactured and placed for the purpose of attracting attention. 
Banner sign shall mean a temporary on-site sign made of canvas or other flexible materials with or without a structural frame and attached to a building, canopy, pole or other structure. 
Bar shall mean premises devoted primarily to the retailing and drinking of malt, vinous or other alcoholic beverages, or any other premises where any sign is exhibited or displayed indicating that alcoholic beverages are obtainable for consumption on the premises. The term "bar" shall include the terms "saloon," "tavern," "pub," "barroom," "cocktail lounge" and "cabaret." 
Base flood shall mean the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood" and the "regulatory flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this Code. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the water-surface elevation associated with the base flood. 
Basement shall mean that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Bed and breakfast homestay shall mean an owner-occupied building used as a single-family residential dwelling that provides overnight lodging and breakfast to transient, paying guests. The homestay use is to be incidental to the primary use as a private residence. 
Bicycle facilities shall mean a general term denoting improvements and provisions made to accommodate or encourage bicycling, including parking facilities, maps, all bikeways, and shared use of roadways not specifically designed for bicycle use. 
Bikeways shall mean any road, path or way which in some manner is specifically designated as being open to bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or are to be shared with other transportation modes. 
Billboard shall mean any sign over 200 square feet in area, including any ground sign or sign mounted on a building or other structure. 
Blade sign shall mean a sign frame with a mounting bracket that is typically maintained perpendicular to the wall. 
Block shall mean a group of lots existing within well-defined and fixed boundaries, usually being an area surrounded by streets or other physical barriers and having an assigned number, letter or other name through which it may be identified. 
Boathouse shall mean an accessory structure designed solely for the protection or storage of watercraft. 
Breakaway wall shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
Buffer shall mean upland areas adjacent to wetlands which are necessary to protect the wetlands and wetland species from the detrimental impacts of development or alteration. The buffer shall include canopy, understory and groundcover which consists of preserved existing vegetation or planted native species. 
Buildable area shall mean that portion of a lot excluding the front, rear, side or waterfront yards as set forth in the single-family residential or two-family residential classification in division 3, article III of chapter 3. 
Building shall mean any structure, including lunch wagons, dining cars, trailers, mobile homes, sheds, garages, carports, animal kennels, storerooms, billboards, signs, gasoline pumps, and similar structures, whether stationary or movable. Also see "Structure." 
Building frontage shall mean each lineal foot, or major portion thereof, measured along the main entry side of a building. Where buildings form an "L" or "U," all main entry sides are measured. 
Building height shall mean the vertical distance from the finished grade, along the front of the structure, to the highest point of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof; or to the average distance between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs; or, if no roof, to the highest point of any structure, or communication tower. 
Building line shall mean the line established by minimum yard requirements outside of which no principal structure may be erected. 
Building permit shall mean the permit required by section 103 of the state building code, as adopted by the City. 
Building, principal, shall mean the building in which the principal use conducted on the lot is located. 
Building setback line shall mean that line parallel to and of the same configuration as the lot line, and which is located behind the front lot line, the minimum distance required by the front yard requirements of this Code, in front of which no structure shall be permitted, erected or placed. 
Bulkhead shall mean a structure or partition to retain or prevent sliding of the land. A secondary purpose is to protect the upland against damage from wave action; a form of rigid armoring. 
Bulkhead line shall mean a governmentally ordered, legally described line, established in or along a river, watercourse or other body of water, that establishes the minimum distance from the water any property improvements must be located. The term "bulkhead line" shall include the term "seawall line." 
Cafeteria shall mean premises where a variety of foods and beverages are prepared in advance and then selected by customers from a buffet for consumption on the premises. 
Caliper shall mean trunk diameter measurement of nursery grown trees. The trunk caliper (trunk diameter) is measured six inches from the ground on trees up to and including four inches in caliper, and 12 inches above the ground for larger trees. Since trunks are seldom round, the average of the largest diameter and that perpendicular to it is referred to as caliper. Any accurate device including a diameter tape may be used to measure caliper. 
Camouflaged communication tower shall mean a communication tower designed to reasonably blend into the existing surroundings and be disguised so as to not have the appearance of a communication tower. Such structures shall be considered communication towers and not spires, belfries, cupolas, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level for purposes of applying height limitations. 
Camper. See "Mobile recreational shelters and vehicles." 
Campground. See "Recreational vehicle park." 
Canopy shall mean a structure constructed of rigid materials, including but not limited to metal, wood, concrete, plastic, glass, which is attached to and supported by a building or by columns, poles or braces extended to the ground. 
Canopy sign shall mean a sign which is suspended from, attached to, printed on, supported from or forming a part of a canopy. 
Carwash shall mean a structure containing specialized mechanical apparatus and facilities for washing motor vehicles. 
Catering services shall mean premises where a variety of foods and beverages are primarily prepared in advance and then delivered to customers for consumption off the premises. 
Changeable copy sign shall mean a sign which has message characters that are not permanently attached to the sign, but which are attached to permit numerous changes of the message at the sign site without the repainting of any part of the sign or removal of any parts of the sign except the characters to be changed; also called a readerboard. 
Church. See "House of worship." 
City shall mean the City of DeBary, Florida. 
City Council shall mean the five elected members of the City Council. 
City Forester shall mean a person trained in the management and care of trees and forests designated by the City to administer the applicable provisions of this Code. 
City Manager shall mean the chief administrative officer for the City. 
City property shall mean land and appurtenances owned by the City. 
City staff shall mean and refer to City employees, City consultants, those companies, governments, individuals and other entities under contract with the City to provide services to or for the City. 
Classified shall mean a zoning classification of the zoning regulations. 
Clear trunk shall mean height measurement of the base portion of a tree trunk which is void of any foliage or branching measured from the natural soil line to the base of the lowest branches or fronds. 
Clearing shall mean the removal of any trees or brush from the land, but shall not include mowing or grubbing, except as provided in chapter 4, article III, division 2. 
Clinics: 
(1)	Medical shall mean premises where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more persons practicing any form of the human healing arts, whether they are medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, optometrists, or any similar professional licensed by the state. The term does not include a veterinarian clinic. 
(2)	Dental shall mean premises where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more persons practicing dentistry and licensed by the state. 
(3)	Veterinary shall mean premises for the medical and surgical care of sick or injured animals, with limited overnight facilities. 
Closure shall mean the termination of any regulated or prohibited nonresidential land use or activity covered by this Code. 
Clothing donation box shall mean any receptacle used for the collection of used clothing, shoes, and small household items donated by the public for redistribution. 
Club, night, shall mean commercial premises where food, alcoholic beverages or other refreshments may be obtained for consumption on the premises and where floor shows or other forms of entertainment may be provided for the customers. 
Club, private, shall mean nonprofit associations and organizations of a fraternal, social, leisure or recreational character. 
Cluster subdivision shall mean a development in which building lots may be reduced in size and buildings sited closer together, usually in groups or clusters; provided that the total development density does not exceed that which could be constructed on the site under conventional zoning classification. The additional land that remains undeveloped is then preserved as common open space. 
Collector road shall mean a route providing service which is of relatively moderate, average traffic volume, moderately average trip length, and moderately average operating speed. These routes also collect and distribute traffic between local roads and/or arterial roads and serve as a linkage between land access and mobility needs. 
Collocation shall mean the placement of more than one communication antenna by more than one telecommunications service provider on a single existing or new communication tower or other supporting structure. 
Common open space shall mean a commonly owned area of land reserved and designed for the leisure or recreational use of the owners of a residential development and may include recreational facilities. Common open space can be referred to as public space when including recreation facilities, or in nonresidential uses, such features as plazas or courtyards. 
Communication tower shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, amateur operator radio towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, associated equipment structures, and the like. 
(1)	Monopole tower shall mean a single, self-supporting communication tower of spin-cast concrete, concrete, steel or other similar materials containing no guy wires. 
(2)	Self-supporting lattice tower shall mean a communication tower which is self-supporting and has three or more sides of open-framed supports. 
(3)	Guyed tower shall mean a communication tower which is anchored with guy wires. 
Community residential home shall mean a dwelling unit licensed to serve clients of the state department of children and family services which provides a living environment for seven to 14 residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care by supportive staff as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of the residents. Pursuant to Florida Statutes Chapter 419, homes of six or fewer residents which otherwise meet the definition of a community residential home shall be deemed a single-family unit and a non-commercial residential use for the purpose of local laws and ordinances. Community residential homes of six or fewer residents shall be allowed in single and multi-family zoning without approval of the local government. 
Comprehensive Plan shall mean the plan for growth and development of the City adopted by the City Council (Ordinance No. 02-10, adopted October 6, 2010, and effective December 8, 2010) pursuant to the requirements of chapter 163, part II, Florida Statutes (F.S. § 163.2511 et seq.). 
Concurrency shall mean to ensure that public facilities and services needed to support development are available concurrent with the impacts of such developments. 
Consistency, Comprehensive Plan, shall mean this Code, or any provision thereof, is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan if it is not in conflict with and takes action in the direction of realizing the Comprehensive Plan's goals, objectives, or policies. 
Constrained arterial shall mean a state, local or county roadway upon which adding two or more through lanes to meet current or future traffic needs is not possible because of physical or policy barriers. 
Construction and demolition debris shall mean discarded materials generally considered to be not water soluble and nonhazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum wallboard, and lumber, from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure, including such debris from construction of structures at a site remote from the construction or demolition project site. The term includes rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter which normally results from land clearing or land development operations for a construction project; clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from a construction project; except as provided in F.S. § 403.707(13)(j), unpainted, nontreated wood scraps from facilities manufacturing materials used for construction of structures or their components and unpainted, nontreated wood pallets, provided the wood scraps and pallets are separated from other solid waste where generated and the generator of such wood scraps or pallets implements reasonable practices of the generating industry to minimize the commingling of wood scraps or pallets with other solid waste; and de minimis amounts of other nonhazardous wastes that are generated at construction or demolition projects, provided such amounts are consistent with best management practices of the construction and demolition industries. Mixing of construction and demolition debris with other types of solid waste will cause it to be classified as other than construction and demolition debris. 
Construction plans shall mean drawings or renderings, prepared by a state registered engineer or architect, showing how a specific structure, building or other improvement is to be constructed. 
Construction sign shall mean a temporary sign identifying those engaged in construction on any construction site while construction is active pursuant to a valid permit issued by the City. This includes all persons or artisans participating in said construction. 
Construction, start of, shall mean the duly permitted permanent placing or erection of construction materials into position. When excavation or removal by an existing structure has commenced in preparation for new construction, such excavation or removal shall be deemed to be the start of construction; provided that work continues thereafter until the new construction is completed. The term includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon or any physical operation on the premises required for building. The term shall also include the constructing, building, raising, assembling, relocating, placing, replacing, affixing, creating, structurally altering, painting, drawing, or in any other way creating or establishing a sign. It shall not include changing the copy or the customary maintenance or repair of a sign. 
Copy area of a sign shall mean the actual area of the sign upon which letters, marks or symbols are applied to any background area. (See "Background area of a sign.") 
County shall mean the County of Volusia, Florida. 
Cross sectional area shall mean the area of the trunk of a tree taken 4½ feet above the base of the tree measured perpendicular to the axis of the trunk. 
Damage shall mean harm or loss resulting from injury to property that causes a loss of value or impairment of its usefulness. 
Damage (trees) shall mean abuse to any plant material through actions or inactions which have caused severe decline, disfigurement, discoloration, defoliation, removal or death of the plant. "Abuse," as used in this definition, includes but is not limited to failure to properly water, fertilize, control pests and fungus, or prune; physically or chemically damaging a plant by cutting the main plant leader stem, removing any mature wood larger than three inches in diameter, topping or heading back, reducing the total circumference or canopy spread by more than one-third, burning, cutting, scarring, painting, or poisoning of trees. 
Datam shall mean a reference surface used to ensure that all elevation records are properly related. Many communities have their own datum that was developed before there was a national standard. The current national datum is the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, which is expressed in relation to mean sea level, or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
Day care center shall mean the premises where more than five persons, other than members of the immediate family occupying the premises, are kept under supervision. The term "day care center" includes day nurseries, kindergartens, day care services, day care center, day care agency, nursery school, play school, preschool or any other terms indicating that persons are under day care control; provided, however, this term does not include family day care homes as defined in F.S. § 402.302. 
Density shall mean the measure of the quantity of development activity in relation to the size of the site area within which the development occurs. Residential density is measured by the number of dwelling units per gross site area (in acres), not including dedicated rights-of-way, transmission and power line easements, lakes and areas defined as wetlands, and floodprone and preservation areas, and is also regulated by establishing a minimum lot size. In the determination of the number of residential dwelling units to be permitted on a specific parcel, a fractional unit shall not entitle the applicant to an additional unit. Nonresidential density (also referred to as intensity) is measured by "floor area ratio," which is the ratio of the total gross floor area of buildings on a site to the gross area of the site itself. 
Designated arterial shall mean an arterial, the location of which is defined with sufficient specificity so that a legal description may be derived therefrom and so that persons owning property affected thereby may be in a position to determine the nature and extent of such effect. 
Deteriorated tree shall mean degenerated or damaged to the point where death of the tree is imminent or to the point where the tree poses a significant hazard. 
Developer shall mean any person engaged in developing or improving a project or group of lots for use, occupancy or sale. 
Development shall mean any construction, installation, reconstruction, addition, renovation, demolition, or removal of a structure, impervious surface, or drainage facility; clearing, scraping, grubbing, killing, or otherwise removing vegetation from a site; adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piling, drilling operations, mining, dredging, paving, filling or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil, mud, sand, or rock of a site; or any other change to real property; or storage of materials or equipment. 
Development agreement shall mean an agreement between the City and one or more parties directly involved in a development project, and which may articulate special provisions or limitations applicable to the subject development. See section 2-7. 
Development order shall mean an order issued by or on behalf of the City indicating that the land uses, density or densities, arrangement of land uses, and other features of the development are approved as being consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan and the general requirements of this Code, and that a development permit may be issued subject to all applicable technical requirements and standards. 
Development permit shall mean an order issued by or on behalf of the City indicating that the development meets all procedural and technical requirements and standards and that actual physical development and construction may proceed as described in the permit. A development may require various development permits, including, but not limited to, building permits, sign permits, facility construction permits, grading permits, etc. 
Development plan shall mean a document, including all attachments and explanatory and supporting materials, largely presented in the form of maps and diagrams, describing the character and extent of a proposed development project. 
Conceptual development plan shall mean a less formal document submitted in order that a more general development scheme may be reviewed. 
Final development plan shall mean a complete formal submittal submitted in order to obtain development approval preliminary to obtaining a development order and development permit. 
Development Review Committee shall mean the group of staff members responsible for reviewing development applications and making findings of consistency between the submittals and City development regulations. 
Development review fee shall mean and refer to the combination of the flat fee and the review costs to be paid by an applicant. 
Development sign shall mean a temporary sign advertising the sale or rental of structures being constructed upon land which is under development. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH) shall mean the trunk diameter of a tree measured 4½ feet above the average ground level at the base of the tree; provided, however, if the tree forks above 4½ feet above ground level, it is measured below the swell resulting from the double stem. Stems that fork below 4½ feet above ground level shall be considered separate trees. 
Discharge and discharge point shall mean the outflow of water from a project, site aquifer, drainage basin or facility. 
Double-faced sign shall mean a sign with two copy areas which are parallel to each other and back to back with the maximum distance between the copy areas not to exceed two feet. 
Drainage easement shall mean land in which the public or the City has an easement devoted to, planned, proposed or required for use as a public drainage system. 
Drainage system and natural drainage shall mean surface streams or swamps which convey water to natural points of discharge. 
Dredging shall mean excavation by any means in water or a wetland. It also means the excavation or creation of a water body which is or is to be connected to waters, directly or via excavated water bodies or a series of excavated water bodies. 
Drip line (tree) shall mean the peripheral limits of the horizontal crown of a tree spread vertically to the ground; provided, however, that the same shall not be less than a circle with a ten-foot radius measured from the center of the tree 
Driveway shall mean an area of land which provides vehicular access from a street to the off-street parking space of a premises. 
Driveway entrance shall mean a portion of a driveway which immediately abuts the public right-of-way or a private street. 
Due public notice or public notice shall mean notice given prior to a public hearing as required by this Code or by applicable provisions of state law, including, but not limited to, F.S. § 166.043. 
Dwelling shall mean one or more rooms in a building forming a separate and independent housekeeping establishment, arranged, designed or intended to be used or occupied by one family, and having no enclosed space or cooking or sanitary facilities in common with any other dwelling unit with no ingress or egress through any other dwelling unit, and containing permanent provisions for sleeping facilities, sanitary facilities and not more than one kitchen. 
Dwelling, attached, shall mean a dwelling attached to another dwelling's foundation, wall or roof. 
Dwelling, detached, shall mean a dwelling entirely surrounded by open space and not attached to another dwelling's foundation, wall or roof. 
Dwelling, mobile home, shall mean a single-family dwelling fabricated in a manufacturing facility, having a width of more than eight feet and a length of more than 40 feet, and bearing a seal certifying it is constructed either to the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code or to obsolete ANSI 119.1 Mobile Home Design and Construction Standards. 
Dwelling, model, shall mean any new dwelling temporarily used by the building/developer for the purpose of on-site sales, construction or security of the type of dwelling he is constructing only in the development in which it is located. 
Dwelling, modular multifamily, shall mean a dwelling fabricated in a manufacturing facility and bearing a seal certifying it is constructed to standards as adopted under the authority of F.S. § 553.35 et seq., and rules adopted by the state department of community affairs under F.A.C. ch. 9B-1 et seq. 
Dwelling, multiple-family, shall mean a building containing three or more dwellings intended to be occupied primarily by permanent residents. 
Dwelling, single-family, shall mean a building containing only one dwelling. 
Dwelling, standard, shall mean a dwelling unit on the site where it is to be occupied and constructed to the state building code, as adopted by the City Council. 
Dwelling, two-family, shall mean a building containing only two dwellings. The term "duplex" is synonymous. 
Effectively destroy (tree) shall mean to cause, suffer, allow or permit any act which will cause a tree to die or go into a period of unnatural decline within a period of two years from the date of the act. Acts which may effectively destroy a tree include, but are not limited to, damage inflicted upon the root system by heavy machinery, excessive trimming, changing the natural grade above the root system or around the trunk, damage inflicted on the tree permitting infection or pest infestation, application of herbicides or other chemical agents or intentional fire damage to the tree permitting infection or pest infestation, the infliction of a trunk wound that is 50 percent or greater of the circumference of the trunk, or the removal of sufficient canopy to cause the unnatural decline of the tree. 
Efficiency unit shall mean a dwelling consisting of not more than one room in addition to kitchen and bath. It is synonymous with "studio unit." 
Electric sign. See "Illuminated sign." 
Electronic message center shall mean a sign capable of displaying words and symbols that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means. 
Elevated building shall mean a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
Emergency repairs shall mean work necessary to protect and preserve life and property of inhabitants of the City. 
Enclosed storage area shall mean an area that is surrounded on all sides by a continuously connected fence or wall except where it is necessary to provide for pedestrian or vehicle openings. 
Encroachment shall mean the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Engineer shall mean a professional engineer registered by the state and qualified to provide engineering services applicable to land development and construction. 
Entertainment and recreational uses and structures shall mean any for-profit use or structure whose primary purpose is for recreation or entertainment such as go-cart tracks, water slides, driving ranges independent of golf courses, miniature golf courses, etc. 
Entrance sign shall mean an identification structure located at the main entrance to a City approved subdivision or development. The only advertising on the structure shall be the name of the subdivision or development. 
Environmentally sensitive lands shall mean lands and/or associated waters which provide ecologically important or vital resources, particularly those ecological communities which are locally or regionally rare or threatened, or which provide habitat for wildlife species which are officially listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern (also referred to as "critical habitat"). Examples of environmentally sensitive lands include, but are not limited to: wetlands; upland fringes of wetlands and shorelines; hardwood hammocks; and areas designated for the purpose of conserving or protecting natural resources of environmental quality. 
EPA shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) shall mean a measure of consumption for potable water and sanitary sewer services. 
Erected. See "Construction, start of." 
Erosion shall mean: 
(1)	The wearing away of the land by running water, wind or other geological agents, including such processes as gravitational creep; 
(2)	Detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan shall mean a plan for the control of erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. 
Essential utility services shall mean publicly owned or regulated utility distribution systems for gas, water, sewer, telephone, television, radio or electricity of 230 kilovolts or less, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, lift stations, conduits, cable towers, digital loop carriers, and antennas 70 feet or less in height, and other similar equipment and accessories which are necessary for furnishing of service by such public utilities, but not including electric power plants, substations, water tanks, gas transfer stations, and water and sewage treatment plants, buildings, and municipal water supply wells. 
Excavation shall mean the hollowing out, removal by digging or leveling of any land, dirt, sand, clay, soil, rock, solid minerals or other soil materials. 
Existing construction shall mean for the purposes of floodplain management, structures for which "the start of construction" commenced before the date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the first FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. This term may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall mean a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the effective date, December 31, 1974, of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall mean the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FAA shall mean The Federal Aviation Administration. 
F.A.C. shall mean The Florida Administrative Code. 
Facade shall mean that portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation. 
Family shall mean any one of the following when living together in a dwelling unit or using it as a common place of abode for 30 days or more in any 90-day period: 
(1)	A natural family of one or more persons who are all related to each other by law, blood, marriage, or adoption. 
(2)	A group of persons living together in a facility licensed by the state department of children and family services in accordance with F.S. § 419.001(2), or amendments thereto. 
(3)	A maximum of two unrelated persons. 
Family in-home day care shall mean the operation of a residence as a family day care home as defined by F.S. § 166.0445 and that is registered or licensed by the Department of Children and Family Services. 
Farm animal, animal raised for subsistence or profit or kept for use such as cattle, sheep, pigs, ducks, goats and poultry. 
FCC shall mean The Federal Communications Commission. 
Federal manufactured housing construction and safety standard codes shall mean Title VI of the 1974 Housing and Community Development Act (42 USC 5401 et seq.), as amended (previously known as the Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards), rules and regulations adopted thereunder (including information supplied by the home manufacturer, which has been stamped and approved by a design approval primary inspection agency, an agent of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to HUD rules), and regulations and interpretations of said code by the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles, bureau of mobile home construction; all of which became effective for mobile/manufactured home construction on June 15, 1976. 
FEMA shall mean the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Fence shall mean a barrier, usually comprised of wooden or metal posts, rails or wire mesh, used as a boundary marker or means of protection or confinement. 
Filling shall mean the deposit or burial of materials, such as land-clearing debris, soil, rock or other solid minerals, onto any land, water or wetlands. The term "filling" does not include permitted landfills with garbage or other similar waste matter; landfilling. 
Final development order shall mean a building permit, final site plan development order or final plat development order. 
Final site plan shall mean the plan required by division 3, article II of chapter 4, in order to obtain a development order or permit which demonstrates the manner in which the developer shall conform with the requirements of this Code. 
Financial institutions shall mean an establishment for the custody, loan, exchange or issue of money for extension of credit and for facilitating the transmission of funds. The terms "bank," "savings and loan," "loan company" and "credit union" are synonymous. 
Findings of fact shall mean a determination by the City Council supported by competent substantial evidence in the record. 
Finished grade shall mean the completed surface of lawns, walks or driveways brought to the grade shown on any building plans. 
Fireworks sales shall mean the on-site wholesale or retail sale of products that are burned or explode to produce noises or light effects commonly used in celebrations, the sale of which constitutes at least 25 percent of gross sales or occupied floor space of an establishment. 
Fixture shall mean the device that holds, protects, and provides the optical system and power connections for a lamp. 
Flag shall mean a piece of fabric of distinctive design, color or pattern that is used as a symbol of some country, state, county, city, political party, organization or other entity. 
Flashing sign. See "Animated sign." 
Flood or flooding shall mean: 
(1)	A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.	The overflow of inland waters; 
b.	The unusual and rapid accumulation of surface water runoff from any source. 
c.	Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection (1)b. of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surface of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
(2)	The collapse or subsidence of land along a shore of a lake or other body of water as the result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (1)a of this definition. 
Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) shall mean the official map of the community on which FEMA has delineated the areas of special flood hazard and regulatory floodways. 
Flood fringe shall mean that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted without additional hydraulic and/or hydrologic analysis. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) shall mean an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as only approximate zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) shall mean an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, which has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) shall mean the official hydraulic and hydrologic report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. The study contains an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards, and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and other flood-related erosion hazards. The study may also contain flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FHBM (where applicable), and other related data and information. 
Floodlight shall mean a reflector-type light fixture which is attached directly to a building and which is unshielded. 
Floodplain shall mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See definition of "Flooding". 
Floodplain administrator shall mean the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations of the community. 
Floodplain management shall mean the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodplain management regulations shall mean this Code and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance), and other applications of police power which control development in floodprone areas. This term describes Federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
Floodproofing shall mean any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor shall mean the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement, garage), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. 
Floor area shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal heated areas of the several floors of a dwelling measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, but excluding: 
(1)	Unheated attic areas with a headroom of less than seven feet; 
(2)	Unenclosed stairs or fire escape; 
(3)	Elevator structures; 
(4)	Cooling towers; 
(5)	Areas devoted to air conditioning, ventilating or heating or other building machinery and equipment; 
(6)	Vehicle parking structures; 
(7)	Unheated basement space not devoted to residential use; 
(8)	Porches, patios, breezeways, sun porches or other similar structural additions that are unenclosed or are enclosed with screening. 
Floor area ratio (FAR) shall mean a measurement of the intensity of development on a site. The floor area ratio is the relationship between the total floor area on a site and the gross site area. The FAR is calculated by adding together all floor areas of all floors and dividing this total by the gross site area. 
Florida registered shall mean currently registered to practice a profession in the state. 
Frame effect shall mean a visual effect on an electronic message center applied to a single frame to transition from one message to the next. 
Free of obstruction shall mean any type of lower area enclosure or other construction element that will obstruct the flow of velocity water and wave action beneath the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor of an elevated building during a base flood event is not allowed. This requirement applies to the structures in velocity zones (V-Zones). 
Freeboard shall mean the additional height, usually expressed as a factor of safety in feet, above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for many unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge openings and hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected frequency flood and floodway conditions. 
Freestanding sign. See "Ground sign." 
Frontage shall mean the distance abutting a street, measured in linear feet. 
Frontage, building, shall mean the length of an exterior building wall along a street right-of-way. 
Frontage, street, shall mean the length of the lot line of any one premises along the street right-of-way line on which the lot borders. 
Frontage street facade shall mean that portion of the facade which is visible from any street. Only one street facade shall be designated as frontage street facade. 
Full circulation parking lot shall mean a parking lot design which permits a car entering a parking lot to circulate in front of all parking stalls and restart the same movement again without using the public right-of-way. 
Functionally dependent use shall mean a use that cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding or ship repair. The term does not include longterm storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Garage sales shall mean the sale of household goods and personal property of the occupant of the premises; providing that no more than two such sales are held during any calendar year and that such sales are limited to a duration of one week. 
General office shall mean a premises on which the administrative, managerial services of a business, person, government, etc., are carried out in a room, a series of rooms or in a building solely devoted to such use. 
Golf course shall mean a relatively large premises designed and constructed to accommodate the sport of golf. The term is not intended to include independent driving ranges or miniature golf courses. 
Governmental sign shall mean signs owned by any governmental entity. 
Grade of a building shall mean when the curb level has been established, grade is the main elevation of the curb level opposite walls located on or parallel with and within 15 feet of the right-of-way line. When the curb level has not been established or all walls of a building are more than 15 feet from street lines, grade means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. 
Gross floor areas shall mean the total floor area designed for occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, expressed in square feet and measured from outside wall face to outside wall face. 
Ground sign shall mean a sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground and independent of any support from buildings or other structures. 
Groundwater shall mean water beneath the surface of the ground whether or not flowing through known and definite channels. 
Group home shall mean a facility which is subject to licensing and approval by the state department of children and family services. A group home may be, but is not limited to, an adult congregate living facility as defined in F.A.C. ch. 10A-5; an adult foster home as defined in F.A.C. ch. 10A-114; and a residential treatment facility as defined in F.A.C. ch. 10E-4. A group home consists of seven or more persons. 
Hardscape shall mean any permanent nonliving site improvements, including but not limited to pavement, curbing, wheel stops, steps, walls, fences, fountains, sculpture, railings, lighting, irrigation fixtures, and other similar fixtures. 
Hardship shall mean, as related to variances from this Code, the exceptional hardship associated with the land that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The community requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
Hazardous substances shall mean those materials specified in section 4-254. 
Hazardous waste transporter facility shall mean a premises used by a person engaged in the offsite transportation of hazardous waste by air, rail, highway, or water. Said facility means any transportation-related complex, including loading docks, parking areas, or storage areas where shipments of hazardous waste are held during the normal course of transportation. 
Helipads shall mean a designated landing area used primarily for the operation and basing of rotorcraft. 
Highest adjacent grade shall mean the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure shall mean any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, a listing maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places, which has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. 
Historic trees shall mean a healthy cypress with a trunk DBH of 36 inches, a healthy live oak tree with a trunk DBH of 30 inches or a healthy magnolia tree with a trunk DBH of 24 inches. 
Hobby breeder shall mean a use allowing for the shelter, breeding or training of dogs or cats belonging to the resident of the premises and which has been licensed as a hobby breeder by the county animal control board. 
Home nameplate shall mean a nameplate not more than one square foot in area, indicating only the name of the occupant or identification of the address. 
Hospital shall mean premises with overnight facilities providing medical or surgical care of sick or injured persons. 
Hospital, animal, shall mean premises with overnight facilities for the medical or surgical care of sick or injured animals. It may also include a crematory and/or pet cemetery. 
Hotel/motel shall mean premises in which sleeping accommodations are offered for rental primarily to transients. It is synonymous with "motel," "boatel," and "tourist homes or cabins." 
House of worship shall mean premises used for worship and permitted customary accessory uses by an organization of religious believers. 
Household moving center shall mean a business specializing exclusively in the rental of household moving trucks and utility trailers and in the sale and rental of other products and services directly related to do-it-yourself moving. 
Hydrograph shall mean a graph of discharge versus time for a selected outfall point. 
Hydrologic cycle shall mean the movement of water through the environment on, above and below the surface of the earth. 
Hydroperiod shall mean a measure of the time (usually in days per year) that water is at or above the solid surface under normal hydrologic conditions. 
Identification sign shall mean one sign per business location not more than three square feet in area, painted on a wall used to identify the name of the business located therein and/or its principals and address. The top of said sign shall be no more than eight feet above ground level. 
Illuminated sign shall mean a sign in which a source of light is used in order to make the message readable, including internally and externally lighted signs. 
Impervious area shall mean an area covered by a material which does not permit infiltration or percolation of water into the ground. 
Indirectly illuminating shall mean illumination as a result of the glowing elements, lamps, globes, or reflectors of an artificial light source which is not visible to a person who is in a standing position on the ground. 
Industry shall mean any activity involving the manufacture, assembly, packaging, canning, bottling or processing of any item. 
Instructional sign shall mean a sign conveying instructions or warnings with respect to the premises on which it is maintained (e.g., "Danger—Bad Dog," "Keep Off"). 
Intervisible shall mean mutually visible, or in sight, the one from the other, as stations. 
Isolated wetlands shall mean wetlands that have no hydrological or vegetative connections with "waters of the state," as defined in F.S. § 403.032(3). 
Junkyard shall mean premises where junk materials such as scrapped metal, rubber tires, glass, wood scraps, plastic, tools, equipment, fixtures, appliances, construction materials, automobile parts, discarded automobiles, and paper or similar materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packaged, packed, disassembled or handled. The term also includes automobile wrecking yard and salvage yard operations. This term may also include recycling collection centers. 
Kennel shall mean premises other than hobby breeders, where five or more domesticated house pets over 180 days of age or five or more class II wildlife over 180 days of age, as listed in F.A.C. 39-6.02, are harbored, whether for profit or for personal use. 
Kitchen shall mean any room or portion thereof which is primarily used or designed for cooking and/or the preparation of food, and contains a sink with counter working space, adequate space and wiring or connections for installing cooking and refrigeration equipment and space for the storage of cooking utensils. 
Lamp shall mean the source of light within a luminaire. 
Land shall mean the earth, water, air above, below or on the surface, and includes any vegetation, improvements or structures customarily regarded as land. Land is intended to refer to water, marsh or swamp as well as to the solid surface of the earth. Land may also be referred to as "gross land area" or "gross acre of land." 
Landfill shall mean a solid waste disposal facility, which is an area of land or an excavation where wastes are or have been placed for disposal, for which a permit, other than a general permit, is required by F.S. § 403.707, or current law. This term shall not include: 
(1)	A land spreading site; 
(2)	A surface impoundment; or 
(3)	An injection well defined under and subject to the provisions of F.A.C. ch. 62-28. 
Landscape and landscape area shall mean at grade soil planting area. 
Landscape architect shall mean a professional landscape architect registered by the state and qualified to provide landscape design services applicable to land development. 
Level of service shall mean an indicator of the extent or degree of service provided by or proposed to be provided by a facility based on the operational characteristics of the facility. 
Livestock shall mean animals kept for sale, animals raised for food or other products or kept for use such as farm animals including meat and dairy cattle, pigs, ducks and chickens. 
Lot shall mean the least fractional part of subdivided lands, having fixed boundaries and identified by an assigned letter, number, or other name. Lots may be referred to in accordance with their locations: 
(1)	Atypical lot shall mean a lot within a subdivision where, as a result of subdivision design, the lot abuts a street at one end and any of the following at the opposite end: a waterway or body of water, either of which is 100 feet or more in width; a golf course fairway or green; or an open space which by itself, or when combined with other open space areas within the same subdivision, comprises at least 15 percent of the total land area in the subdivision, and in which an undivided interest is conveyed with each lot. 
(2)	Corner lot shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two streets and abutting such streets on two adjacent sides. Corner lots are defined as lots located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the frontmost points of the side lot lines to the frontmost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
(3)	Interior lot shall mean a lot bounded on at least two sides by other lots and which is not a corner lot. Interior lots are defined as lots with only one frontage on a street. 
(4)	Through lot or double frontage lot shall mean an interior lot which has lot lines along two substantially parallel streets. Through lots are defined as lots other than corner lots with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may also be referred to as double-frontage lots. 
Lot classifications shall mean lots shall be classified as corner lots, interior lots, through lots and atypical lots. The following diagram illustrates these lot types:    
In the diagram, "A" designates corner lots, "B" designates interior lots, "C" designates through lots, and "D" designates atypical lots. 
Lot coverage shall mean that area of a lot from the ground up which is occupied by principal and accessory buildings. 
Lot depth shall mean the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot line, front, shall mean the property line abutting any street right-of-way, or for streets with less than 50 feet of dedicated right-of-way, an imaginary line located 15 feet from and parallel to the edge of the traveled way. 
Lot line, rear, shall mean the property line most distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line, with the exception that, on corner lots, the property line most distant from and parallel to the front lot lines shall be considered side lot lines. 
Lot line, side, shall mean any property line that is not a front or rear property line. 
Lot lines shall mean the perimeter property lines around the lot or the space line of a rental space. 
Lot, substandard, shall mean any lot with less than 5,000 square feet of area, or less than 50 feet of width at the front building line; provided, however, that approved cluster subdivision lots shall not be considered substandard. 
Lot width shall mean the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the front building setback line. 
Lowest adjacent grade shall mean the lowest elevation, after the completion of construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure. 
Lowest floor shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of section 60.3, Code of Federal Regulations. 
Luminaire shall mean a complete unit that artificially produces and distributes light. An artificial light source, including fixture, ballast, mounting, and lamp. 
Mangrove stand shall mean an assemblage of mangrove trees, which is mostly low trees noted for a copious development of interlacing adventitious roots above the ground and which contains one or more of the following species: black mangrove ( Avicennia nitida ); red mangrove ( Rhizophora mangle ); white mangrove ( Laguncularia racemosa ); and buttonwood ( Conocarpus erecta ). 
Manufacturing shall mean the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or chemicals into new products. 
Marina shall mean a boat dock or basin with facilities for berthing, securing, fueling and servicing various types of recreational watercraft. It may include the provision of supplies and storage. It does not include boat docks that are accessory to residential uses. 
Market value shall mean the building value, which is the property value excluding the land value and that of the detached accessory structures and other improvements on site (as agreed to between a willing buyer and seller) as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by an independent certified appraisal (other than a limited or curbside appraisal, or one based on income approach), actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction of building), or adjusted tax-assessed values. 
Marquee shall mean a canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a building, when such canopy or covered structure extends beyond the building. 
Marquee sign shall mean any sign attached to the side or front or hung under a marquee, which sign shall not extend above the top of a marquee or shall not be mounted upon the top of the marquee. 
Mean high water shall mean the average height of the high waters over a 19-year period. For shorter periods of observation, "mean high water" means the average height of the high waters after corrections are applied to eliminate known variations and to reduce the result to the equivalent of a mean 19-year value. 
Mean high-water line shall mean the intersection of the tidal plane of mean high water with the shore. 
Mean sea level shall mean the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this Code, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
Medical office shall mean premises where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more persons practicing any form of the human healing arts, whether they are medical doctors, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, optometrists, or any similar professional licensed by the state. Does not include pain management clinics as defined herein. 
Message center sign shall mean any sign that can electronically display words, numerals, and/or characters in a programmed manner. 
Micro-irrigation systems shall mean irrigation systems that efficiently irrigate plant materials with maximum distribution of water to the plant root zone at a rate consistent with the water requirements of the plants being irrigated and with minimal loss of water by evaporation by using specialized underground emitters or pipes and low trajectory spray heads. 
Miniwarehouse shall mean an enclosed storage area containing individually rented or owned compartments or stalls for storage only. 
Mitigation (wetlands) shall mean actions including, but not limited to, restoration, enhancement, or creation of wetlands, required to be taken by a person to offset environmental impacts of permitted activities. 
Mitigation (traffic) shall mean special actions, programs and procedures intended to reduce, redistribute, or modify the traffic impact on the arterial system and/or increase capacity to the arterial system by using professionally accepted standards and methods. 
Mobile home shall mean a building, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mobile home park shall mean an area of land under one ownership where designated spaces for mobile home dwellings are rented. The overall operation is managed on a full- or part-time basis and provides various services and facilities for common use. 
Mobile home space shall mean an improved area within an approved mobile home park, designated for the placement of only one mobile home dwelling. 
Mobile home subdivision shall mean an approved subdivision with lots for sale as residential sites for mobile home dwellings. 
Mobile recreational shelters and vehicles shall mean portable shelters and vehicles, designed for travel or recreational purposes, which are not more than 8½ feet wide. The term includes the following: 
(1)	Tent, tent camper or camping trailer shall mean a portable shelter usually fabricated of canvas or other water-repellant and fire-resistant material. The shelter may be designed to collapse for independent storage or may be designed to fold out from a special trailer body towed behind a motor vehicle. 
(2)	Truck camper shall mean a portable unit designed to be loaded onto, or affixed to, the bed or chassis of the truck and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. 
(3)	Travel trailer shall mean a vehicular portable unit, mounted on wheels, of such a size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a motorized vehicle. It is primarily designed and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. It has a body width of no more than 8½ feet and an overall body length of no more than 40 feet when factory-equipped for the road. 
(4)	Motor home shall mean a vehicular unit which does not exceed 40 feet in length and the height and the width limitations provided in F.S. § 316.515, is a self-propelled motor vehicle and is primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. 
(5)	Pickup cover shall mean a portable enclosure placed on the bed of a pickup truck, usually lacking any self-containment features, and primarily providing simple sleeping arrangements. 
(6)	Private motor coach shall mean a vehicular unit which does not exceed the length, width, and height limitations provided in F.S. § 316.515(9), is built on a self-propelled bus type chassis having no fewer than three load-bearing axles, and is primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. 
(7)	Fifth-wheel trailer shall mean a vehicular unit mounted on wheels, designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, of such size or weight as not to require a special highway movement permit, of gross trailer area not to exceed 400 square feet in the setup mode, and designed to be towed by a motorized vehicle that contains a towing mechanism that is mounted above or forward of the tow vehicle's rear axle. 
(8)	Recreational vehicle shall mean a vehicle which is: 
a.	Built on a single chassis; 
b.	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.	Designated to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
d.	Designated primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Monument sign shall mean a ground sign with an enclosed base equal to at least two-thirds of the horizontal width of the sign surface and not exceeding eight feet in overall height. The base of the sign must come in complete contact with the ground and there shall be no gaps between the base and the ground cover or sod. 
Mowing shall mean to cut grass, brush, and other nonprotected vegetation which falls below a two-inch caliper with a machine designed to remove such material without disturbing the soil and plant roots. 
Multifamily parcel shall mean a residential parcel of land which is not classified as a single-family or duplex parcel as defined in this section. 
Multiple-sided sign shall mean a sign with more than one face. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) shall mean as corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Natural flow pattern shall mean the rate, volume and direction of the surface water or groundwater flow occurring under natural conditions for any given portion of the City. 
NAVD88 shall mean North American Vertical Datum of 1988. 
New construction shall mean, for floodplain management purposes, any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management code, ordinance, or standard, based upon specific technical base flood elevation data that establishes the area of special flood hazard, December 31, 1974. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For flood insurance rates, the term "new construction" shall mean structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after December 31, 1974, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision shall mean a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance or standard. 
NGVD29 shall mean National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. 
Nightclubs. See "Club, night." 
Nuisance tree shall mean any of the following tree species: 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 
Australian Pine 	Casuarina litorea 
Australian Pine 	Casuarina glauca 
Brazilian Pepper 	Schinus terebinthefolius 
Camphor Tree 	Cinnamonum camphora 
Chinaberry 	Melia azedarach 
Citrus 	Citrus species 
Ear Pod Tree 	Enterolobium cyclocarpa 
Eucalyptus 	Eucalyptus species 
Punk Tree or Cajeput 	Melaleuca quinquenervia 
Silk Oak 	Grevillea robusta 
Woman's Tongue 	Albizia lebbeck 
Chinese Tallow Tree 	Sapium Sebiferum 
 
  
Nonconforming lots shall mean an area of land which abuts a street and which either complied with or was exempt from the City subdivision regulations on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Code is derived, but which does not meet the minimum area and width requirements of its zoning classifications. 
Nonconforming sign shall mean any sign which does not comply with the regulations of this Code, or subsequent amendments. 
Nonresidential activity shall mean any activity occurring on any described parcel of land, whether or not within a structure, with the exception of residential activity, as defined in this section. 
Nonresidential parcel shall mean a parcel of land other than a residential parcel, as defined in this section. 
Nonvehicular ingress and egress easement shall mean an easement entitling the holder of the easement to control access across the easement by motor vehicles. 
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD) shall mean a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Nursing home shall mean premises where meals, lodging, nursing care and related medical services are furnished for compensation to six or more persons unrelated by marriage, birth or legal adoption. It does not include hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
Official zoning map shall mean a graphic illustration of zoning boundaries and classifications drawn and approved as part of the records of the City. 
Off-premises directory sign shall mean a sign located on property other than the property which is referenced by the directory information displayed on the sign. 
Off-premises sign shall mean a third-party sign. It is a sign that advertises goods, products, services or facilities or directs persons to a different location from where the sign is installed. 
Off-street loading area shall mean an off-street loading area provided off the public right-of-way for the temporary parking of trucks being loaded or unloaded. 
Off-street loading space shall mean a permanently located off-street space for the temporary parking of vehicles which pick up, deliver, load or unload goods, supplies and merchandise. 
Off-street parking space shall mean a permanently located off-street space for the temporary parking of vehicles. 
On-premises sign shall mean a sign erected by the owner or lessee of a premises that is incidental, subordinate and accessory to the permitted principal use or structure and located on the same premises of such principal use or structure. It is a sign identifying a business, person, activity, goods or services located on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained. 
100-year flood elevation means the flood elevation that has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded each year. 
Open space shall mean that portion of a project not used for buildings, street rights-of-way or off-street parking and loading areas or other impervious surfaces (not including recreational facilities). Open space is intended to perform one or all of the following purposes: 
(1)	Protection of natural resources (uplands, wildlife habitats and groundwater recharge areas) and areas unsuitable for development due to natural conditions (wetlands, floodplain and poor soils); 
(2)	Recreation areas; and 
(3)	Enhancement of the urban environment (buffer areas, landscaped areas, plazas and courtyards). 
Outdoor display of retail merchandise shall mean the display of merchandise or goods available for purchase consisting of a small sample of merchandise or decorative items placed outdoors adjacent to the responsible business. The outdoor display is intended to allow retailers to attract the public by offering a sample of the products available inside. 
Outdoor entertainment and recreational uses and structures shall mean privately owned and operated facilities providing outdoor recreation, entertainment or amusement activities to the general public usually for an admission fee. Examples of such facilities include: miniature golf courses, amusement parks, water slide and sport facilities, golf driving ranges, and go-cart tracks. Speedways, racetracks, motorized vehicle or motocross courses, agricultural centers and associated fairgrounds, outdoor musical events, and circus headquarters are not included in this definition. 
Outdoor sales shall mean retail sales from other than an approved store, shop, or similar building. The term "outdoor sales" shall not include garage sales, as defined in this section. 
Outdoor storage shall mean the keeping of inventory, goods, material including raw, semi-finished, and finished materials incidental to an allowed use located on the same premises outside for any period of time. 
Outstanding Florida Waters (OFW) shall mean waters and associated wetlands identified in F.A.C. 17-302.700. 
Owner shall mean any person, group of persons, firm or firms, joint venture, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought to be developed under this Code. It also refers to an owner or group of owners of fee simple title to a particular lot, tract, or parcel of real property. 
Owner occupied shall mean a dwelling occupied by the owner of record, holding a valid certificate of occupancy. 
Owner's authorized agent shall mean and refer to an agent of the owner duly authorized to submit and process an application. If the applicant is not the property owner, a written authorization must accompany the application. Such authorization shall be evidenced by a power of attorney signed by the owner in connection with the application as to the owner's real property, which is the subject of the application. The authorization shall include an agreement of the owner to be bound by the actions of the owner's authorized agent and the provisions of this Code. 
Package treatment plant shall mean small wastewater treatment systems which have a collection network, treatment plant, and disposal system. Package treatment plants are generally used to serve isolated development and are partially or completely preassembled by the manufacturer prior to shipment to the site of use. 
Pain management clinic shall mean any publicly or privately owned clinic, facility or office, which advertises in any medium for any type of pain management service, or where in any month a majority of patients are prescribed opioids, benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or carisoprodol for the treatment of chronic nonmalignant pain and is required to register with the Florida Department of Health. 
Parapet shall mean that portion of the facade which extends above the roofline. 
Parcel of land shall mean any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, which is designated by its owner or developer as a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit. 
Parcel of record shall mean a contiguous piece of land in possession of, owned by, or recorded as property of the same person in the public records of the county. 
Park trailer shall mean a transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. The total area of the unit in a setup mode, when measured from the exterior surface to the exterior stud walls at the level of maximum dimensions, not including any bay window, does not exceed 400 square feet when constructed to ANSI A-119.5 standards, and 500 square feet when constructed to United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Standards. The length of a park trailer means the distance from the exterior of the front of the body to the exterior of the rear of the body, including any protrusions. 
Parking aisle shall mean the area immediately adjacent to the car parking stalls which permits maneuvering of the cars entering and leaving a parking stall, and which connects the parking stalls to the driveway. 
Parking stall shall mean the space that is necessary to park a car, excluding aisles and driveways. 
Partial circulation parking lot shall mean a parking lot design which permits a car entering a parking lot to circulate in front of all parking stalls without using the public right-of-way. 
Penthouse shall mean an enclosed structure or structures above the roof of a building occupying not more than an aggregate area of one-third of the area of the supporting roof. Penthouses shall not be used for purposes other than the shelter of mechanical equipment or shelter of vertical shaft openings in the roof. 
Person shall mean any individual, group of persons, firm, corporation, association, or entity. 
Person, aggrieved, shall mean one whose legal right is invaded by a decision complained of, or whose pecuniary interest is directly affected by a decision. The person's interest must be specific and personal, not common to all members of the community. When the decision affects any public recreation area, however, the phrase shall include any user of that area. 
Person, interested, shall mean any person who presents evidence, testimony or argument at any public hearings, whether oral or written, in person or by representative and who provides his name and address to the hearing body. 
Pervious area shall mean an area maintained in its natural condition, or covered by a material that permits infiltration or percolation of water into the ground. 
Pet, an animal that is kept by humans for companionship and enjoyment such as dogs, cats, fish, hamsters and birds but does not include horses, ponies, chickens, roosters, pigs or other livestock and farm animals. 
Planned unit development (PUD) shall mean a tract of land under unified ownership, to be planned and developed according to the master development plan specified in this Code. 
Plant height shall mean the height of a plant measured vertically from the natural soil line to the uppermost point of the plant. 
Plant list shall mean the City's list of trees and vegetation identifying species and specifications approved for planting to comply with the City landscape requirements 
Plat shall mean a map or delineated representation of the subdivision of lands in accordance with the requirements of F.S. ch. 177. 
Platted land shall mean any land which can be referenced to a plat. 
Pole lighting shall mean a light fixture set on a base or pole which raises the source of the light higher than 48 inches off the ground. 
Political sign shall mean any sign urging the election or defeat of any candidate seeking any political office, or urging the passage or defeat of any ballot measure, but does not include any billboard owned or maintained by a commercial firm or advertising company. 
Portable shelter shall mean a movable device, consisting of a rigid plastic, fiberglass or metal frame supporting an attached tarpaulin weather barrier, which is capable of being easily assembled from a commercially available kit or bundle of prefabricated parts and is intended to be utilized outdoors for the sole purpose of sheltering mechanical equipment, vehicles or other personal property. 
Potable water or potable water facilities shall mean water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes, meeting current state and federal drinking water standards. The water meets the criteria of F.A.C. 17-3.071 and/or F.A.C. 17-3.404, and/or F.A.C. ch. 17-22. 
Potable water supply well shall mean a potable water well to supply water which has been permitted for consumptive use by the St. Johns River Water Management District and the casing diameter is six inches or greater. 
Preliminary development order shall mean a rezoning, special exception, Planned Unit Development, subdivision sketch plan or overall development plan, conceptual or preliminary site plan, or any other development order other than a final development order, except a variance authorized under this Code. 
Premises shall mean a distinct unit or parcel of land and all buildings, structures, or other appurtenances thereof including the appurtenances thereon. 
Primary containment shall mean the first level of product-tight containment, i.e., the inside portion of that container which comes into immediate contact on its inner surface with the hazardous substance being contained. 
Primary well field protection zone shall mean the land area immediately surrounding any potable water supply well and extending a radial distance of 200 feet. 
Principal structure shall mean any structure occupied by the principal use. 
Principal use shall mean the primary purpose or function served or provided. 
Product-tight shall mean impervious to the hazardous substance which is or could be contained so as to prevent the seepage of the hazardous substance from the containment system. To be product-tight, the containment system shall be made of a material that is not subject to physical or chemical deterioration by the hazardous substance being contained. 
Profession shall mean a calling requiring specialized knowledge, often long and intensive academic preparation, and involving mental rather than manual labor. 
Professional office shall mean an office for the use of an architect, engineer, attorney, accountant and the like. Such use is characterized principally by offering consultant services. 
Program deficiency shall mean a deficiency in the community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations or of the standards required by the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Project shall mean the particular structures and improvements proposed by the applicant on a particular land area which are part of a common plan of development and may include the subdivision of land. Any area of land that is planned, designed and developed in an integral and unified arrangement. It includes all structures, improvements and equipment of every kind, nature or description incident to the development. 
Property perimeter shall mean the area of a development site beginning on the property boundary line and projecting at a right angle toward the interior of the site. A property perimeter is bounded on the outside by the property line and on the inside by a building or structure, vehicular use area, or open space. 
Protective barrier shall mean conspicuously colored fences or like structures, constructed of sturdy materials that are at least four feet in height, which prevent or obstruct passage. 
Prune shall mean to cut away, remove, cut off or cut back parts of a tree or plant for the purpose of promoting healthy growth and shape without damaging the plant. 
Public improvements shall mean any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water main, roadway, parkway, bridge, sidewalk, pedestrian way, planting strip, or other facility for which the City or other governmental agency may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
Public property shall mean all real and personal property, including leasehold rights owned by the federal, state or local governments, including all political subdivisions, authorities, or other entities to which the rights, powers and privileges of the federal, state and local government have been delegated. 
Public safety and nuisance shall mean anything which is injurious to safety or health of the entire community or a neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
Public use shall mean a use of any premises by a public body, board, council or authority, such as a municipal, county, state or federal government, or any agency or department thereof for a governmental or proprietary purpose. 
Public utility shall mean an enterprise providing an essential service authorized and regulated by state or federal public utility commissions. Included are facilities necessary to provide the service such as water towers, well houses, utility poles, transmission towers, substations, sewerage, communication equipment, street lighting and other similar equipment. 
Public utility uses and structures shall mean publicly owned or regulated electric power plants, substations, water tanks, gas transfer stations, water and sewage treatment plants and other buildings and uses not defined as "essential utility services." 
Publicly owned parks and recreational facilities shall mean an area of land, often in a largely natural state, having facilities for rest, recreation or sports activities owned or managed by a municipal, county, state or federal government or any agency or department thereof for the benefit or enjoyment of the general public. 
Quasi-judicial action shall mean a public hearing by the City Council where due public notice of the hearing has been performed and an opportunity to be heard and to present evidence is afforded to affected parties, and the decision of the City Council is based on competent substantial evidence present in the record. 
Real estate sign shall mean any sign, installed on a temporary basis, by the owner of real property or his agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, sale, or lease, but shall not include roominghouse signs. 
Rebuttable presumption shall mean a presumption which may be rebutted by evidence. 
Recharge shall mean the inflow of water into a project, site aquifer, drainage basin or facility. 
Recovered wastewater (reclaimed water) shall mean effluent treated to advanced levels meeting the state department of environmental protection criteria and disposed of through irrigation or other approved methods. 
Recreational areas shall mean privately owned and operated facilities providing recreation and sport uses such as golf courses, country clubs, swim clubs, tennis clubs, and the like. Private recreational facilities are generally sustained through the sales of memberships, but may be open to the general public for a fee. 
Recreational facilities shall mean those improvements or artificially installed accessories which facilitate the use of an area or a resource for outdoor recreation. Facilities are divided into two categories: 
(1)	Primary facilities are those that are essential or extremely desirable for conducting a particular outdoor recreational activity, such as launching ramps for boating, trails for cycling, roads for access to areas, etc.; 
(2)	Secondary facilities are those that are desirable as a further enhancement of the recreational experience but are still dispensable, such as outdoor grills for picnicking and camping, docks for boating, etc. 
Redevelopment shall mean substantial alterations or additions to an existing structure effecting 50 percent or more. 
Regulatory floodway shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Remedy a deficiency or violation shall mean to bring the regulation, procedure, structure or other development into compliance with state, Federal or local floodplain management regulations; or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways the impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Removal (tree) shall mean to cut down, dig up, destroy, effectively destroy, or the unlicensed relocation of any tree. 
Replacement stock (tree) shall mean any immature tree having an overall height of at least six feet but does not include any nuisance tree. In addition replacement stock shall have a minimum caliper of two inches. 
Reservoir area shall mean an area not on the public right-of-way which is provided for the temporary use of vehicles waiting to enter or leave a vehicle-oriented service, or an off-street parking facility. 
Residential activity shall mean any building or structure or portion thereof that is designed for or used for residential purposes and any activity involving the use or occupancy of a lot for residential purposes. Residential activity shall include those customary and accessory residential activities associated with the principal permitted use of a lot for residential purposes as set out in the zoning regulations or other appropriate code of the City. 
Residential construction shall mean construction of a single-family or two-family housing unit on an individual lot within an existing approved subdivision where property is classified (zoned) pursuant to chapter 3, article III, division 3 of the City Land Development Code as amended, for single-family, two-family or mobile home use excluding mobile home parks, or is located in a residential use area in a community development plan or said use is in a residential Planned Unit Development. 
Residential parcel shall mean a parcel of land on which a residential structure may be built without violating the Comprehensive Plan, or any applicable law or ordinance. 
Restaurant shall mean premises where meals, including beverages or confections, are served to customers. Restaurants are classified as: 
(1)	Type A shall mean buildings where the customers normally order from individual menus while seated at a table. The order is then normally served by a restaurant employee to the same table and there consumed by the customer. This group also includes cafeterias. 
(2)	Type B shall mean any building containing a restaurant other than Type A, including but not limited to fast food and drive-through restaurants. 
Retail sales and services shall mean the duly licensed selling of general or specialized merchandise directly to the consumer from a store, shop or similar building. The repair, installation, servicing and making of only that merchandise being sold from the store, shop or similar building, is allowed as an accessory use to the permitted sales. 
Revetment shall mean a sloped facing structure of an armoring material such as, but not limited to, quarrystone, concrete, or geotextile fabrics, built to protect a scarp, embankment, or shore structure against erosion by wave action or currents. A form of rigid armoring. 
Review deposit shall mean and refer to the review deposit, as established by this Code and as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council, to be paid by an applicant at the time of the filing of an application in those circumstances where review costs are paid by the applicant under the provision of this Code. 
Revolving sign. See "Animated sign." 
Riding stables. Commercial and private equine boarding stables with riding arenas and equestrian facilities. 
Right-of-way shall mean land for which the state, county, or City owns the fee or has an easement devoted to or required for use as a transportation facility or street. 
Right-of-way line shall mean the line which bounds the right-of-way set aside for use as a street. 
Riverine shall mean relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Roof sign shall mean any outdoor advertising display sign, installed, constructed or maintained above the roofline of any building. 
Roofline shall mean the intersecting lines of a roof, formed at the junction of the roof with the walls of a building. 
Roominghouse. See "Boardinghouse." 
Rotating sign. See "Animated sign." 
Sandwich sign. See "A-frame sign." 
Satellite building or satellite use shall mean a detached building and any accessory structure sharing common ingress, egress, or parking facilities with a shopping center and containing a single tenant; the use occupying a satellite building. 
Seasonal high ground water table (SHGWT) shall mean the zone of water saturated soil at the highest average depth during the wettest season of the year. 
Seasonal high water level (SHWL) shall mean the elevation to which ground or surface water can be expected to rise during a normal wet season. 
Seawall shall mean a structure separating land from water areas, primarily designed to prevent upland erosion and other damage as a result of wave action. A form of rigid armoring. 
Secondary containment shall mean the level of product-tight containment external to and separate from the primary containment. 
Secondary well field protection zone shall mean the land area surrounding the primary well field protection zone, and extending a radial distance of 800 feet from said primary well field protection zone. 
Sediment shall mean solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sediment basin shall mean a depression formed by the construction of a barrier or dam built at a suitable location to retain sediment and debris. 
Self-service laundry shall mean premises where equipment for washing and drying laundry is made available to retail customers for a charge. It is synonymous with "laundromat." 
Setback shall mean the minimum distance which must be maintained around the perimeter of a lot and any structures; required yard area between the lot and the building line. 
Shade tree shall mean tree species that customarily grow over 30 feet in height and have a minimum crown spread of 35 feet. 
Shallow flooding shall mean the same as "area of shallow flooding." 
Shopping center shall mean premises containing a group of commercial establishments planned, developed and organized as a unit. 
Shoulder shall mean the portion of a roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles, emergency use, and lateral support of base and surface courses. 
Sidewalk shall mean the portion of a right-of-way intended for pedestrian use. 
Sidewalk sign. See "A-frame sign." 
Sign shall mean any device or display consisting of lights, letters, numbers, symbols, pictures, illustrations, announcements, cut-outs, insignia, trade marks, or demonstrations, including all trim and borders, which is designed to advertise, inform, identify, or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the device or display is located, and which is visible from a public street. 
(1)	Any person or animal stationed at or close to a business site for the purpose of attracting attention to the business by actions or attire is a sign. 
(2)	Sign structure is that material which supports or is capable of supporting a sign, including decorative cover. 
(3)	Advertising message is any copy, logos, or graphic elements of a sign which convey a message, identify a business, or describe products or services offered to the public. 
Sign, canopy. Refer to "Sign, marquee." 
Sign copy shall mean the area of a sign that consists of letters, numbers, symbols, pictures, illustrations, announcements, insignia, trademarks or the like. 
Sign copy area shall mean the surface area of a sign upon which its copy is displayed. (Refer to section 5-36(a)(2) to determine the method of calculating the copy area square footage.) 
Sign, on-premises, shall mean a sign erected by the owner or lessee of a premises that is incidental, subordinate and accessory to the permitted principal use or structure and located on the same premises of such principal use or structure. It is a sign identifying a business, person, activity, goods or services located on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained. 
Sign, portable, shall mean a sign which is manifestly designed to be transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support constructed without wheels is converted to an A- or T-frame sign, or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground since this characteristic is based on the design of such a sign. It is characteristic of such a portable sign that the space provided for advertising matter consists of a sign that is mounted on a vehicle normally licensed by the state as a trailer. 
Sign, projecting, shall mean a sign erected or designed as an integral part of a building or structure that extends more than 12 inches and less than four feet beyond such building or structure. 
Site plan shall mean the plan required by division 3, article II of chapter 4 to obtain a development order or permit which shows the means by which the developer will conform with the requirements of this Code. 
Skirting shall mean a type of wall constructed of approved fire- and weather-resistant material enclosing the area between the ground and floor of a mobile home dwelling. 
Small site plan shall encompass buildings and/or paving areas of 5,000 square feet or less. 
Small tree shall mean tree species that customarily grow no more that 30 feet in height and have a maximum crown spread of 25 feet. 
Snipe sign shall mean any sign of any size, made of any material, including paper, cardboard, wood and metal, when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to a tree, utility pole, fence or similar objects, and the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the premises upon which said sign is located. Also includes any sign installed without permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is located. 
Special exception shall mean a use expressly so designated that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a particular zoning classification but that would not adversely affect the public health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance, convenience, morals or general welfare, if controlled in number, area, location, relation to the neighborhood, or in other appropriate respects. The term "conditional use" is synonymous. 
Special flood hazard area shall mean the same as "area of special flood hazard." 
_____
Specimen tree shall mean the following species of trees with the minimum specified DBH are determined to be specimen trees in the City: 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 	DBH 
Turkey Oak 	Quercus leavis 	12 inches and larger 
Other Oak species 	Quercus spp. 	18 inches and larger 
Maple 	Acer spp. 	18 inches and larger 
Sweet Gum 	Liquidambar styraciflua 	18 inches and larger 
Hickory 	Carya spp. 	18 inches and larger 
Elm 	Ulmus spp. 	18 inches and larger 
Loblolly Bay 	Gordonia lasianthus 	12 inches and larger 
Sweet Bay 	Magnolia virginiana 	12 inches and larger 
Red Bay 	Persea borbonia 	12 inches and larger 
Swamp Bay 	Persea palustris 	12 inches and larger 
Sycamore 	Platanus occidentalis 	18 inches and larger 
Magnolia 	Magnolia grandiflora 	12 inches and larger 
Bald Cypress 	Taxodium distichum 	18 inches and larger 
Red Cedar 	Juniperus silicicola 	12 inches and larger 
 
_____
Spill shall mean the unpermitted release or escape of a hazardous substance, directly or indirectly to soils, surface waters or groundwaters. 
Start of construction shall mean, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act P.L. 97-348, and includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement or permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. 
State shall mean the State of Florida. 
Storage system shall mean any one or combination of tanks, sumps, wet floors, waste treatment facilities, pipes, vaults, or other portable or fixed containers used, or designed to be used, for the storage of hazardous substances at a facility. 
Stormwater management system facility shall mean a system of manmade structures or natural resources designed or used to collect, convey, hold, divert or discharge stormwater, and includes stormwater sewers, canals, detention structures, retention structures, lakes, holding basins, wetlands, and natural depressions. 
Stormwater retention facility shall mean a structure designed to collect and prevent the release of a given volume of stormwater by complete on-site storage for a given storm event. 
Story shall mean each portion of a building between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, and any portion which is used for human occupancy between the top floor and the roof. A basement or cellar shall not be deemed a story unless used for human occupancy. 
Street shall mean any access way which affords a primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties such as a street, road, lane, highway, avenue, boulevard, alley, parkway, viaduct, circle, court, terrace, place, or cul-de-sac. It includes all the land lying between the right-of-way lines whether improved or unimproved, but does not include easements and rights-of-way intended solely for limited utility purposes such as electric power lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, drainage and sanitary sewers, and easements of ingress and egress. 
(1)	Arterial or arterial street shall mean a route providing service which is or has the potential of relatively continuous and/or relatively high traffic volume, long average trip length, high operative speed, and high mobility importance. In addition, all United States or state numbered highways shall be considered arterial roads. 
(2)	Local street shall mean a route primarily providing access to abutting properties and connecting individual properties with the network of higher level streets and roads. Service is relatively continuous and of relatively low traffic volume, short average trip length, low operating speed, and low mobility importance. 
(3)	Minor arterial street shall mean a route which generally interconnects with and augments urban principal arterial routes and provides service to trips of shorter length and a lower level of travel mobility. Such routes include all arterials not classified as principal and contain facilities that place more emphasis on land access than the higher system. 
(4)	Principal arterial street shall mean a route which generally serves the major centers of activity of an urban area, the highest traffic volume corridors, and the longest trip purpose, and carries a high proportion of the total urban area travel on a minimum of mileage. The routes are integrated, both internally and between major rural connections. 
Structure shall mean any object constructed or installed by man. The term "structure" means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Subdivision shall mean the division of a parcel or tract of land, whether improved or unimproved, into two or more lots or parcels of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of any kind of transfer of ownership or right to possession, or for any building development, including a condominium, in which there is or is intended to be: 
(1)	Any division of any parcel or tract into units; or 
(2)	Any division of the air space into units above or contiguous to any parcel or tract held in common, undivided ownership. If the establishment of a new street is involved, this term shall mean any division of any parcel or tract of land. Subdivision includes a resubdivision and replatting and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
Subdivision record shall mean an index card, computer file or other historic record under the maintenance and supervision of the LDM or DED which indicates the status of recorded or unrecorded subdivisions based on reviews performed pursuant to previous exemptions or other criteria. 
Substantial damage shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement shall mean any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a building, the cost of which equals or exceeds over a five-year period, a cumulative total of 50 percent of the building's market value as determined by the property appraiser or a certified appraisal either before the alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not however include any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of a building to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety codes that are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, nor any alteration of a building listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivision shall mean where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvements of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Surveyor shall mean a professional surveyor and mapper registered by the state and qualified to provide land surveying services applicable to land development. 
Swinging sign. See "Animated sign." 
Tenant frontage shall mean each lineal foot, major portion thereof, measured along the main entry of a tenant space. 
The traveled way shall mean the paved portion of the roadway or that surface between both edges of pavement or back of curb, including, but not limited to, turn lanes, parking lanes, deceleration and acceleration lanes, or 12 feet from the centerline on both sides of the right-of-way of unpaved roads. 
Time and temperature sign shall mean a sign containing illuminated numerals flashing alternately to show the time and/or temperature. 
Tinted glass shall mean any glass treated to achieve an industry-approved, inside-to-outside light transmittance value of 45 percent or less. Such transmittance is limited to the visible spectrum (400 to 700 nanometers) and is measured as the percentage of light that is transmitted through the glass. 
To plat shall mean to divide or subdivide land into lots, blocks, parcels, tracts, sites or other divisions, however the same may be designated, and the recording of a plat in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county. The term "to plat" shall include replat. 
Toe shall mean the lowest part of an embankment. 
Townhouse shall mean an individually owned single-family standard or manufactured dwelling constructed as a group of three or more attached single-family dwellings, each on its own lot. 
Traffic analysis zone shall mean a limited geographic area defined and used for traffic modeling and analysis. 
Traffic impact analysis shall mean a study prepared by a qualified professional engineer, licensed to practice within the state, to determine the vehicular impact of the development upon the major road network system. This study includes: determination of trip generation; trip distribution; traffic assignment; capacity analysis; and improvements to the roadway system necessitated by the development, such as required new roads, additional lanes and signalization. 
Trailer shall mean a vehicle without motor power of its own, designed for carrying passengers or property, and drawn by an automobile, motor truck or tractor. It is intended to include the terms "tractor-trailer" and "semitrailer," but not to include "mobile home" or "mobile recreational shelters or vehicles." 
Trash shall mean the combination of yard trash and construction and demolition debris along with other debris such as paper, cardboard, cloth, glass, street sweepings, and other like matter. 
Tree shall mean any woody self-supporting plant characterized by having a single trunk of at least six inches DBH or multistem trunk system with a well-developed crown at least 15 feet high as measured from its base. 
Trip shall mean a one-way movement of vehicular travel from an origin (one trip end) to a destination (the other trip end). 
Trip generation shall mean the attraction or production of trips caused by a given type of land development. 
USGS shall mean United States Geological Survey. 
Utilities shall include, but is not limited to, water systems, electrical power, sanitary sewer systems, gas distribution systems, storm drainage systems, telephone systems, and cable television systems. 
Variance shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this Code. 
Vee-shaped sign shall mean any sign which has two faces which are not parallel and which form an angle of 60 degrees or more. 
Vehicular sign shall mean a sign affixed to or painted on a transportation vehicle or trailer, for the purpose of business advertising; however, not to include signs affixed to a vehicle or trailers for identification purposes. 
Vehicular use area shall mean any area of a development site used for circulation, parking, or display of any type of vehicle. 
Vending operations shall mean, for purposes of this Code, any person, persons, firms, business association or corporation engaging in the sale, trade or other exchange of any materials or goods, including but not limited to fruits, vegetables, or other food stuffs, souvenirs, trinkets, art objects, etc., from a vehicle or temporary structure. 
Violation shall mean the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this Code. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this Code is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Wall sign shall mean any sign erected parallel to the facade or on the outside wall of any building and supported throughout its length by the wall of the building. 
Water body shall mean a lake, pond or other natural body of water of any type. 
Water surface elevation shall mean the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
Watercourse shall mean a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
Well shall mean any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug, jetted, or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation is for the location, acquisition, development, or artificial recharge of groundwater but such term does not include any well for the purpose of obtaining or prospecting for oil, natural gas, minerals, or products of mining or quarrying, for inserting media to dispose of oil brines or to repressure oil-bearing or natural gas-bearing formations or for storing petroleum or natural gas or other products or for temporary dewatering or subsurface formations for mining, quarrying or construction purposes. 
Well field shall mean an area of land which contains one or more potable water supply well. 
Wetlands shall mean lands which are identified by being inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do or would support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The definition includes all contiguous and noncontiguous or isolated wetlands to waters, water bodies, and watercourses. Wetlands include, but are not limited to, swamp hammocks, hardwood hydric hammocks, riverine cypress, cypress ponds, bayheads, bogs, wet prairies, freshwater marshes, tidal flats, salt marshes, mangrove swamps and marine meadows. The landward extent of wetlands shall be determined in accordance with F.A.C. ch. 62-340. Wetlands shall be defined as in F.S. § 373.019. 
Window sign shall mean any sign installed or maintained inside or upon the window of any building or structure, visible from the exterior of the building. 
_____
Yard shall mean the required setback area between the property line and the building line. Yards are referred to by their location on the lot: 
(1)	Front yard shall mean the entire width of the yard abutting the street. On through lots abutting more than one public street, all yards abutting streets are front yards. On corner lots, both yards abutting streets shall be considered to be front yards. 
(2)	Side yard shall mean the yard or yards bounded by the front and rear yards, or by the front yards on a through lot. 
(3)	Rear yard shall mean the entire width of the yard abutting that lot line farthest from and generally parallel to the front yard. On corner lots, the yard opposite the street toward which the principal building is oriented shall be the rear yard and other yards which are not front yards shall be side yards. 
(4)	Waterfront yard shall mean the yard abutting a natural or artificial water body (lake or pond) larger than 5,000 square feet, or a watercourse (stream or creek) greater than ten feet in width. 
 
Yard trash shall mean vegetative matter resulting from landscaping maintenance or land clearing operations and includes materials such as tree and shrub trimmings, grass clippings, palm fronds, trees and stumps. 
Xeriscape shall mean a landscaping method that maximizes the conservation of water by the use of site-appropriate plants and an efficient watering system. The principles of xeriscape include planning and design, appropriate choice of plants, soil analysis, the use of solid waste compost, efficient irrigation, practical use of turf, appropriate use of mulches, and proper maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 11-99, § 2, 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 11-00, § 2, 9-6-2000; Ord. No. 08-07, 3-7-2007; Ord. No. 06-08, § I, 5-7-2008; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 1-4. - Development and use of land. 
(a)	Development permit and development order. No development shall be undertaken within the City without approval and issuance of a development permit pursuant to the provisions of this Code and of other relevant codes and regulations (such as the Building Code). Where indicated by these regulations, a development order approved by the City Manager or City Council shall be required prior to issuance of a development permit. 
(b)	Development plan. For developments requiring a development plan or site plan under this Land Development Code, and for development situations specifically identified in this Code, a development plan shall be approved before a development permit may be issued. 
(c)	Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)	No land, water, or building, or any part thereof, shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy is issued finding the use in conformity with this Code. A certificate of occupancy must comply with the terms and provisions of the approved development order and development permit, as well as with the provisions of these regulations. 
(2)	No existing use of land, water, or building, or any part thereof, shall be changed to a different use classification as established in the state building code, until a certificate of occupancy is issued finding that the use as changed is in conformity with this Code. 
(3)	Following a written request, a final inspection shall be made and a certificate of occupancy issued if it is found that the requirements have been met. If the certificate of occupancy is denied, a written statement shall be provided to the applicant with the reasons for refusal, citing the applicable regulations and remedy which may achieve compliance. 
(4)	Where no health or safety hazard is created, a conditional certificate of occupancy may be issued prior to completion of all improvements. The conditions may include the submittal of plans and specifications for the required improvements and posting of security to ensure completion. The period for completion shall be provided in the certificate of occupancy, and shall be no more than 60 days. If the improvements are not completed within the time provided, the certificate of occupancy shall be void, and appropriate enforcement action shall be taken by the City Manager. 
(d)	Issuance of development permits while amendment pending. No development permit shall be issued where an amendment to this Code is pending before the City Council, which amendment, if adopted, would make nonconforming the development authorized by the development order or permit. 
(e)	Agreement to specific provisions. The City may enter into an agreement with a developer to establish specific provisions governing the use and development of a particular piece of land. Such agreement shall be subject to applicable provisions of law and shall comply with the following: 
(1)	No provision may be included which is contrary to the adopted Comprehensive Plan or which would be tantamount to a rezoning of land. 
(2)	Except where expressly provided in the agreement, no agreement shall have a term of more than five years. Agreements may individually provide for extensions to be approved by the City Council. 
(3)	All Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) shall require an agreement. 
(4)	Agreements may modify or limit the use and/or density provisions; may provide for extra or oversized buffers, setbacks, or landscaping; may restrict the location or design of buildings and other site features; may establish provisions for infrastructure improvements; and may establish operational restrictions on the uses within the planned development. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, §§ 1(103), 1(207), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 1-5. - Administration. 
(a)	City Council. The City Council is the governing body of the City, established and operating in accordance with law. The City Council shall have the following duties and responsibilities under this Code: 
(1)	The City Council shall serve as the Local Planning Agency (LPA) for all purposes and as provided in F.S. ch. 163, pt. II (F.S. § 163.2511 et seq.), and shall perform all duties and comply with the requirements established therein, including responsibility for review of the Land Development Code for consistency with the adopted Comprehensive Plan. The LPA shall include a nonvoting school board representative member for certain comprehensive plan amendments and rezonings as provided by and in accordance with Florida law. 
(2)	The City Council shall review all of the Land Development Code and shall review applications for land development orders where such review is required by this Code. 
(3)	The City Council shall hear and consider requests for variances from and shall hear appeals concerning the standards of this Code. All decisions of the City Council shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(4)	The City Council shall make all interpretations of the Comprehensive Plan, including determinations that development orders are consistent with the adopted plan. The City Council may provide for delegation of such interpretations to the City Manager and by the City Manager to another party, subject to appeal of interpretation to the City Council. 
(5)	The City Council shall hear and consider requests for special exceptions, as provided herein. 
(6)	The City Council shall hear and consider requests for change in zoning and approval of development agreements (including development agreements under PUD regulations). 
(7)	Action of the City Council shall be by vote of the majority of members present. 
(b)	City Manager. The City Manager is the official employed by the City Council to be responsible for the day to day operation of the City. The City Manager shall have the following duties and responsibilities under this Code: 
(1)	The City Manager shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this Code. The City Manager may designate other City officers, employees, or agents to perform administrative functions, make determinations, and enforce various provisions. Designation need not be in writing and may be inferred. 
(2)	The City Manager shall prepare and present to the City Council reports on actions to be taken by the City Council, including appeals and requests for rezoning or development plan approval, and may present information items and request direction from the City Council for items where City Council approval is not otherwise required. 
(3)	The City Manager may adopt regulations providing procedures, and forms for the implementation and enforcement of this Code. Where adopted, such procedures shall be used by City staff, land owners, and developers in the application for, review, and issuance of development orders and development permits, but deviations from such policies or procedures shall not be a basis for invalidation of any development order, development permit, or determination, provided all requirements of this Code have been met. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(104), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 04-15 , § II, 12-2-2015)  
Sec. 1-6. - Rezoning. 
(a)	Procedure. 
(1)	Land may be rezoned at the initiative of the property owner or other person with beneficial interest in the land as agent of the property owner. Rezoning may also be initiated by the City Council. 
(2)	Any request for rezoning shall be made on forms provided by the City Manager accompanied by a letter of authorization from the property owner (if applicable), and a survey and legal description of the property to be rezoned. The City Manager will review the request (or have it reviewed) and will make a recommendation to the City Council for action. 
(3)	A community meeting hosted and arranged by the applicant is required for all rezoning applications including Planned Unit Developments (PUD). The community meeting shall afford citizens and other affected parties an opportunity to discuss the applicant's proposal and express concerns, issues or problems they may have with the proposal in advance of the public hearing. Following the community meeting the applicant shall submit a report documenting the results of the meeting. Notification of the community meeting shall be in accordance with the following. 
i.	The community meeting shall be held at least seven days prior to the first public hearing for the proposed ordinance. 
ii.	The level of citizen interest and area involvement will vary depending on the nature of the application and the project's location. The applicant will determine the target area for notification after consultation with the Planning Administrator and approval by the City Manager. But in no case shall the notification area for the community meeting be less than required by section 1-10(c)(1), Notice requirements, (currently 200 feet but as may be amended by City Council from time to time). 
iii.	The applicant shall notify neighborhood and homeowner's associations within the public notice area. 
iv.	The applicant shall provide a list to the City of all those notified by the applicant of the community meeting. 
(4)	The City Council will review the request at a public hearing and following public notice as required by law and by this Code, and will approve, deny, or approve with modifications. 
(5)	If a request for rezoning is denied, no substantially similar request may be considered within 180 days, unless this restriction is waived by the City Council. 
(b)	Criteria for rezoning. All applications for rezoning shall be reviewed in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)	The proposal shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, including proposed uses and intensity or density of use. 
(2)	The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the uses permitted by the proposed rezoning shall not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(3)	The uses permitted by the proposed rezoning shall not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding properties for uses permitted in the district and shall be consistent with the character of the immediate neighborhood. 
(4)	The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the uses permitted by the proposed rezoning shall be supported by adequate infrastructure or provisions shall be made to ensure that infrastructure is adequate when needed to serve the development. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(105), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 04-15 , § III, 12-2-2015)  
Sec. 1-7. - Interpretations and appeals. 
(a)	Procedure for interpretations. 
(1)	Where any person is unsure of his status with respect to the application of this Code, either before or after the Code has been applied, he may request a formal interpretation. Requests for interpretations shall be made to the City Manager. Interpretations shall be made in writing and provided to the requesting party within ten days after receipt of the request. The City Manager will maintain in one place a copy of all written interpretations and shall make these available for review upon request. 
(2)	Any person (including the City Council acting as a body) may appeal an interpretation as provided herein. 
(b)	Matters subject to appeal. 
(1)	An appeal may be brought by an applicant or owner of property subject to the action being appealed and/or an aggrieved or adversely affected person. 
(2)	Any decision or interpretation of the provisions or requirements of this Code made by the City Manager may be appealed. Such appeal shall describe the decision or interpretation being appealed and the nature of the proposed correct decision or interpretation. Where the City Manager has delegated or assigned a responsibility or duty to another employee or another party (including an assignment under a contract to provide administrative services), an appeal may be taken from an action of that other party to the City Manager and, subsequently, to the City Council under this section. 
(3)	An action by the City Manager approving, approving with conditions, or denying an application for a development order may be appealed. Such appeal shall state the basis for the appeal, including reference to specific provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, applicable laws, or this Code, with which the action is alleged to be inconsistent. 
(c)	Procedure for appeal. 
(1)	An appeal shall be filed with the City Manager within ten days after the occurrence of the action being appealed. Where the provisions of this Code do not require a written statement or action as part of the decision process, and in order to establish a basis for appeal, the person making the appeal may request a written statement from the City Manager making a formal decision or interpretation as it applies to the property or situation involved in the appeal, in which case the appeal shall be filed within ten days after the issuance of such written statement. 
(2)	The appeal shall be considered by the City Council at at a regular or special meeting within 60 days of the City Manager's receipt of a timely filed petition. 
(3)	In considering an appeal, the City Council will conduct a public hearing with public notice. The Mayor or presiding officer may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The City Council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify any order, requirement, decision, or determination within its jurisdiction and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made. Consideration of an appeal by the City Council shall be a quasi-judicial action. 
(4)	Action to reverse or modify any order, requirement, decision, or determination under this Code, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to act, or to effect any variation from these regulations, shall require the concurring vote of the majority of the entire Council. 
(d)	Effect of decision on an appeal. 
(1)	All decisions of the City Council are expressly conditioned upon the appellant or applicant obtaining the permit requested, or complying with such other order, and beginning construction within one year from the date of the decision. If compliance with all requirements has not been made and the permit has not been issued within one year, then the variance or special exception shall expire. Extensions may be granted by the City Council, provided that extensions shall not exceed one year. 
(2)	Upon denial of a request, an applicant may not apply for the same relief or relief of the same condition until 180 days after the date of final action. 
(e)	Matters which may/may not be appealed. The actual language of any section or provision of this Code may not be appealed—only the application of that language to a specific situation or circumstance. No requirement which is a requirement of or is directly based on and/or made directly pursuant to a requirement of the county, the state, or any federal or regional agency may be appealed. No provision or requirement of the Comprehensive Plan may be appealed; however, an interpretation of the meaning of a plan provision may be appealed to the extent that it affects a decision or action under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(106), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 1-8. - Variances. 
The City Council may grant a variance from the strict application of a provision of this Code if the effect of the variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan and with these regulations and standards and where the City Council makes findings of fact, based on the standards hereinafter described, that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in carrying out the strict letter of the regulation or regulations. Variances may also be issued in cases where the City Council determines that failure to permit the requested relief would subject the City to a claim of equitable estoppel. 
(1)	Procedure. Any person desiring to make improvements to property or to erect any structure not in conformance with the regulations or standards in this Code shall apply for a variance. Consideration of a request for a variance by the City Council shall be a quasi-judicial action and shall be considered after due public notice. Public notice shall include newspaper advertising as required by state law. 
(2)	Limitations on granting variances. The City Council shall not vary the provisions of this Code unless it includes within the record of its action findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.	The property in question cannot yield a reasonable and beneficial use if permitted to be developed only under the regulations and standards in this Code. 
b.	The plight of the landowner is due to unique circumstances and not the result of his own action or failure to act. 
c.	The variance, if granted, will be the minimum variance necessary to accomplish the objectives and will not alter the essential character of the area. 
(3)	Criteria for approval of a variance. For the purpose of implementing this provision, the City Council, in making its determination whether there are practical difficulties or particular hardships, also shall take into consideration the extent to which the following facts favorable to the applicant have been established by the evidence: 
a.	The particular physical surroundings, shape, topographical conditions, or other physical or environmental condition of the specificproperty involved would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out. 
b.	The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the parcel and would not be applicable, generally, to other property within the vicinity. 
c.	The purpose of the variance request is not based exclusively upon an economic hardship. 
d.	The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any act or failure to act by the person owning the property. 
e.	The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity. 
f.	The proposed variance will be consistent with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this Code. A variance shall meet any specific requirements identified in this Code and no variance shall be granted from these requirements. 
(4)	Conditions. In giving preliminary development approval involving a variance, the City Council may impose such conditions and restrictions as may be necessary to comply with the standards in this Code to reduce or minimize the injurious effects of such variance upon other property in the vicinity and so as to carry out the intent and purposes of this Code. Such conditions shall conform to the limitations set out in this Code and shall be enforceable as are any other provisions of this Code. 
(5)	Expiration. The activity permitted by a variance shall be commenced within one year after approval or the variance shall expire. 
(6)	Administrative variances. The City Manager shall have the power to grant approval of an application for an administrative variance. An administrative variance may only modify setbacks, buffer widths, yard dimensions, height or floor area when the variance requested is equal to or less than ten percent of the required setback, buffer width, yard dimensions, height or floor area requirement. If the City Manager denies an application for an administrative variance, an application may be submitted to City Council in accordance with section 1-8 (1-5) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(107), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 1-9. - Special exceptions. 
Certain uses or development situations are "special exceptions." These uses or development situations are generally permitted in the zoning district indicated, but may involve consideration of special circumstances or factors to determine that they are appropriate to the specific location and property. These uses may also require additional conditions to be imposed to ensure compatibility with the surrounding area and consistency with the overall objectives of this Code. 
(1)	Procedure for review of special exception. 
a.	A request for approval of a special exception shall be filed with the City Manager or his designee. The request may be filed and processed in conjunction with any other request, such as a request for a change of zoning. The request shall be accompanied by a development plan for the project, unless it is determined by the City Manager that the nature of the request and the issues involved are not appropriate for development plan review. 
b.	In considering a request for a special exception, the City Council shall evaluate the criteria as they relate to the specific use requested and the specific location of the proposed special exception. 
c.	If the City Council determines that the special exception reasonably meets the criteria, or can be conditioned to meet the criteria, it will approve the request. If the City Council determines that the proposed special exception cannot reasonably be conditioned to meet the criteria, it will deny the request. If the request is denied, the reasons therefor will be provided as part of the action denying the request. 
(2)	Criteria for special exceptions. All applications for special exceptions shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the following criteria: 
a.	The proposal shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
b.	The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the proposed use shall not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
c.	The proposed use shall not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding properties for uses permitted in the district and shall be consistent with the character of the immediate neighborhood. 
d.	Adequate measures shall be taken for ingress, egress and parking in a manner consistent with traffic operations and safety. 
e.	The proposal shall not have a substantial adverse effect on any known archaeological, historical, or cultural resource located on or off the site. 
f.	The proposed design shall minimize adverse effects of the use on adjacent property, including visual impacts. 
g.	Adequate provision shall be made for buffers, landscaping, public open space, and other improvements necessitated by the proposal. 
h.	The use shall meet the lot and building requirements of the district in which it is located unless the requirements are specifically modified by the City Council. A special exception shall meet any specific requirements identified in this Code and no variance shall be granted from these requirements. 
i.	The use shall comply at all times with the approved development plan, and any conditions imposed for establishment and operation of the use. 
(3)	Imposition of conditions. In approving a special exception, the City Council may impose such additional reasonable conditions for establishment and operation of the use, including but not limited to: 
a.	Hours of operation of the use. 
b.	Restraints to minimize environmental effects such as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, and odor. 
c.	Special yard or other open space, lot area, or dimension requirements. 
d.	Height, size, or location limitations on buildings or other structures. 
e.	Increase of the required amount of street dedication, roadway width, or improvements within the street right-of-way. 
f.	Regulation of the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing, or other improvement of a parking or truck loading area, and control of traffic generation or circulation. 
g.	Regulation of the number, size, location, height, or lighting of signs. 
h.	Regulation of the location, intensity, and shielding of outdoor lighting. 
i.	Berming, screening, landscaping, or other measures to protect adjacent or nearby property, including standards for installation and maintenance. 
j.	Regulation of the size, height, location, or materials for a fence or wall. 
k.	Regulations to protect existing trees, vegetation, water resources, wildlife habitat, or other significant natural resources. 
l.	Consideration of the size, style, history, and appearance of a structure to ensure architectural compatibility with other structures in the district. 
(4)	Previously approved special exceptions. It is the intent of this Code that any use or situation approved as a special exception prior to the effective date of this Code shall continue to be valid unless the use or situation is abandoned for more than 180 days based on utility records and/or occupancy or a change is requested. Any change shall be processed as a new request for a special exception under the provisions of this Code. The use or activity permitted under a special exception shall be commenced within one year after approval or the special exception shall expire, unless a different term is provided as part of the approval of the special exception. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(108), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 1-10. - Notice requirements. 
(a)	For amendments to the text of this Code, or amendments to the city's official zoning map (rezonings) initiated by the city, notice shall include newspaper advertising and other notice required by state law. 
(b)	For amendments to the city's official zoning map (rezonings) including major amendments to a planned unit development initiated by persons or entities other than the city, the following notice shall be provided: 
(1)	Newspaper advertising and other notice required by state law; 
(2)	At least ten days prior to each public hearing on the proposed rezoning, notice shall be sent by the applicant via certified mail to the owners of all property that is within 200 feet from the boundaries of the property subject to proposed rezoning; and 
(3)	At least ten days prior to each public hearing on the proposed rezoning, a notice shall be posted by the applicant conspicuously on the property subject to the proposed rezoning. 
(c)	For approval or for consideration by the City Council of a special exception, variance, minor amendment to Planned Unit Development or appeal, the following notice shall be provided at least ten days prior to the public hearing on the request: 
(1)	A notice shall be sent by the applicant via certified mail to the owners of all property that is within 200 feet of the property subject to the request; 
(2)	A notice shall also be posted by the applicant conspicuously on the property subject to the request; and 
(3)	A notice in a newspaper of general circulation. At a minimum the newspaper notice shall contain the nature of the request, the date, time and location of the public hearing(s) on the request, and the tax parcel identification number(s) for the property subject to the request. 
(d)	Where certified mailed notice or posting is required, notice shall at a minimum contain the nature of the request, the date, time and location of the public hearing(s) on the request and the tax parcel identification number(s) for the property subject to the request. 
(e)	For the purposes of notice under this section, the names and addresses of owners of property shall be determined by the latest ad valorem tax rolls. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(114), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 2-2-2005; Ord. No. 05-09, § I, 5-6-2009; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 1-11. - Appeal to court. 
(a)	Any action by the City in approving, approving with conditions, or denying an application for development approval may be appealed to court under the applicable provisions of state law. Any action of the City Council in approving or denying an action prescribed by this Code or in taking or failing to take an action under the provisions of this Code may be appealed to court under the applicable provisions of state law. 
(b)	It is the intent of the City, however, that reasonable effort will be taken to resolve disputes through the dispute resolution processes established by state law and by the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(109), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 1-12. - Nonconforming lots, structures, and uses. 
(a)	Nonconforming lots. 
(1)	A lot or parcel of land is nonconforming if it does not meet the minimum area and dimensional requirements of the district in which it is located. 
(2)	Any lot or parcel made nonconforming solely as a result of eminent domain proceedings instituted by any governmental agency, or through a voluntary conveyance in lieu thereof, shall be deemed to be a conforming lot or parcel for all purposes. However, all development activity on such a lot or parcel shall be in accordance with district yard requirements at the time of development. 
(3)	Where two or more existing nonconforming lots with continuous frontage are under the same ownership, or where a nonconforming lot has continuous frontage with a large tract under the same ownership, nonconforming lots shall be combined to form one or more building sites meeting the lot requirements of the district. 
(4)	Development of a single-family dwelling shall be permitted on a nonconforming lot of at least 5,000 square feet and 50 feet or more in width at the front building line in any district in which the use is permitted, if remedy of the nonconformity by combination with other lots under the same owner is not available. 
(5)	The City Council shall have jurisdiction to authorize variances from the requirements of this subsection. 
(b)	Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
(1)	A building or structure is nonconforming if it does not meet the building setback, height, or bulk limitations of this Code. 
(2)	An existing nonconforming building or structure may be maintained and repaired, but shall not be structurally added onto or altered to further the nonconformance unless the additions or alterations are for the purpose of a conforming use of the building or structure. 
(3)	Existing nonconforming buildings and structures shall be made to comply with these regulations if the value of the buildings and structures on a lot after the damage is less than 50 percent of the value immediately preceding the damage as determined by the county property appraiser. This provision shall not apply to the reconstruction of a legal nonconforming single-family dwelling. 
(c)	Nonconforming uses. 
(1)	A use of land or of any building or structure is nonconforming if any of the following conditions apply: 
a.	The use is not currently permitted in the district in accordance with this Code. 
b.	The density of the use exceeds the density currently permitted in the district in accordance with this Code. 
c.	The site does not meet the applicable off-street parking requirements of this Code. 
(2)	An existing nonconforming use of any building or structure shall not be extended, enlarged, or expanded. 
(3)	An existing nonconforming use of any building or structure shall not be rebuilt or repaired if the value of the buildings and structures on a lot after the damage is less than 50 percent of the value immediately preceding the damage as determined by the county property appraiser. This provision shall not apply to the reconstruction of a legal nonconforming single-family dwelling. 
(4)	Modifications shall not be granted from any of these restrictions. No modification shall be permitted from dimensional and density restrictions in order to reestablish a nonconforming use. 
(d)	Vested development. There are within the City, various properties, the development of which was previously declared to be "vested" under the regulations of the county. It is the intent of this Code that such "vested" status shall not be changed solely by virtue of the adoption of this Code. 
(d)	Vested development. There are within the City, various properties, the development of which was previously declared to be "vested" under the regulations of the county. It is the intent of this Code that such "vested" status shall not be changed solely by virtue of the adoption of this Code. 
(e)	For vested developments that are legal non-conforming uses, the City Manager may permit the addition of accessory structures including fences as well as aesthetic site improvements such as landscaping, if such improvements meet the following conditions and are not for the purpose of expanding or enlarging the nonconforming use. 
(1)	The non-conforming use shall not be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was originally occupied. 
(2)	The improvement must comply with all other applicable laws and regulations including overlay district requirements and required setbacks. 
(3)	No new non-conformities shall be created. 
(4)	The maximum lot coverage must not exceed that required by the site's zoning classification. 
(f)	Nonconforming site improvements (not including structure). Where an existing site improvement (landscaping, parking lot layout, etc.) is non-conforming with the current regulations related to such, nothing in this section shall prohibit minor site improvements that result in the reduction of this non-conformity. 
(g)	Illegal uses. This section does not authorize the continuance of any use or nonconformity which was not validly in existence at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 1-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21-07, § 3, adopted Sept. 5, 2007, deleted § 1-13 which pertained to development agreements and derived from Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(210), adopted Nov. 3, 1999.  
Sec. 1-14. - Enforcement and penalties. 
The provisions of this Code may be enforced and violations punished by any of the following methods: 
(1)	The county court shall have jurisdiction to enforce these regulations by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 60 days or by both. Each day any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)	The Code enforcement board or its designee shall have jurisdiction to enforce these provisions, and any person, firm, corporation, or agent determined to be in violation shall be subject to all penalties and remedies available to the board as provided by law. 
(3)	The City may institute any appropriate action or procedure to bring about compliance or remedy. The City may order discontinuance of the use of any land, water, or building, the removal of any building, addition, or other structure, the discontinuance of any work being done, or any other act when such use or act is in violation of this Code. 
(4)	The City may institute a citation process pursuant to state law and may enforce this Code under applicable procedures. 
(5)	Specific provisions of this Code may provide for additional remedies.  
Sec. 1-15. - Authority to enter property in performance of duties. 
Any person acting under the direction of the City Manager in the performance of functions and duties pursuant to this Code shall be authorized to enter upon any land and make inspections, examinations, and surveys as necessary in its administration and enforcement, subject to the limitations set forth in state statutes.  
Sec. 1-16. - Assessment of fees, costs and expenses for development. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Application shall mean and refer to an application or petition or proposal submitted to the City for review or approval of: 
(1)	A preliminary subdivision plan; 
(2)	A subdivision plan or plat; 
(3)	A rezoning (with or without a Comprehensive Plan amendment); 
(4)	A Comprehensive Plan amendment; 
(5)	A variance; 
(6)	A special exception; 
(7)	A Planned Unit Development; 
(8)	Subdivision review exemption; 
(9)	Site plan; 
(10)	A development permit for construction, inspection and testing of subdivision improvements; 
(11)	Conceptual site plan review; 
(12)	Stormwater management permit; 
(13)	Tree removal permit; 
(14)	Wetland alteration permit; 
(15)	A development agreement; and/or 
(16)	Other development related matters for which City approval or review is required. 
City staff shall mean and refer to City employees, City consultants, City attorneys, City engineers, and those companies, governments, individuals and other entities under contract with the City to provide services to or for the City. 
Development review fee shall mean and refer to the combination of the flat fee and the review costs to be paid by an applicant pursuant to this section. 
Owner's authorized agent shall mean and refer to an agent of the owner duly authorized to submit and process an application. If the applicant is not the property owner, a written authorization must accompany the application. Such authorization shall be evidenced by a power of attorney signed by the owner and notarized specifically authorizing the agent to represent the owner in connection with the application and as to the owner's real property which is the subject of the application. The authorization shall include an agreement of the owner to be bound by the actions of the owner's authorized agent and the provisions of this Code. 
Review deposit shall mean and refer to the review deposit, as established by this section and as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council, to be paid by an applicant at the time of the filing of an application in those circumstances where review costs are paid by the applicant under the provisions of this section. 
(b)	Review deposits. 
(1)	In addition to the flat fee required, a $2,000.00 review deposit payable to the City by money order, personal or company check or cashier's check drawn on a financial institution authorized to do business in the county, shall be delivered to and collected by the City Manager or his designee at the time of submission of each application for review or approval. If the amount of the fees, costs and expenses relating to the review, processing, inspection and regulation of such as estimated by the City Manager, based on information from City staff and the applicant, will exceed the flat fee and are likely either to be less than or more than the review deposit, then the City Manager may adjust the review deposit to the minimum extent supported by the City Manager's estimate. The City Manager may waive the requirement of a review deposit if, based upon information from City staff, the amount of the fees, costs and expenses relating to the review, processing, inspection and regulation of such as estimated by the City Manager will not exceed the flat fee. 
(2)	No review of any application shall commence until the flat fee and review deposit, if applicable, are paid to the City. The review deposit shall be forwarded to the City Manager or his designee prior to the end of the second business day following the submittal of an application for review or approval. Any portion of the review deposit that exceeds the actual costs incurred in reviewing the application shall be returned to the applicant after completion of the matter for which the application was submitted, or after withdrawal of such application. No interest shall be paid on any review deposit. 
(c)	Project account. Once an application has been submitted to the City and the applicable flat fee and review deposit have been collected, the City Manager or his designee shall establish an individual project account through which all fees, expenses and costs incurred by the City which are associated with the application will be monitored. The project account will be maintained throughout the entire review, processing, inspection, and regulation process until the later of: 
(1)	Final action (after all appeal periods have ended) by the City Council has occurred with respect to the application; 
(2)	No further involvement of the City staff is likely; or 
(3)	The City has been paid all of the amounts. 
Fees, costs and expenses for the City staff time directly related to the review, processing, inspection or regulation of an application or development and directly related expenses, including, but not limited to, legal, inspection and engineering costs will be charged to the project account. 
(d)	City invoices. 
(1)	The City Manager or his designee may periodically, up until, and shall prior to, the City's final approval of each application and the project for which a review deposit is required, total the costs, expenses and fees incurred by the City for such application and project and send a written invoice to the applicant for payment. The applicant shall have 20 calendar days from the date of the invoice to pay to the City the invoiced amount. Thereafter, if full payment is not received in the required time, the City Manager or his designee shall apply the review deposit toward payment of the invoiced amounts. If the total costs, expenses and fees incurred by the City for such application and project exceed the review deposit and full payment is not received in the 20 calendar days, the City Manager or his designee shall apply the review deposit to a portion of the invoiced amount and send a notice of nonpayment to the applicant and to all City staff associated with the application or project. The notice will instruct the City staff to cease all work relating to such application unless and until further notified by the City Manager or his designee. 
(2)	If payment of the balance of the invoice is not received within 20 calendar days, then work by the City staff shall cease and will not be reactivated on any application or project. Neither building permits, development orders, certificates of completion nor certificates of occupancy or other permits or approvals will be issued with respect to such or the real property related to such until such time as all outstanding fees, costs and expenses are paid in full and a new review deposit for the application or project is paid to the City in an amount determined by the City Manager. Review of any future application or project with respect to the real property for which payment was not made will not be undertaken by the City until such time as all outstanding fees, costs and expenses due are paid in full and a new review deposit is paid to the City. 
(3)	The deficiency owed to the city shall accrue interest per diem at the interest rate set pursuant to F.S. § 55.03 until paid. The amount of any such deficiency owed to the city shall be, together with interest and the costs of collection as hereinafter provided, the personal obligation of the property owner and shall be a continuing lien on the real property related to the application or project under review. Any subsequent or new owner of the real property related to the application or project shall take title subject to the obligations of the property owner and shall be jointly and severally liable for such obligations; provided, however, a property owner may not escape liability for the deficiency by abandonment of the application or project, withdrawal of such or sale of the real property with respect to which such application has been submitted. If the initial or subsequent invoices is/are not timely paid and the invoiced amount exceeds the amount of the review deposit, the city may take whatever legal means it deems appropriate to collect the deficiency, including, but not limited to, retaining the services of a collection agency or attorney, initiating legal proceedings for the collection thereof, recording a notice of lien, and foreclosing same in the same fashion as mortgage liens are foreclosed. To give the public notice of the deficiency, the City Manager may (but shall not be obligated to) record a notice of lien in the public records of the county, stating the description of the real property related to the application or project, the name of the owner of the real property and the amount then due and owing to the city. 
(e)	Required payments. Payment of costs, expenses and fees incurred by the City is a requirement for the City's final approval of the application and project. 
(f)	Assessable costs, expenses and fees. All costs, expenses and fees incurred by the City relating directly to the review, processing, inspection, or regulation of an application, or project, including but not limited to, the time of City staff, agents, engineers, attorneys, surveyors, consultants, and entities providing services to the City by contract, as well as those relating directly to surveying, legal and engineering for an application or project shall be assessed to the applicant. City employees' hourly rates shall be determined by the City Manager based on actual costs to the City, accounting for employees' salaries, health care expenses, payroll taxes, benefits, training costs, and other employee costs to the City. The fees, costs and expenses for the City's contract consultants including but not limited to the City's engineers, attorneys, and surveyors shall be invoiced to the applicant at the same rate charged to the City for the service rendered. Hourly rates for work performed by county employees on behalf of the City shall be determined by the county's contract with the City. To the extent that the fees, costs and expenses required under this section are assessed and paid, pursuant to other provisions of the City Code, assessment and payment under this section shall not occur. 
(g)	Fee collection and schedule. 
(1)	The Comprehensive Plan amendment fee schedule, Land Development Code application fee schedule and zoning ordinance fee schedule attached hereto as exhibits "A", "B" and "C" respectively, as later may be amended, establish the flat fee for the matters referenced therein. Such flat fees in addition to any review deposit required shall be paid by the applicant and delivered to the City Manager or his designee upon submittal of any application to the City. The City Manager or his designee shall ensure the required flat fee is collected, and, if applicable, the review deposit (collectively referred to as "development review fee") is posted to an account for said application. The City Manager or his designee, shall receive all applications with proof of payment of the flat fee and review deposit, if applicable. 
(2)	Should the City Manager or his designee determine that the required review deposit for an application is inadequate to cover the reasonably anticipated fees, costs and expenses to be required by the City, the City Manager or his designee shall increase the minimum deposit to the minimum extent necessary to cover such reasonably anticipated fees, costs, and expenses. 
(h)	Objections; appeal. Any objection to any invoice or to any matter set forth in this section of the Code must be set forth in writing, addressed and delivered to the City Manager on or within ten calendar days of the date of the relevant invoice. In the event the City Manager denies the objection, the applicant shall have ten calendar days after the date of the City Manager's decision to file an appeal of such decision with the City Council. All objections and appeals shall set forth in detail the reasons and evidence upon which the objection and appeal are based. Failure of the applicant to establish beyond a preponderance of the evidence that an invoice, decision or other matter objected to or appealed is not appropriate and is not based upon competent substantial evidence, shall result in a denial of the objection and appeal or reconsideration. 
(i)	Attorney's fees in the event of failure to pay review costs. In the event the City is required to take legal action to enforce this Code, then the City shall be entitled to recover from the applicant all costs and expenses incurred, including but not limited to its reasonable attorneys' fees, paralegal fees and other costs and expenses, whether incurred prior to, during or subsequent to court proceedings or on appeal. 
(j)	Change of ownership. An applicant shall provide prompt written notice to the City Manager within 20 calendar days in the event of a change in ownership of all or a portion of a lot, tract, or parcel of real property with respect to which an application, or project is pending before the City. Such notice shall include the name, address and phone number of the new owner and a legal description of the lot, tract or parcel of real property now owned by the new owner. Any such new owner shall not be entitled to utilize or draw upon any review deposit previously paid to the City by the original applicant, shall be liable to the City for all fees, costs and expenses related to the lot, tract or parcel of real property which arise subsequent to the date the new owner acquires title to such real property, and may be required by the City to pay a separate review deposit in the same manner as a new application in which case a separate project account will be opened in the name of the new owner or the new owner's authorized agent. If a separate review deposit is required, no work shall be undertaken by the City with respect to the lot, tract or parcel of real property then owned by the new owner until a separate review deposit is paid to the City. Until such time as the City receives such written notice of a change in ownership, the original applicant shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for all fees, costs and expenses associated with the application or project which may subsequently be incurred by the City in connection with the activities of the new owner; provided, however, that upon receipt by the City of such a notification of change of ownership, the original applicant shall not be liable to the City for any further fees, costs and expenses incurred by the City which arise solely out of the application or project of the new owner and the new owner shall be solely liable to the City for all such fees, costs and expenses associated with the application or project activities of the new owner or the new owner's authorized agent subsequent to the date of receipt by the City of such notification. 
(k)	Agreement to be bound by this section. Execution of an application shall constitute the consent and agreement of the applicant and the owner if the application is being executed by the owner's authorized agent to be bound by the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 02-06, § 1, 3-1-2006; Ord. No. 12-10, § 2, 10-20-2010)  
Chapter 2 - PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Development plan required. 
(a)	In certain situations, a development plan or site plan shall be approved by the City Council prior to the issuance of a development permit. Requirements and procedures for submittal and review of a development plan shall be as set forth for a site plan. 
(b)	It is the intent of this Code that review of a development plan may occur concurrently with the review of a request for rezoning, special exception, variance, or other approval, and that where possible, related requests shall be considered by the City Council at the same time. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(201), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 2-2. - Criteria for review of a development plan. 
In order to meet the purpose of development plan review and the provisions of this Code, the following factors will be considered by the City Council in the review and approval of a development plan: 
(1)	Plans must meet all Land Development Code requirements. Any variances necessary must be identified and approved prior to or in conjunction with the approval of the development plan. 
(2)	The relationship the proposed development would have to adjacent properties, the impact the development would have on the immediate neighborhood, and the compatibility of the proposed development with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan, including any development standards contained therein. 
(3)	Ingress and egress to the site, compatibility with road improvement plans, vehicular and pedestrian safety, traffic flow and traffic control on public streets, maneuverability of vehicles, conflict points, provisions for service drives, adequacy of parking and loading areas (including number of parking spaces), servicing of utility areas by vehicles, access by emergency vehicles, and cross visibility. 
(4)	The method of storm drainage on the property and the effect of proposed site alterations on drainage of adjacent properties, public drainage systems, the retention of stormwater, drainage to landscaped areas, the water table, flood hazard areas, and protection of water bodies from pollution. 
(5)	Preservation of exceptional tree specimens and as many healthy trees as possible, the location and quality of landscaped and open areas, and the preservation or installation of buffer and screening areas. 
(6)	Siting of and efforts to provide open spaces as well as recreational facilities for residents of the development where appropriate. 
(7)	Utility tie-in locations, existing water and sewer facilities, offsite utility improvements, impact on water and sewer treatment capacities, supply capabilities, and pressure, and the necessity for and location of fire hydrants on- or off-site. 
(8)	Internal circulation and parking with reference to pedestrian and vehicular safety, maneuverability of vehicles, prevention of points of vehicular conflict, wheel chair ramps, marking of drives and parking bays, cross visibility, drop-off points, adequacy of parking count, parking spaces for the handicapped, and accessibility of firefighting equipment and personnel, applying the infrastructure, public improvement, and utility requirements of this Code. 
(9)	General site arrangement, amenities, and convenience with particular reference to insuring that appearance and general layout of the proposed development will be compatible and harmonious with properties in the general area and will not be so at variance with other development so as to cause substantial depreciation of property values. 
(10)	The use and development depicted in the development plan shall meet all City minimum environmental standards as set forth in this Code. 
(11)	Other standards appropriate to the use and scale of the development proposed. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(203), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 2-3. - Previously approved planned developments. 
It is the intent of this Code that the completion of planned developments previously approved under the regulations of the county shall continue to be administered under the approved standards unless changes are requested. Any subsequent major revisions to the terms and conditions will be made following the provisions of this Code, including but not limited to the procedures for minor and major revisions set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(204), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 2-4. - Platting. 
It is the intent of this Code that the subdivision plat review process and platting process shall meet the requirements of F.S. ch. 177. 
(1)	Applicability. These provisions shall apply to the review of any plat of subdivisions of any land within the City, which plat is to be recorded in the public records of the county. Submission, review, and approval of a plat shall be required for the division of any lot or parcel of land. Previously recorded and unrecorded subdivisions are hereby approved except as determined not exempt or vested by the procedures set forth in these regulations. Approval for the realignment or change of any lot or boundary shall be as set forth by these regulations. 
(2)	Submittal requirements. Submittal and review of preliminary and final subdivision plats shall be as provided in this Code. 
(3)	Procedure. Prior to recording of any subdivision plat, such plat shall be submitted to the City Council for approval. The plat shall be reviewed and approved by the City Manager as meeting all applicable requirements of this Code and other regulations. The Mayor shall then sign the plat to indicate that it has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(206), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 2-5. - Concurrency management system. 
(a)	General provisions. 
(1)	The purpose of the concurrency management system is to meet the legal requirement that no development be permitted unless the public facilities necessary to support the development are in place with adequate capacity to serve the development or will be in place when needed by the development. 
(2)	It is the intent of this Code that the provisions of this section will not be applied in such a way as to deprive the owner of property from the reasonable beneficial use thereof. 
(b)	Procedure for designating nondevelopment areas. 
(1)	At the time of his presentation of the proposed annual budget and annual capital budget, the City Manager shall report to the City Council any existing or projected deficiencies in level of service standards for necessary facilities as designated in state law and in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)	If a provision is not added to the annual capital budget to remove the deficiency, the area affected will be designated by an overlay on the zoning map as a "nondevelopment area." The procedure for such designation shall be the same as for any other amendment to the zoning map. 
(3)	Designation as a nondevelopment area shall be effective during the fiscal year and shall expire at the end of the fiscal year. If the condition persists during the subsequent fiscal year, the nondevelopment area shall be redesignated in the same manner. 
(c)	Regulations applicable within nondevelopment areas. 
(1)	No permit for construction will be issued within any designated nondevelopment area, except as follows: 
a.	Permits for nonresidential construction may be issued if the nondevelopment status of an area is exclusively attributable to deficiency of recreation facilities serving the area. 
b.	Permits may be issued for construction if a project to remove the identified deficiency is included in the annual capital budget and the project has received all appropriate permits for construction. 
c.	Permits for construction of infrastructure or of any facility or use that will not increase existing deficiencies may be issued. 
(2)	The City Council may provide that a permit may be issued where failure to allow development will deny the owner any reasonable beneficial use of his property. In such case, the City Council will consider any modification or reduction of the size of the project or other techniques necessary to mitigate additional demand on deficient facilities. 
(3)	Permits may be issued for construction within an approved Planned Unit Development (PUD) consistent with the development plan (including the development timetable). Any substantial modification of a PUD will be reviewed to determine whether the change affects demand on facilities, and may only be approved in a nondevelopment area if there is no change or no increase in the demand on deficient facilities. 
(d)	Determination and offsetting of impact on public services and facilities of the City. 
(1)	Procedure. During the review of a preliminary plat or final site plan for a development order, a determination will be made by the City according to policies set out in the Comprehensive Plan and this Code as to the environmental, physical and fiscal impact of the development on the public services and facilities of the City as set forth in this section and the measures necessary to offset said impacts. 
a.	The determination of impact will use the best available information and will be based upon the maximum impact of the proposed development as generated from the submitted application for a development order. The applicant is encouraged to provide any information in addition to required submittals that will assist in more accurately determining impact. 
b.	The measures necessary to offset the impact of the proposed development shall be as set out in this section. 
(2)	Availability of the stormwater management system. The proposed development shall be designed to provide for the construction and maintenance of a stormwater management system, which conforms to the standards of division 7, article II of chapter 4, the Comprehensive Plan, and any other governmental agency having jurisdiction over the area. 
(3)	Availability of the potable water system. The availability and capacity of the potable water system shall be as provided in this Code. 
(4)	Availability of the sanitary sewer system. The availability and capacity of the sanitary sewer system shall be as provided in this Code. 
(5)	Tree protection measures. The existing trees and tree coverage of a proposed development shall be adequately maintained and protected through consideration, to the maximum extent possible, of the standards and requirements of article IV of chapter 5. 
(6)	School system sites in new residential development. In order to provide for lands to be used to meet the need for school sites created by new residential development, a developer may dedicate land to the county school board of suitable size, dimension, soil type, topography and general character to meet the need for school sites created by the development. 
(7)	Availability of solid waste facilities. The availability and capacity of solid waste facilities shall be as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(209), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 2-6. - Public school capacity. 
(a)	Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this subsection, unless otherwise indicated by the context: 
Administrative rezoning shall mean and refer to a rezoning initiated by the City. 
Applicant shall mean and refer to the individual or entity submitting a request for a development permit or Comprehensive Plan amendment. 
Capacity enhancement agreement shall mean and refer to an agreement between the school board and an applicant providing for sufficient capacity to accommodate the additional students that will be generated by a development permit or Comprehensive Plan amendment that may also certify to the City that the school board will have sufficient capacity to accommodate the additional students generated by approval of the development permit or Comprehensive Plan amendment. 
City shall mean and refer to the City municipal government. 
City of DeBary shall mean and refer to all of the geographical area contained within the incorporated municipal boundaries of the City. 
Comprehensive plan amendment shall mean and refer to a change made to the City's Comprehensive Plan as approved pursuant to general law. 
De minimis impact shall mean and refer to a development permit or Comprehensive Plan amendment that would, if approved, ultimately result in a net increase of less than ten residential dwelling units. However, a development permit or Comprehensive Plan amendment for a property shall not be deemed to have a de minimis impact if, when the impact from a development permit or Comprehensive Plan amendment for such property is aggregated with a development permit or Comprehensive Plan amendment for adjacent property or other properties with a common or related development plan or common or related owner, the increase in the number of residential dwelling units equals or exceeds ten residential dwelling units. 
Development permit shall mean and refer to any building permit, zoning permit, subdivision approval, preliminary subdivision approval, overall development plan, development agreement, rezoning, certification, special exception, variance, or any other official action of the City having the effect of permitting the development of land or the functional equivalent thereof. 
Interlocal agreement regarding school capacity shall mean and refer to an agreement entered into by the school board and the City that recognizes the school board's process for determining the availability of school capacity and the roles and responsibilities of the respective parties in determining and resolving school capacity issues and the process for creating capacity enhancement agreements. 
Residential dwelling unit shall mean and refer to a single-family or multifamily dwelling unit, attached or detached dwelling, house of conventional construction, mobile home, manufactured home, and any other structure used for permanent residence or for dwelling purposes, regardless of whether occupied by an owner or tenant. 
School board shall mean and refer to the School Board of Volusia County, Florida, the governing body of county public schools. 
VCPS shall mean and refer to the Volusia County Public Schools, the county school district. 
(b)	Adequate school capacity required for permit approval. The City shall not approve a development permit or Comprehensive Plan amendment if the City determines that adequate school capacity does not exist and such inadequacy is not mitigated to accommodate an increase in residential density. In making such determination, the City is entitled to rely on VCPS's certification of adequate or inadequate capacity as competent, substantial evidence that the affected public school or schools can or cannot accommodate the additional students resulting from the increase in residential density. However, the following exceptions to this section apply: 
(1)	This section shall not apply to a development permit or Comprehensive Plan amendment with a de minimis impact. Such a development permit, its functional equivalent, or Comprehensive Plan amendment shall be presumed not to create an adverse impact on any affected public school. 
(2)	This section shall not apply to a development permit, Comprehensive Plan amendment, or administrative rezoning that does not increase actual residential density, but merely makes the zoning district or category representative of the preexisting development and preexisting residential density in the area. 
(3)	The City may, with written approval of VCPS and the consent of the applicant, elect to defer consideration of school capacity from adoption of Comprehensive Plan amendment for a property until such time as the City considers a development permit for the property. 
(4)	If no interlocal agreement is yet in place between the City and the school board as provided for in this section, or VCPS otherwise fails to provide the City with school capacity reports or other information, then the City may base its determination of the adequacy of school capacity on the best available information and data as procured from and provided by the school board, applicant, and/or other credible sources. 
(c)	Interlocal agreement; minimum requirements. The City shall negotiate with the school board to reach an interlocal agreement regarding school capacity, which shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)	The school board shall respond to the City's request for a school capacity report within an agreed-upon time period. 
(2)	If the school capacity report indicates that there is insufficient capacity, and the applicant requesting the development permit or Comprehensive Plan amendment proposes a capacity enhancement agreement, the school board shall approve or deny the capacity enhancement agreement within an agreed-upon time period. Approval by the school board of a capacity enhancement agreement shall constitute its certification that sufficient school capacity will exist to handle the additional students generated by the proposed development permit or Comprehensive Plan amendment and that such capacity is based on a financially feasible and educationally sound plan. 
(3)	The capacity enhancement agreement shall take into account the time at which school capacity will be available. 
(4)	The school board shall use funds collected pursuant to a capacity enhancement agreement to provide school capacity to serve the students of the City. 
(5)	A school board certification of insufficient school capacity when an applicant has made a capacity enhancement proposal shall require the school board to demonstrate that it has considered options to mitigate the impacts created by issuance of a development permit or approval of a Comprehensive Plan amendment. 
(6)	That any provisions within the agreement for certification of school capacity will be superseded by any valid, future, countywide interlocal agreement for school concurrency which is also applicable within the City and adopted pursuant to general law, but only superseded to the extent of direct conflicts between the agreements. 
(d)	Multijurisdictional participation. The county, along with the City and the school board, may be a party to the interlocal agreement regarding school capacity. Any other municipality within the county may request to be a party to the interlocal agreement regarding school capacity. To the extent that negotiations with individual cities are successful, they may be parties to the interlocal agreement regarding school capacity. To the extent that negotiations with individual municipalities, as well as the county, are unsuccessful, they will not be parties to the interlocal agreement regarding school capacity. 
(e)	Effect of failure to join; optional parties. The failure of any other municipality or local government, including the county, to enter into the interlocal agreement regarding school capacity will not prevent the execution and implementation of the interlocal agreement regarding school capacity between the City and the school board. 
(f)	Effect of school board's failure to join or provide timely certification. This section recognizes the autonomy of the county school board as a sovereign entity. The provisions of this section shall be effective immediately upon the City's adoption of the ordinance creating said section. In the event the county school board and the City do not approve the interlocal agreement referenced in subsection (c) of this section, or the county school board fails to timely provide the City with school capacity reports or other information contemplated by this section, the City shall make the determination on school capacity required by this section based on information the City deems sufficient. 
(g)	Effect of implementation of countywide school concurrency. This section will be superseded by any valid, countywide, interlocal agreement for school concurrency adopted by this City as required by general law, but only to the extent that said school concurrency agreement conflicts with this section. 
(h)	Effect of maximum densities under the Comprehensive Plan. The maximum density established by the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map, or an amendment thereto does not absolve a development permit applicant from meeting this section. For the issuance of development permits, the City may require and approve less density than the maximum density established by the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map on the basis of lack of public school capacity. 
(Ord. No. 28-06, § I, 12-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-7. - Owners' association. 
No final development order shall be issued for any development where there is any property within the development which is not to be conveyed to an individual, to a condominium or cooperative, or to a government agency. Where property is to be conveyed to an owners' association, the following standards shall apply. 
(1)	The organization or legal entity established for the purpose of owning and maintaining common land shall be created by covenants running with the land. The documents creating such an association shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney prior to issuance of the final development order. 
(2)	No such organization shall be dissolved nor shall it dispose of any common land or facilities by sale or otherwise except to an organization conceived and organized to own and maintain such common land or facilities. The organization may offer to dedicate all such land and facilities to the City. The City may make acceptance subject to improvements which will be made before the land or facilities are transferred. If the City agrees to accept the land and facilities, the organization may be disbanded, but not before the improvements are made and the property is transferred. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(210), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 2-8. - Proportionate fair-share program. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a method whereby the impacts of development on transportation facilities can be mitigated by the cooperative efforts of the public and private sectors, to be known as the proportionate fair-share program, as required by and in a manner consistent with F.S. § 163.3180(16). 
(b)	Applicability. The proportionate fair-share program shall apply to any development project in the city where the project's traffic impact study or the city's traffic engineer determines that there is insufficient capacity on one or more segments to satisfy the development project's transportation concurrency requirements including transportation facilities maintained by FDOT or Volusia County that are relied upon for transportation concurrency determinations. The proportionate fair-share program does not apply to developments of regional impact (DRIs) using proportionate fair share under F.S. § 163.3180(12), or to developments exempted from concurrency under F.S. § 163.3180. 
(c)	General requirements. 
(1)	An applicant whose project meets the criteria of subsection (b) may choose to satisfy transportation concurrency requirements by making a proportionate fair-share contribution, pursuant to the following requirements: 
a.	The proposed development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and applicable land development regulations, and 
b.	The five-year schedule of capital roadway improvements in the city's Capital Improvements Element (CIE) of the City's Comprehensive Plan includes one or more transportation improvements that, upon completion, will provide sufficient capacity for the deficient segments to accommodate the traffic generated by the proposed development. 
(2)	The City may choose to allow an applicant to satisfy transportation concurrency for a deficient segment through the proportionate fair-share program by the developer contributing to an improvement that, upon completion, will create additional capacity on the deficient segment sufficient to accommodate the additional traffic generated by the applicant's proposed development even if the improvement project for the deficient segment is not contained in the five-year schedule of capital improvements in the CIE where: 
a.	The DeBary City Council holds an advertised public hearing to consider the proportionate share agreement and corresponding future changes to the five-year CIE, and 
b.	The City adopts, by ordinance, an amendment adding the improvement to the five-year schedule of capital improvements in the CIE. To qualify for consideration under this section, the proposed improvement must be reviewed by the DeBary City Council, and determined to be financially feasible pursuant to F.S. § 163.3180(16)(b)1, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, and in compliance with the provisions of this section. Financial feasibility for this section means that additional contributions, payments or revenue sources to fund the improvement project are reasonably anticipated during a period not to exceed ten years. 
c.	Any improvement project proposed to meet a developer's fair-share obligation must meet design standards of the City and county for arterials and those of the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) for the state highway system. 
(d)	Application process. 
(1)	Upon identification of a lack of capacity to satisfy transportation concurrency, an applicant may choose to satisfy transportation concurrency through the proportionate fair-share program by submitting an application to the City Manager or his/her designee for the purpose of entering into a proportionate fair-share agreement with the city. 
(2)	Prior to submitting an application for a proportionate fair-share agreement, the applicant shall attend a preapplication meeting with city planning and traffic engineering staff to discuss eligibility, application submittal requirements, potential mitigation options, and related issues. Volusia County and the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) will be notified and invited to participate in the pre-application meeting. 
(3)	Eligible applicants shall submit an application to the city that includes an application fee as established by resolution and the following: 
a.	Name, address, and phone number of owner(s), developer and agent; 
b.	Property location, including parcel identification numbers; 
c.	Legal description and survey of property; 
d.	Project description, including type, intensity, and amount of development; 
e.	Phasing schedule, if applicable; 
f.	Description of requested proportionate fair-share mitigation method(s); 
g.	Copy of concurrency application; 
h.	Copy of the project's traffic impact statement (TIS) or traffic impact analysis (TIA); and 
i.	Location map depicting the site and affected road network. 
(4)	Within ten business days, city planning staff shall review the application and certify that the application is sufficient and complete. If an application is determined to be insufficient, incomplete, or inconsistent with the general requirements of the proportionate fair-share program as indicated in subsection (c), then the applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons for such deficiencies within ten business days of submittal of the application. If the applicant does not remedy such deficiencies within 30 days of receipt of the written notification, then the application shall be deemed abandoned. The City Manager may, in his/her discretion, grant an extension of time not to exceed 60 days to cure such deficiencies, provided that the applicant has shown good cause for the extension and has taken reasonable steps to affect a cure. 
(5)	Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3180(16)(e), proposed proportionate fair-share mitigation for development impacts to facilities on the strategic intermodal system (SIS) requires the concurrence of the FDOT. If an SIS facility is proposed for proportionate share mitigation, the applicant shall submit evidence of an agreement between the applicant and the FDOT for inclusion in the proportionate fair-share agreement. 
(6)	When an application is deemed sufficient, complete, and eligible, a proposed proportionate fair-share obligation and binding agreement will be prepared by the city, or the applicant with direction from the city, and delivered to the appropriate parties for review. Copies of the agreement shall be provided to FDOT and Volusia County for any fair-share mitigation related to their respective thoroughfare facilities. 
(7)	The city shall notify the applicant regarding the date of the DeBary City Council meeting at which the agreement will be considered for final approval. No proportionate fair-share agreement will be effective until approved by the DeBary City Council. 
(e)	Determining proportionate fair-share obligation. 
(1)	Proportionate fair-share mitigation for concurrency impacts may include, separately or collectively, private funds, contributions of land, and construction and contribution of facilities as provided in F.S. § 3180 (16)(c). 
(2)	A development shall not be required to pay more than its proportionate fair share. The fair market value of the proportionate fair-share mitigation for the impacted facilities shall not differ based on the form of mitigation as provided in F.S. § 163.3180 (16)(c). 
(3)	The methodology used to calculate an applicant's proportionate fair-share obligation shall be as provided for in F.S. § 163.3180 (12), as follows: 
a.	The cumulative number of peak hour, peak direction trips from the complete buildout of the proposed development, or buildout of the stage or phase being approved, that are assigned to the proportionate share program segment divided by the change in the peak hour directional maximum service volume (MSV) of the proportionate share program segment resulting from construction of the proportionate share program improvement, multiplied by the anticipated construction cost of the proportionate share project in the year that construction will occur. 
This methodology is expressed by the following formula: 
Proportionate Fair Share = |Ms [[(Development Tripsi ) ÷ (SV Increasei)] X Costi ] (Note: In the context of the formula, the term "cumulative" does not include a previously approved stage or phase of a development.) 
Where: |Ms = Sum of all deficient links proposed for proportionate fair-share mitigation for a project. 
Development Tripsi = Those trips from the stage or phase of development under review that are assigned to roadway segment "i" and have triggered a deficiency per the concurrency management system; 
SV Increasei = Service volume increase provided by the eligible improvement to roadway segment "i"; 
Costi = Adjusted cost of the improvement to segment "i". Cost shall consist of all improvements and associated costs, including design, right-of-way acquisition, planning, engineering, inspection, and physical development costs, directly associated with construction at the anticipated cost in the year that construction will occur. 
(4)	For purposes of determining proportionate fair-share obligations, the city shall determine improvement costs based upon the actual and/or anticipated costs of the improvement in the year that construction will occur. The City Development Engineer will determine these costs. 
(5)	If the city has accepted an improvement project proposed by the applicant, then the value of the improvement shall be based on an engineer's certified cost estimate provided by the applicant and approved by the City Development Engineer or other method approved by the City Manager. 
(6)	If the city has accepted right-of-way dedication for the proportionate fair-share payment, credit for the dedication of the nonsite-related right-of-way shall be valued on the date of the dedication at 120 percent of the most recent assessed value by the Volusia County Property Appraiser or, at the option of the applicant, by fair market value established by an independent appraisal approved by the city and at no expense to the city. Said appraisal shall assume no approved development plan for the site. The applicant shall supply a drawing and legal description of the land and a certificate of title or title search of the land to the city at no expense to the city. If the estimated value of the right-of-way dedication proposed by the applicant (based on a city-approved appraisal) is less than the city estimated total proportionate fair-share obligation for that development, then the applicant must also pay the difference. If the estimated value of the right-of-way dedication proposed by the applicant (based on a city-approved appraisal) is more than the city estimated total proportionate fair-share obligation for the development, then the city must pay the difference. 
(f)	Proportionate fair-share agreements. 
(1)	Upon executing a proportionate fair-share agreement (agreement) and satisfying other concurrency requirements, an applicant shall receive a certificate of concurrency (or its successor upon amendment of initial concurrency regulations). Should the applicant fail to apply for building permits or final plat within the timeframe provided for in the city's concurrency certificate, then the project's concurrency vesting shall expire, and the applicant shall be required to reapply. Once a proportionate share payment for a project is made and other impact fees for the project are paid, no refunds shall be given. All payments, however, shall run with the land. 
(2)	Payment of private funds, contributions of land, and construction and contribution of facilities as provided in F.S. § 3180(16)(c) of proportionate fair-share requirements for a project and shall be due and must be paid or completed prior to the issuance of a building permit or recording of a final plat. If payment is submitted more than 12 months from the date of issuance of the certificate of concurrency, then the proportionate fair-share mitigation shall be recalculated at the time of payment and shall be subject to approval of the City Development Engineer. 
(3)	All developer improvements accepted as proportionate fair share contributions must be completed within three years of the issuance of the first building permit for the project which is the subject of the proportionate fair share agreement and be accompanied by a performance bond that is sufficient to ensure the completion of all required improvements. It is the intent of this section that any required improvements be completed within three years of the issuance of the first building permit for the project which is the subject of the proportionate fair share agreement. 
(4)	Dedication of necessary right-of-way for facility improvements pursuant to a proportionate fair-share agreement must occur prior to the issuance of a building permit or approval of a final plat. 
(5)	Any requested change to a development project subsequent to issuance of a development order shall be subject to additional proportionate fair-share contributions to the extent the change would increase project costs or generate additional traffic that would require mitigation. 
(6)	Applicants may withdraw from a proportionate fair-share agreement at any time prior to the execution of the agreement. The application fee and any associated advertising costs to the city are nonrefundable. 
(7)	The city may enter into proportionate fair-share agreements for selected corridor improvements to facilitate collaboration among multiple applicants on improvements to a shared transportation facility. 
(g)	Appropriation of fair-share revenues. 
(1)	Proportionate fair-share revenues shall be placed in the appropriate project account for funding of scheduled improvements in the city's Capital Improvements Element, or as otherwise established in the terms of the proportionate fair-share agreement. Proportionate fair-share revenues may also be used as the 50-percent local match for funding under the FDOT Transportation Regional Incentive Program (TRIP). 
(2)	In the event a scheduled facility improvement is removed from the CIE, then the proportionate fair-share revenues collected for its construction may be applied toward the construction of alternative improvements within that same corridor or sector where the alternative improvement will mitigate the impacts of the development project on the congested roadway(s) for which the original proportionate fair share contribution was made. 
(Ord. No. 27-06, § I, 12-6-2006)  
Chapter 3 - ZONING REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Zoning map. 
The map entitled "Zoning Map of The City of DeBary, Florida," is hereby made a part of this Code by reference and shall be referred to as the "zoning map." 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.1), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 3(Exh. B), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-2. - Zoning classifications. 
Certain zoning classifications are hereby incorporated, as follows: 
C 	Conservation District 
P 	Public Use District 
RC 	Resource Corridor District 
A-2 	Rural Agriculture District 
A-3 	Transitional Agriculture District 
RR 	Rural Residential District 
RA 	Rural Agricultural Estate District 
R-1 	Urban Single-Family Residential District 
R-3 	Urban Single-Family Residential District 
R-4 	Urban Single-Family Residential District 
R-5 	Urban Single-Family Residential District 
R-6 	Urban Two-Family Residential District 
R-7 	Urban Multifamily Residential District 
R-8 	Urban Multifamily Residential District 
MH-1 	Mobile Home Park District 
MH-5 	Urban Mobile Home District 
B-2 	Neighborhood Commercial District 
B-3 	Shopping Center District 
B-4 	General Commercial District 
B-5 	Heavy Commercial District 
B-6 	Highway Interchange Commercial District 
B-7 	Commercial Marina District 
B-9 	General Office District 
I-1 	Light Industrial District 
PUD 	Planned Unit Development District 
 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-2a. - Zoning/future land use compatibility matrix. 
The following matrix illustrates which city zoning classifications are consistent with which city future land use classifications. 
Section 3-2a Zoning/Future Land Use Compatibility Matrix 
Land Use Classifications 	Future Land Use 	Net Density (Dwelling units per net buildable acre) and Floor Area Ratios (FAR) 	Allowable Zoning Classifications 
Conservation and Rural Land Use Classifications 	Environmentally Sensitive Lands (ESL) 	Max 1 DU/10 acres 	C (Conservation), RC (Resource Corridor) 
	Agricultural Rural (A/R) 	Max 1 DU/5 acres 	A-2 (Rural Agriculture), A-3 (Transitional Agriculture), RR (Rural Residential), RA (Rural Estate), Planned Unit Development 
Residential Land Use Classifications 	Residential Low Density (RLD) 	Max 4 DU/acre 	R-1, R-3, R-4, (Urban Single Family Residential), Planned Unit Development 
	Residential Low-Medium Density (R/LMD) 	Max 8 DU/acre 	R-5 (Urban Single Family), R-6 (Urban Two Family Residential), R-7 (Urban Multi-Family Residential), Planned Unit Development 
	Residential Medium Density (R/MD) 	Max 14 DU/acre 	R-5, R-6, R-7, R-8 (Urban Multi-Family Residential), Planned Unit Development 
	Residential/Mobile Home (R/MH) 	Max 8 DU/acre 	MH-1 (Mobile Home Park), MH-5 (Urban Mobile Home) 
Commercial 
Classifications 	Commercial Office (C/O) 	12 Du/Acre Max FAR 1 	B-9 (General Office) and Planned Unit Development 
	Commercial Retail (C/R) 	12 Du/Acre Max FAR 1 	B-9 (General Office), B-2 (Neighborhood Commercial), B-3 (Shopping Center), B-4 (General Commercial), B-5 (Heavy Commercial), B-6 (Highway Interchange Commercial), B-7 (Commercial Marina) and Planned Unit Development 
Industrial 
Classifications 	Industrial/General (IG) 	Max FAR 1 	I-1 (Light Industrial), Planned Unit Development 
	Industrial/Utility (IU) 	Max FAR 1 	I-1 (Light Industrial), Planned Unit Development 
	Industrial Service (IS) 	Max FAR 1 	I-1 (Light Industrial), Planned Unit Development, B-5 (Heavy Commercial) 
Public/Institutional 	Public/ Institutional (P/I) 		P (Public Use) 
Mixed Use Classifications 	Southeast Mixed Use (SEMUA) 	8 Du/Acre Max FAR 2 	Planned Unit Development 
	Southeast Mixed Use /Transit Oriented Overlay (SEMUA/TOD) 	*14 to 32 DU/Acre Max FAR 2 	Planned Unit Development, Transit Oriented Development 
	Southwest Mixed Use 	4DU/Acre Max FAR 1 	Planned Unit Development 
 
*Refer to Article VI for TOD Sub-area requirements/ Minimum of 14 du/acre and Maximum of 32 du/acre 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-3. - Rules of construction. 
While it is the intent of this Code that the regulations identified in sections 3-1 and 3-2 shall apply within the City, it is not the intent that all procedural provisions or assignment of responsibilities to specific officials shall apply. Where the above referenced sections identify actions or responsibilities of other officials or boards, the action or responsibility is assigned by this Code to the City Manager, and the provision in question shall be so interpreted. Where there is a question as to whether the provision involves a procedure, or how the standard shall be administered, the City Manager will make the determination, which may be appealed pursuant to section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.4), 11-3-1999)  
Secs. 3-4—3-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 3-21. - Applicability. 
In addition to the regulations and standards set forth by this chapter, certain additional regulations and standards shall apply within areas identified as overlay districts on the zoning map. Where an overlay district or districts are identified, the regulations set forth below shall apply in addition to or in lieu of the regulations of the underlying conventional zoning district as stated or as indicated by the context. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(302), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-22. - Village Center Overlay District. 
(a)	Purpose and intent; applicability. 
(1)	The purpose of the Village Center Overlay District is to provide additional development restrictions and opportunities within the Village Center area to help strengthen and direct development toward existing communities and to encourage walkable neighborhoods. The overlay encourages a compact, multiuse and mixed-use development area of retail, office and service, to support the overall growth and development of the City. 
(2)	The provisions of this section shall apply within the area identified on the zoning map as the "Village Center Overlay District." 
(b)	Additional regulations applicable to use and development. 
(1)	Uses and development practices not permitted shall include: 
a.	Automobile driving schools, automobile rental, and automobile sales, new and used exceeding 1 acre. 
b.	Bars and liquor stores as principal uses of land, except liquor stores and bars with less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area and those located in a shopping center with a minimum of 100,000 square feet gross floor area. 
c.	Boat, mobile home, and recreational vehicle sales and service establishments. 
d.	Game rooms or arcades for pool, billiards, pinball machines, juke boxes, or other coin-operated amusements, except where a juke box is operated as an accessory to a restaurant. 
e.	Household moving center. 
f.	Nightclubs that exceed 5,000 square feet gross floor area. 
g.	Outside storage of products for retail or wholesale trade or involved in manufacturing, processing, or distribution activities, except for plant nurseries. Does not include outdoor display of merchandise permitted pursuant to section 3-122(10) in the B-2, B-3, B-4 and B-5 commercial zoning districts. 
h.	Pawn shops. 
i.	Outdoor dog or animal runs associated with any kennel or veterinary clinic. 
j.	Tattoo parlor or body piercing establishment (except ear piercing) operated as a principal or accessory use. 
k.	Fireworks sales. 
(2)	Additional uses and development practices may be permitted by special exception, including: 
a.	Off-site and shared parking arrangements and reduction of required parking. Any proposed parking arrangement which provides for shared, reduced or off-site required parking must include an agreement with a term of at least ten years and providing that the City Manager will be notified of any change in the agreement or of the expiration of the agreement without provision of required parking. 
b.	Outside service areas for restaurants, including outside service of alcoholic beverages and entertainment. Restaurants must operate under 4COPSRX licenses or shall meet similar limitations. Outside service shall be limited to the same hours of operation as interior service. 
c.	Drive-thru restaurants on parcels where the underlying zoning permits the use (Reference section 3-134(15) Special exception uses). 
(3)	Retail uses are permitted, provided they do not exceed 10,000 gross square feet of retail space, except there shall be no limit of square feet of retail space at commercial nodes located at the intersection of U.S. Highway 17-92 and Highbanks Road. 
(c)	Expansion of commercial uses. Efforts shall be made to expand the size of individual development parcels by consolidating properties. Developments which include property fronting on U.S. 17-92 may be expanded into adjacent residentially zoned parcels. Such expansions must be approved by the City Council through the planned development process and must demonstrate that there will be no adverse impact on residentially-zoned areas. A unity of title agreement must be recorded ensuring that multiple parcels remain under a common ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(302.1), 11-3-1999; Ord No. 16-04, § 1, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 22-02, § 3, 12-11-2002; Ord. No. 10-11, § 2, 10-5-2011; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-23. - South 17-92 Overlay District. 
(a)	Purpose and intent; applicability. 
(1)	The purpose of the South 17-92 Overlay District is to provide additional development restrictions and opportunities within the area along South U.S. 17-92 consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan. The plan provides for mixed-use and commercial development to support the overall growth and development of the City. It is the intent of this section that adequate flexibility be provided to accommodate the purposes and style of development described in the Plan. 
(2)	The provisions of this section shall apply within the area identified on the zoning map as the "South 17-92 Overlay District." 
(b)	Additional regulations applicable to use and development. 
(1)	Uses and development practices not permitted shall include: 
a.	Automobile and truck sales, new and used, except those meeting the standards of subsection (c) of this section. 
b.	Bars and liquor stores as principal uses of land, except liquor stores located in a shopping center with a minimum of 100,000 square feet gross floor area or separately located not exceeding 5,000 gross square feet. 
c.	Boat, mobile home, and recreational vehicle sales and service establishments, except those meeting the standards of subsection (c) of this section. 
d.	Outside storage of products for retail or wholesale trade or involved in manufacturing, processing, or distribution activities, except as may be permitted by special exception. Does not include outdoor display of merchandise permitted pursuant to Section 3-133(10) in the B-2, B-3, B-4 and B-5 commercial zoning districts. 
e.	Tattoo parlor or body piercing establishment (except ear piercing) operated as a principal or accessory use. 
(2)	Parking arrangements. Off-site and shared parking arrangements and reduction of required parking may be allowed by special exception. Any proposed parking arrangement which provides for shared, reduced or off-site required parking must include an agreement with a term of at least ten years and providing that the City Manager will be notified of any change in the agreement or of the expiration of the agreement without provision of required parking. 
(c)	Development standards. The minimum size of any development parcel shall be five acres and the minimum frontage shall be 600 feet on a paved public street. One driveway entrance shall be permitted for each 400 feet of frontage. Shared driveways for adjacent parcels are encouraged provided that the location is reasonable in consideration of driveways on other parcels, median openings, and street intersections. Coordinated development on a single parcel or coordination of developments on adjacent parcels under a unified development plan is encouraged. Where parcels are combined for development purposes, a unity of title agreement must be recorded ensuring that multiple parcels remain under a common ownership or control. The City Council may allow a reduction in the lot area and/or frontage requirements where adjacent developments are coordinated so as to meet the intent of this provision. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(302.2), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 16-04, § 2, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-24. - Waterfront Use Overlay District. 
(a)	Purpose and intent; applicability. 
(1)	The purpose of the Waterfront Use Overlay District is to provide additional development restrictions and opportunities for areas used for privately owned public water access consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan. The Plan provides for management of areas adjacent to surface water bodies and preservation of the public's ability to access water bodies. It is the intent of this section that adequate flexibility be provided to accommodate the purposes and style of development described in the Plan. 
(2)	The provisions of this section shall apply within the area identified on the zoning map as the "Waterfront Use Overlay District." 
(b)	Additional regulations applicable to use and development. 
(1)	Uses and development practices not permitted shall include any use or development which restricts public access to surface water bodies utilizing public facilities. This provision does not prevent management of private lands, including private access facilities, by the owner of such land or facilities. 
(2)	Additional uses and development practices may be permitted by special exception, including campgrounds and recreational vehicle facilities operated in conjunction with a marina, provided that such facilities shall be served by central sewerage facilities (public or private). 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(302.3), 11-3-1999)  
Secs. 3-25—3-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ZONING  
DIVISION 1. - RULES OF INTERPRETATION OF CLASSIFICATION BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 3-41. - Interpretation of classification boundaries. 
The following rules of interpretation shall be used to locate the classification boundaries shown on the official zoning map: 
(1)	Boundaries following streets. Boundaries following, or approximately following, the centerlines of streets shall be construed to follow those centerlines. If a street is vacated, the classification boundary shall be construed to remain in its location, except when ownership of the vacated street is divided other than at the center, in which case, the boundary shall be construed to move with the ownership. 
(2)	Boundaries following lot lines. Boundaries following, or approximately following, lot lines shall be construed to follow those lot lines. 
(3)	Boundaries following county and City limits. Boundaries following, or approximately following, county and City limits shall be construed to follow those county and City limits. 
(4)	Boundaries following railroad lines. Boundaries following, or approximately following, railroad lines shall be construed to follow the centerline of the railroad right-of-way. If a railroad right-of-way is vacated, the classification boundary shall be construed to remain in its location; except when ownership of the vacated railroad right-of-way is divided other than at the center, in which case, the boundary shall be construed to move with the ownership. 
(5)	Boundaries following water bodies. Boundaries following, or approximately following, the shorelines of water bodies shall be construed to follow and move with those shorelines. Boundaries following, or approximately following, the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow and move with those centerlines. 
(6)	Boundaries entering any body of water. Boundaries entering any body of water, but not continuing to intersect with other zoning boundaries, shall be construed to extend in the same direction in which they entered the body of water, until they intersect with other zoning boundaries. 
(7)	Reduction of unincorporated area by municipal annexation. If City limits change through annexation, classification boundaries shall be construed to move with the City limits. 
(8)	Increase of unincorporated area by municipal deannexation. If City limits change through deannexation, no different use may be made of the property deannexed until an appropriate zoning classification for it has been assigned in the manner prescribed by law. 
(9)	Boundaries parallel to or extensions of above features. Boundaries apparently parallel to or extensions of the features indicated in subsections (1)—(8) of this section shall be construed to be parallel to or extensions of those features, as the case may be. 
(10)	Other cases. 
a.	Boundaries splitting existing lots in subdivisions and any other boundaries not determined by the above rules shall be determined by reference to the expressed distances on or the scale of the official zoning map. In instances where boundaries, other than Resource Corridor boundaries, split existing lots, parcels or other tracts of land, the minimum yard and other requirements of the respective zoning classifications shall be measured from the classification boundary. If the existing lot will not accommodate any of the uses permitted in the multiple classification indicated thereon, a rezoning to an appropriate classification shall be required. 
b.	In instances where Resource Corridor boundaries split lots, parcels or other tracts of land, and when that area of the lot classified as Resource Corridor has less than 25 acres of area, principal and accessory structures shall be located on the area not classified as Resource Corridor utilizing the minimum yard requirements of the zoning classification of the area not classified as Resource Corridor as measured from the property line. In instances where the structure cannot be located in the area not classified as Resource Corridor, the structure may be located in the area classified as Resource Corridor utilizing the minimum yard requirements of the Resource Corridor classification as measured from the property line. 
(11)	Administrative adjustment of zoning classification boundaries. Where the boundary of a land use designation accorded an individual parcel or lot by the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan has been administratively adjusted in a manner which is consistent with the provisions of said plan, the corresponding zoning classification boundary shall not be realigned, nor shall it be interpreted as having been realigned, concurrent with the adjusted boundary of the land use designation except as provided for herein. Proposed realignment of any zoning classification boundaries so as to correspond to the revised boundary of a land use designation shall be processed in the manner required unless the realignment of said zoning classifications is necessitated by the adjustment of the boundaries of the environmental systems corridor land use designation; provided, however, that the revised boundary of the land use designation does not adjoin land owned by a person other than the owner of the property for which the administrative adjustment of the land use designation boundary has been requested. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(400.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Secs. 3-42—3-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SCOPE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— These regulations shall apply uniformly to all premises. 
 
Sec. 3-61. - Zoning affects all premises. 
No premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and no principal building, accessory structure or sign shall be hereafter erected, constructed, moved or altered except in conformity with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(500.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-62. - Interpretation of uses and structures permitted. 
If a use or structure is not expressly permitted in any classification, the City Manager shall not permit such use or structure in the classification unless it is substantially similar to a use or structure otherwise permitted in the classification. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(501.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-63. - Yard, lot coverage, floor area, and building height requirements. 
Every principal or accessory structure to be erected upon a lot shall meet all yard, lot coverage, floor area and building height requirements of its classification unless otherwise expressly permitted by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(502.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-64. - Multiple use of required space prohibited. 
No part of a yard, or other required open space, or of the off-street parking or loading spaces for one structure, shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space requirements for any other structure. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(503.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-65, 3-66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A) repealed former §§ 3-65, 3-66, in their entirety which respectively pertained to prohibition on the reduction of lot area and width and the reduction of yards below certain requirements. Both former sections derived from Ord. No. 01-99, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 1999.  
Sec. 3-67. - Cardrooms prohibited. 
(a)	Cardroom. For the purposes of this section, cardroom shall mean and refer to a facility, as further defined and regulated by F.S. § 849.086, where authorized games are played for money or anything of value and to which the public is invited to participate in such games and charged a fee for participation by the operator of such facility. 
(b)	Prohibition. Cardrooms are prohibited and are deemed an illegal use under this chapter, and a cardroom shall neither be located nor otherwise operated anywhere within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(c)	Majority vote of disapproval. For the purposes of state licensing requirements under F.S. § 849.086, this section shall be interpreted and understood as a standing majority vote of the City Council disapproving the establishment and operation of a cardroom within the city. 
(d)	Enforcement. Operation of a cardroom in contravention of this section shall be subject to enforcement as set forth in section 1-14 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, § I, 3-3-2010)  
Secs. 3-68—3-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CLASSIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 3-81. - Established. 
The following classifications and their included regulations are established: 
C 	Conservation 
P 	Public Use 
RC 	Resource Corridor 
A-2 	Rural Agriculture 
A-3 	Transitional Agriculture 
RR 	Rural Residential 
RA 	Rural Agricultural Estate 
R-1 	Urban Single-Family Residential 
R-3 	Urban Single-Family Residential 
R-4 	Urban Single-Family Residential 
R-5 	Urban Single-Family Residential 
R-6 	Urban Two-Family Residential 
R-7 	Urban Multifamily Residential 
R-8 	Urban Multifamily Residential 
MH-1 	Mobile Home Park 
MH-5 	Urban Mobile Home 
B-2 	Neighborhood Commercial 
B-3 	Shopping Center 
B-4 	General Commercial 
B-5 	Heavy Commercial 
B-6 	Highway Interchange Commercial 
B-7 	Commercial Marina 
B-9 	General Office 
I-1 	Light Industrial 
PUD 	Planned Unit Development 
 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3, 11-3-1999))  
Sec. 3-82. - C Conservation Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. It is intended that the C Conservation Classification be applied to certain lands which are either owned or controlled by a governmental agency, but it may be applied to privately owned lands upon request of the owner. It is the purpose of this classification to protect and preserve: 
(1)	Historic or archaeologic sites; 
(2)	Fishing, wildlife, or forest management areas; 
(3)	The natural environment of other selected public lands such as well fields; and 
(4)	Any other unusual or unique feature or areas such as governmentally designated canoe trails, wild or scenic watercourses. 
 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the C Conservation Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Aquatic preserves (state or federally designated). 
Essential utility services. 
Fishing, hunting, forest and wildlife management areas. 
Historical or archeological sites. 
Public uses. 
Public utility uses and structures. 
Publicly and privately owned passive parks and recreational areas. 
Publicly owned or regulated water supply wells. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Exempt excavation. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. None. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-83. - P Public Use Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the P Public Use Classification is to provide for development of governmentally owned or used lands in a manner which is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. This classification is a specialized one, designed to be applied to areas that are not intended for public use special exceptions. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the P Public Use Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary uses and structures: 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Essential utility services. 
Farmer's Market. 
Government buildings. 
Museums. 
Public uses. 
Public utility uses and structures. 
Plant facilities for essential utility services. 
Potable water treatment plant. 
Public parks and recreational areas. 
Public schools. 
Publicly owned or regulated water supply wells. 
Wastewater treatment plants. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Exempt excavations. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: five acres. 
Width: No minimum. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: All buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from perimeter property lines; all other structures, except off-street parking areas, shall be set back at least 25 feet from perimeter zoning classification boundary lines. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: None. 
(5)	Landscape buffer requirements: At least a 20-foot-wide landscape buffer shall be maintained around the perimeter of the property. 
SEC. 3-83(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot size. min. (acre) 	5 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
All building sides (ft.) 	50 
Other structures (ft.) 	25 
Landscape buffer (ft.) 	20 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	45 
 
 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-84. - RC Resource Corridor Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the RC Resource Corridor Classification is to provide protected, natural corridors consisting of environmentally sensitive and ecologically significant lands which connect to other protected areas such as parks and water bodies. The corridor shall provide a contiguous hydroecological pathway, where the wetlands and uplands are integrated and conducive to the maintenance and perpetuation of the system. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the RC Resource Corridor Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Apiaries; provided, however, that the RC classified area does not comprise part of a lot classified for residential, commercial, or industrial use. 
Aquatic preserves (state or federal designated). 
Aviaries; provided, however, that the RC classified area does not comprise part of a lot classified for residential, commercial, or industrial use. 
Boat docks not exceeding 500 square feet. 
Fishing, hunting and wildlife management areas. 
Historical or archeological sites. 
Single-family standard or manufactured dwelling. 
Public passive parks. 
"A" Class home occupations. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134: 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements for lots, parcels and tracts of land zoned in its entirety as Resource Corridor. 
(1)	Minimum lot sizes: 
Area: 25 acres. 
Width: 150 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 50 feet. 
Rear yard: 50 feet. 
Side yard: 50 feet. 
Waterfront yard: 75 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot clearance and coverage: Lot clearance can not exceed 20 percent. The total cleared lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed ten percent. 
(5)	Minimum floor area: 750 square feet. 
SEC. 3-84(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot area, min. (acre) 	25 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	150 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	10 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	20 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	50 
Rear (ft.) 	50 
Side (ft.) 	50 
Waterfront (ft.) 	75 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	45 
Floor area, min. (sq. ft.) 	750 
 
(e)	Dimensional requirements for lots, parcels or other tracts of land which are zoned a mixture of RC and another zone classification. In instances where Resource Corridor boundaries split existing lots parcels or tracts of land, the subject property may be subdivided into lots meeting the minimum lot area and width requirements of the zoning classification of the property not classified as Resource Corridor; providing that Resource Corridor classified lands are not counted as meeting part of the minimum lot area or lot width requirements of the other zone classification. In such instances, there shall be no minimum area or width requirements for the portion of the lot classified as RC. Development of lots classified as a mixture of RC and another zone classification shall be subject to the provisions of section 3-41(10). 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: No minimum for the portion of the lot classified as RC; providing that the minimum area requirement for the portion of the lot classified other than RC is met. 
Width: No minimum for the portion of the lot classified as RC; providing that the minimum with requirement for the portion of the lot classified other than RC is met. 
(2)	Minimum yard sizes: As provided for under section 3-41(10). 
(3)	Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: Lot clearance on the portion of the lot classified as RC cannot exceed 20 percent, and no more than ten percent of the portion of the lot classified as RC may be covered with principal and accessory buildings. The portion of the lot classified other than RC shall be subject to the maximum lot coverage requirements of that zone classification. 
(5)	Minimum floor area: As required for the portion of the lot not classified as RC. 
 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-85. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3-86. - A-2 Rural Agriculture Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. 
(1)	The purpose and intent of the A-2 Rural Agriculture Classification is to preserve and protect rural areas of the City that have some agricultural value, but which are also suitable for rural estate living. 
(2)	In order to ensure the longterm vitality of agricultural uses and natural resources, all agricultural uses are encouraged to utilize the Natural Resource Conservation Service (formerly the Soil Conservation Service) best management techniques and other agricultural best management practices. 
 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the A-2 Rural Agriculture Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Except for those permitted special exceptions listed hereunder, all agricultural pursuits, including the processing, packaging, storage and sale of agriculture products which are raised on the premises. 
Apiaries. 
Aquaculture operations in which there are no associated excavations. 
Aviaries. 
Boat docks not exceeding 500 square feet. 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Essential utility services. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Feed stores. 
Fire stations. 
Hobby breeder. 
Houses of worship. 
Parks and recreation areas accessory to residential developments. 
Single-family standard or manufactured dwelling. 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
"A" Class home occupations. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Exempt excavations. 
Bed and breakfast homestay (refer to section 3-134(16)). 
Cemeteries (refer to section 3-134(3)). 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Fish, hunting or nonprofit organization camps. 
Garage apartments. 
Home occupations, Class B (refer to section 3-127). 
Kennels. 
Mobile home dwelling as a temporary residence while building a standard or manufactured dwelling (maximum duration of 540 days). 
Processing, packaging, storage, retail or wholesale sales of agricultural products not raised on the premises. 
Recreational areas (refer to section 3-134(2)). 
Riding stables. 
Public schools. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: five acres. 
Width: 150 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 50 feet. 
Rear yard: 50 feet. 
Side yard: 25 feet 
Waterfront yard: 50 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
(5)	Minimum floor area: 750 square feet. 
SEC. 3-86(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot area, min. (acre) 	5 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	150 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	50 
Rear (ft.) 	50 
Side (ft.) 	25 
Waterfront (ft.) 	50 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	45 
Floor area, min (sq. ft.) 	750 
 
 
(e)	Skirting requirement for mobile home dwelling. The area between the ground and floor of the mobile home dwelling shall be enclosed with skirting. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 02-13, § 2(Exh. A), 6-5-2013 ; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 3-87. - A-3 Transitional Agriculture Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. 
(1)	The purpose and intent of the A-3 Transitional Agriculture Classification is to preserve and protect small farms for personal and limited agricultural production or to provide a transitional agricultural zone between more intensive agricultural use areas and residential areas. 
(2)	In order to ensure the long term vitality of agricultural uses and natural resources, all agricultural uses are encouraged to utilize the Natural Resource Conservation Service (formerly the Soil Conservation Service) best management techniques and other agricultural best management practices. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the A-3 Transitional Agriculture Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Agricultural uses. Except for those permitted special exception uses listed hereunder the processing, packaging, storage and sale of agriculture products which are raised on the premises is permitted. The sale of agricultural products is not be permitted within established rural residential communities. 
Apiaries. 
Aquaculture operations in which there are no associated excavations. 
Aviaries. 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Essential utility services. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Fire stations. 
Hobby breeder. 
Home occupations, Class A. 
Houses of worship. 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
Parks and recreation areas accessory to residential developments. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Publicly owned or regulated water supply wells. 
Single-family standard or manufactured dwelling. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Aquaculture operations in which there are nonexempt excavations. 
Assisted living facility (refer to section 3-134(10)). 
Bed and breakfast homestay (refer to section 3-134(16)). 
Cemeteries (refer to section 3-134(3)). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
Exempt excavations. 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Garage apartments. 
Group home (refer to section 3-134(10)). 
Home occupations, Class B (refer to section 3-127). 
Kennels. 
Public schools. 
Processing, packaging, storage, retail or wholesale sales of agricultural products not raised on the premises. 
Public uses not listed as a permitted principal use. 
Public utility uses and structures (refer to section 3-134(1)). 
Recreational areas (refer to section 3-134(2)). 
Riding stables. 
Single-family mobile home dwelling with a minimum floor area of 480 square feet as a temporary residence while building a standard or manufactured dwelling (maximum duration of 540 days). 
Single-family standard or manufactured dwelling. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: one acre. 
Width: 150 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 40 feet. 
Rear yard: 40 feet. 
Side yard: 25 feet. 
Waterfront yard: 40 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
(5)	Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet. 
SEC. 3-87(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot area, min. (acre) 	1 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	150 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	40 
Rear (ft.) 	40 
Side (ft.) 	25 
Waterfront (ft.) 	40 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	45 
Floor area, min. (sq. ft.) 	1,000 
 
 
(e)	Skirting requirement for mobile home dwelling. The area between the ground and floor of the mobile home dwelling shall be enclosed with skirting. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 02-13, § 2(Exh. A), 6-5-2013 ; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 3-88. - RR Rural Residential Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the RR Rural Residential Classification is to provide for development in a manner which is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the RR Rural Residential Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Hobby breeder. 
Home occupations, Class A (refer to section 3-127). 
Parks and recreation areas accessory to residential developments. 
Single-family standard dwelling. 
Keeping of horses and ponies as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Garage apartments. 
Group home (refer to section 3-134(10)). 
Home occupations, Class B (refer to section 3-127). 
Houses of worship (refer to section 3-134(3)). 
Kennels. 
Recreational areas (refer to section 3-134(2)). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: one acre. 
Width: 100 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 40 feet. 
Rear yard: 40 feet. 
Side yard: 15 feet. 
Waterfront yard: 40 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 30 percent. 
(5)	Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet. 
SEC. 3-88(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot area, min. (acre) 	1 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	100 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	30 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	40 
Rear (ft.) 	40 
Side (ft.) 	15 
Waterfront (ft.) 	40 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	35 
Floor area, min. (sq. ft.) 	1,000 
 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 02-13, § 2(Exh. A), 6-5-2013 ; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 3-89. - RA Rural Estate Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the RA Rural Estate Classification is to provide for low density development. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the RA Rural Estate Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Home occupations, Class A (refer to section 3-127). 
Keeping of horses and ponies as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
Parks and recreation areas accessory to residential developments. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Single-family standard dwelling. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Garage apartments. 
Home occupations, Class B (refer to section 3-127). 
Houses of worship (refer to section 3-134(3)). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
Recreational areas (refer to section 3-134(2)). 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: 2½ acres. 
Width: 150 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 45 feet. 
Rear yard: 45 feet. 
Side yard: 25 feet. 
Waterfront yard: 45 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
(5)	Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet. 
SEC. 3-89(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot area, min. (acre) 	2.5 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	150 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	45 
Rear (ft.) 	45 
Side (ft.) 	25 
Waterfront (ft.) 	45 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	35 
Floor area, min. (sq. ft.) 	1,000 
 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 02-13, § 2(Exh. A), 6-5-2013 ; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 3-90. - R-1 Urban Single-Family Residential Classification. 
 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the R-1 Urban Single-Family Residential Classification is to provide low-density residential developments, preserving the character of existing or proposed residential neighborhoods. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the R-1 Urban Single-Family Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Community residential homes (refer to section 133(3)). 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Home occupations, Class A (refer to section 3-127). 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
Parks and recreation areas accessory to residential developments. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Single-family standard dwelling and manufactured modular dwelling. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Bed and breakfast homestay (refer to section 3-134(16)). 
Garage apartments. 
Houses of worship (refer to section 3-134(3)). 
Recreational areas (refer to section 3-134(2)). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: 20,000 square feet. 
Width: 100 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 30 feet. 
Rear yard: 20 feet. 
Side yard: 20 feet combined, minimum of eight feet on any one side. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
(5)	Minimum floor area: 1,500 square feet. 
SEC. 3-90(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot area, min. (sq. ft.) 	20,000 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	100 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	30 
Rear (ft.) 	20 
Side, combined (ft.) 	20 
Side, on any one side (ft.) 	8 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max (ft.) 	35 
Floor area, min (sq. ft.) 	1,500 
 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 3-91. - R-3 Urban Single-Family Residential Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the R-3 Urban Single-Family Residential Classification is to provide medium-low-density residential developments, preserving the character of existing or proposed residential neighborhoods. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the R-3 Urban Single-Family Residential Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Cluster and zero lot line subdivisions (refer to section 3-137). 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Community residential homes (refer to section 3-133(3)). 
Essential utility services. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Home occupations, Class A (refer to section 3-127). 
Houses of worship. 
Parks and recreational areas accessory to residential developments. 
Public schools. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Publicly owned or regulated water supply wells. 
Single-family standard dwelling and modular dwelling. 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Garage apartments. 
Houses of worship (refer to section 3-134(3)). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
Public utility uses and structures (refer to section 3-134(1)). 
Recreational areas (refer to section 3-134(2)). 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: 10,000 square feet. 
Width: 85 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 30 feet. 
Rear yard: 20 feet. 
Side yard: 20 feet combined, minimum of eight feet on any one side. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
(5)	Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet. 
SEC. 3-91(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot area, min. (sq. ft.) 	10,000 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	85 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	30 
Rear (ft.) 	20 
Side, combined (ft.) 	20 
Side, on any one side (ft.) 	8 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max (ft.) 	35 
Floor area, min (sq. ft.) 	1,000 
 
 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 3-92. - R-4 Urban Single-Family Residential Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the R-4 Urban Single-Family Residential Classification is to provide low-density residential developments, preserving the character of existing or proposed residential neighborhoods. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the R-4 Urban Single-Family Residential Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Cluster and zero lot line subdivisions (refer to section 3-137). 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Community residential homes (refer to section 133(3)). 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Home occupations, Class A (refer to section 3-127). 
Parks and recreational areas accessory to residential developments. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Single-family standard dwelling. 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Bed and breakfast home stay. 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Day care centers. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required. 
Garage apartments. 
Houses of worship (refer to section 3-134(3)). 
Off-street parking areas. 
Public uses. 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
Public utility uses and structures. 
Recreational areas (refer to section 3-134(2)). 
Schools, parochial or private. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: 7,500 square feet. 
Width: 75 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 25 feet. 
Rear yard: 20 feet. 
Side yard: 20 feet combined, minimum of eight feet on any one side. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
(5)	Minimum floor area: 850 square feet. 
SEC. 3-92(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot area, min. (sq. ft.) 	7,500 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	75 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	25 
Rear (ft.) 	20 
Side, combined (ft.) 	20 
Side, on any one side (ft.) 	8 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	35 
Floor area, min. (sq. ft.) 	850 
 
 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 9-17-2008; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-93. - R-5 Urban Single-Family Residential Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the R-5 Urban Single-Family Residential Classification is to provide for low-medium and medium-density residential development and preserve the character of existing small lot residential subdivisions. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the R-5 Urban Single-Family Residential Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Community residential homes (refer to section 133(3)). 
Cluster and zero lot line subdivisions (refer to section 3-137). 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Home occupations, Class A (refer to section 3-127). 
Parks and recreational areas accessory to residential developments. 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Single-family standard dwelling. 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Garage apartments. 
Public uses not listed as a permitted principal use. 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
Public utility uses and structures (refer to section 3-134(1)). 
Recreational areas (refer to section 3-134(2)). 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: 5,000 square feet. 
Width: 50 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 25 feet, except on a corner lot, one front yard may be reduced to 15 feet. 
Rear yard: 20 feet. 
Side yard: five feet. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
(5)	Minimum floor area: 750 square feet. 
SEC. 3-93(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot area, min. (sq. ft.) 	5,000 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	50 
Lot coverage, max.(%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	25 
Front, corner lot (ft.) 	15 
Rear (ft.) 	20 
Side (ft.) 	5 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	35 
Floor area, min. (sq. ft.) 	750 
 
 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 3-94. - R-6 Urban Two-Family Residential Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the R-6 Urban Two-Family Residential Classification is to provide for a mixture of one- and two-unit dwellings where that mixture of land use exists or is proposed. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the R-6 Urban Two-Family Residential Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Cluster and zero lot line subdivisions (refer to section 3-137). 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Community residential homes (refer to section 133(3)). 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Home occupations, Class A (refer to section 3-127). 
Parks and recreational areas accessory to residential developments. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Single-family dwellings. 
Two-family dwellings. 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
Minimum building separation requirements: 50 feet between fronts or rears of buildings and 25 feet between any other combination of building arrangements. 
Minimum lot and yard size for townhouses: 
Minimum lot size per dwelling: 
Area: 2,000 square feet. 
Width: 20 feet. 
Minimum yard size per dwelling: 
Front yard: ten feet. 
Rear yard: ten feet. 
Side yard: 
Abutting any lot: No minimum. 
Abutting any street: ten feet. 
Waterfront yard: 20 percent of lot depth but not less than 20 feet. 
Minimum building setback requirements from streets, drives and off-street parking areas: No building shall be located closer than ten feet from any interior street, drive or off-street parking area. 
Maximum building length and width: No building shall exceed 200 feet in length or width. 
Project perimeter setback: No structure shall be located within 45 feet of the project's perimeter. 
Off-street parking and loading space meeting the requirements of section 3-129 shall be constructed. 
A landscaped buffer area meeting the requirements of article I of chapter 5 shall be constructed. 
Final site plan approval meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. 
Public uses not listed as a permitted principal use. 
Public utility uses and structures (refer to section 3-134(1)). 
Recreational areas (refer to section 3-134(2)). 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Single-family dwellings: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 
Area: 7,500 square feet. 
Width: 75 feet. 
b.	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 25 feet. 
Rear yard: 20 feet. 
Side yard: 20 feet combined, minimum of eight feet on any one side. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
c.	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
d.	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
e.	Minimum floor area: 600 square feet. 
(2)	Two-family dwellings: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 
Area: 11,000 square feet. 
Width: 75 feet. 
If the two-family dwelling and lot is divided into separate ownership for each unit, then a minimum lot area of 5,500 square feet for each unit and 11,000 square feet for both units combined shall be required, and also a minimum lot width of 37½ feet for each unit and 75 feet for both units combined shall be required. 
b.	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 25 feet. 
Rear yard: 20 feet. 
Side yard: ten feet. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
c.	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
d.	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
e.	Minimum floor area: 600 square feet. 
SEC. 3-94(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot area, min. (sq. ft.) 	7,500 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	75 
Lot coverage, max.(%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	25 
Rear (ft.) 	20 
Side, combined (ft.) 	20 
Side, on any one side (ft.) 	8 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	35 
Floor area, min. (sq. ft.) 	600 
 
 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-95. - R-7 Urban Multifamily Residential Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the R-7 Urban Multifamily Residential Classification is to provide for multifamily residential living where medium-density residential developments exist or are proposed. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the R-7 Urban Multifamily Residential Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Community residential home (refer to section 3-133(3)). 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Home occupations, Class A (refer to section 3-127). 
Parks and recreation areas accessory to residential developments. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Townhouses. 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Group home (refer to section 3-134(10)). 
Nursing homes approved and licensed by the appropriate state agency (refer to section 3-134(10)). 
Public uses not listed as a permitted principal use. 
Public utility uses and structures (refer to section 3-134(1)). 
Recreational areas (refer to section 3-134(2)). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Townhouses: 
a.	Minimum project size: one acre. 
b.	Maximum density: eight dwellings per net acre of land. 
c.	Minimum lot size per dwelling: 
Area: 2,000 square feet. 
Width: 20 feet. 
d.	Minimum yard size per dwelling: 
Front yard: ten feet. 
Rear yard: ten feet. 
Side yard: No minimum. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
e.	Minimum floor area: 575 square feet. 
f.	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
g.	Maximum building length and width: No building shall exceed 200 feet in length or width. 
h.	Minimum building separation requirements: 50 feet between fronts or rears of principal buildings and 25 feet between any other combination of principal building arrangements. 
i.	Project perimeter setback: No structure shall be located within 45 feet of the project's perimeter. 
SEC. 3-95(d)(1) 
TOWNHOUSES DIMENSIONAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Project size, min. (acre) 	1 
Density, max. (dwellings/acre) 	8 
Lot size, min. (sq. ft.) 	2,000 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	20 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	10 
Rear (ft.) 	10 
Side(ft.) 	None 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
Building separation, front to rear (ft.) 	50 
Building separation, any other combination (ft.) 	25 
Project perimeter (ft.) 	45 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	35 
Building length, max. (ft.) 	200 
Building width, max. (ft.) 	200 
Floor area, min (sq. ft.) 	575 
 
(2)	Multifamily dwellings: 
a.	Minimum project size: one acre. 
b.	Maximum density: eight dwellings per net acre of land. 
c.	Minimum floor area: 
Studio or efficiency: 480 square feet. 
One bedroom: 575 square feet. 
Each additional bedroom: 150 square feet. 
d.	Minimum building separation requirements: 
50 feet between fronts or rears of buildings, and 
25 feet between any other combination of building arrangements. 
e.	Minimum building setback from streets and drives: No building shall be located closer than ten feet from any interior street, drive or off-street parking area. 
f.	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
g.	Maximum building length and width: No building shall exceed 200 feet in length or width. 
h.	Project perimeter setback: No structure shall be located within 45 feet of the project's perimeter. 
SEC. 3-95(d)(2) 
MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Project size, min. (acre) 	1 
Density, max. (dwellings/acre) 	8 
Lot size, min. (sq. ft.) 	2,000 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	20 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	10 
Rear (ft.) 	10 
Side(ft.) 	None 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
Building separation, front to rear (ft.) 	50 
Building separation, any other combination (ft.) 	25 
Project perimeter (ft.) 	45 
Building setback from interior street, drive, or off-street parking area (ft.) 	10 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	35 
Building length, max. (ft.) 	200 
Building width, max. (ft.) 	200 
Floor area, studio, min. (sq. ft.) 	480 
Floor area, one bedroom, min. (sq. ft.) 	575 
Floor area, each additional bedroom min. (sq. ft.) 	150 
 
(e)	Landscape buffer requirements. A landscaped buffer area meeting the requirements of article I of chapter 5 shall be constructed. 
(f)	Final site plan requirements. Final site plan approval meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1, 5-5-2004; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-96. - R-8 Urban Multifamily Residential Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent: The purpose and intent of the R-8 Urban Multifamily Residential Classification is to provide for multifamily residential projects in urban areas of the City. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the R-8 Urban Multifamily Residential Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Community residential home (refer to section 3-133(3)). 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Home occupations, Class A (refer to section 3-127). 
Multifamily residences and modular dwellings. 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
Parks and recreation areas accessory to residential developments. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Group home (refer to section 3-134(10)). 
Public uses not listed as a permitted principal use. 
Public utility uses and structures (refer to section 3-134(1)). 
Recreational areas (refer to section 3-134(2)). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: 10,000 square feet. 
Width: 100 feet. 
(2)	Maximum density: eight dwellings per net acre of land. 
(3)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 25 feet, except on a corner lot, one front yard may be reduced to 20 feet. 
Side yard: 12 feet. 
Rear yard: 25 feet. 
(Buildings over 25 feet in height shall provide additional interior side yards and rear yards at a ratio of one foot of yard for every foot of building height over 25 feet.) 
Waterfront yard: 
On river, canal or lake: 25 feet. 
(4)	Minimum floor area: 
Studio or efficiency: 480 square feet. 
One bedroom: 575 square feet. 
Each additional bedroom: 150 square feet. 
(5)	Maximum building length and width: No building shall exceed 200 feet in length or width. 
(6)	Minimum building separation requirements: 50 feet between fronts or rears of principal buildings, and 25 feet between any other combination of principal building arrangements. 
(7)	Minimum building setback from streets and drives: No principal building shall be located closer than ten feet from any interior street, drive or off-street parking area; however, this requirement shall not apply to an off-street parking area which is under a principal building. (On lots with a width or depth of less than 135 feet, the minimum principal building setback from interior streets, drives and parking areas shall be five feet.) 
(8)	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
SEC. 3-96(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot size, min. (sq. ft.) 	10,000 
Lot width, min. (ft.) 	100 
Density, max. (dwelling/acre) 	8 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	25 
Front, Corner lot (ft.) 	20 
Rear (ft.) 	25 
Side(ft.) 	12 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
Building separation, front to rear (ft.) 	50 
Building separation, any other combination (ft.) 	25 
Project perimeter (ft.) 	45 
Building setback from street (ft.) 	10 
Building setback from street, width or depth less than 135ft (ft.) 	5 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	35 
Building length, max.(ft.) 	200 
Building width, max. (ft.) 	200 
Floor area, studio, min. (sq. ft.) 	480 
Floor area, one bedroom, min. (sq. ft.) 	575 
Floor area, each additional bedroom min. (sq. ft.) 	150 
 
(e)	Final site plan requirements. Final site plan approval meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1, 5-5-2004; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-97. - MH-1 Mobile Home Park Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the MH-1 Mobile Home Park Classification is to provide areas for the use and development of mobile home parks. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the MH-1 Mobile Home Park Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Home occupations, Class A (refer to section 3-127). 
Mobile home parks meeting the requirements of section 3-128 and accessory laundry buildings, swimming pools and recreational facilities. 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Mobile home sales accessory to a mobile home park (refer to section 3-134). 
Public uses not listed as a permitted principal use. 
Public utility uses and structures (refer to section 3-134(1)). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements for mobile home park. 
(1)	Minimum project size: ten acres. 
(2)	Maximum spaces per net acre of land: seven. 
(3)	Minimum mobile home space size: 
Space area: 5,000 square feet. 
Space width: 50 feet. 
Space depth: 50 feet. 
(4)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: ten feet. 
Rear yard: 7½ feet. 
Side yard: 
Abutting any space: 7½ feet. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
(5)	Minimum floor area: 480 square feet. 
SEC. 3-97(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Project size, min. (acre) 	10 
Density, max. (spaces/acre) 	7 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	10 
Rear (ft.) 	7.5 
Side(ft.) 	7.5 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
MOBILE HOME SIZE, MINIMUM 
Space area (sq. ft.) 	5,000 
Space width (ft.) 	50 
Space dept (ft.) 	50 
Floor area (sq. ft.) 	480 
 
  
 
(e)	Final site plan requirements. Final site plan approval meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. 
(f)	Landscape buffer requirements. A landscaped buffer area meeting the requirements of article I of chapter 5 shall be constructed. 
(g)	Skirting requirement. The area between the ground and floor level of the mobile home dwelling shall be enclosed with block or decorative skirting. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3-99. - MH-5 Urban Mobile Home Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the MH-5 Urban Mobile Home Subdivision Classification is to provide medium-density areas for mobile home subdivisions. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the MH-5 Urban Mobile Home Subdivision Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures: 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Family in-home day care as defined by law. 
Home occupations, Class A (refer to section 3-127). 
Mobile home dwelling. 
Keeping of pets as an accessory use to residential dwelling. 
Parks and recreation areas accessory to the development. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Public uses not listed as a permitted principal use. 
Public utility uses and structures (refer to section 3-134(1)). 
Recreational areas (refer to section 3-134(2)). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: 5,000 square feet. 
Width: 50 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard requirements: 
Front yard: 20 feet. 
Rear yard: 15 feet. 
Side yard: five feet. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
(3)	Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
(5)	Minimum floor area: 720 square feet. 
SEC. 3-99(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot size, min. (sq. ft.) 	5,000 
Width, min. (ft.) 	50 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	20 
Rear (ft.) 	15 
Side(ft.) 	5 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	35 
Floor area, min. (sq. ft.) 	720 
 
 
(e)	Skirting requirements. The area between the ground and floor levels of the mobile home dwelling shall be enclosed with block or decorative skirting. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-100. - B-2 Neighborhood Commercial Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the B-2 Neighborhood Commercial Classification is to provide a limited commercial convenience facility, servicing nearby residential neighborhoods, planned and developed as an integral unit. No single permitted use listed hereunder shall exceed 5,000 square feet of building area. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the B-2 Neighborhood Commercial Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures unless a use is found to be substantially similar in nature by the City Manager. Reference Article II, Overlay Districts, for any additional applicable regulations. 
Bakeries, retail (including preparation of products for sale on the premises). 
Barbershops, beauty shops, shoe repair shops. 
Book and stationery stores. 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Confectioners, and ice cream shops, retail (including preparation of products for sale on the premises). 
Convenience stores with or without fuel dispensers (excluding the sale of distilled spirits with a higher alcoholic content than malt beverages or fermented wines). No more than eight vehicular service positions per fuel dispenser island. Maximum of four fuel dispenser islands. 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Fire stations. 
Florist and gift shops. 
General offices. 
Hardware stores. 
Jewelry stores. 
Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations. 
Libraries. 
Outdoor display of retail merchandise (refer to section 3-133(10)). 
Pharmacies. 
Public schools. 
Photographic studios. 
Physical fitness studios (gym). 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Publicly owned or regulated water supply wells. 
Restaurants, Type B, when accessory and subordinate to the convenience store use excludes a single-use freestanding restaurant). 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Convenience stores with more than eight vehicular service positions per fuel dispenser island. 
Day care center (refer to section 3-134(5)). 
Financial institutions. 
Houses of worship (refer to section 3-134(3)). 
Only one single-family dwelling unit for the owner or manager of an existing permitted principal use. 
Public uses not listed as a permitted principal use. 
Public utility uses and structures (refer to section 3-134(1)). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum project size: 
Area: 20,000 square feet. 
Width: 100 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 35 feet. 
Rear yard: 20 feet unless abutting a residential or 
mobile home zoned property, then 35 feet. 
Side yard: ten feet unless abutting a residential 
or mobile home zoned property, then 35 feet. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage. The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
(5)	Lighting requirements: Light shield to deflect light from adjoining properties to prevent spillover light. 
SEC. 3-100(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Project size, min. (sq. ft.) 	20,000 
Width, min. (ft.) 	100 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	35 
Rear (ft.) 	20 
Rear, abutting residential or 
mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Side(ft.) 	10 
Side, abutting residential or 
mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	35 
 
 
(e)	Final site plan requirements. Final site plan approval meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-101. - B-3 Shopping Center Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the B-3 Shopping Center Classification is to provide shopping centers where compatible business establishments will be planned, organized and grouped in a unified arrangement. Such centers should be designed of sufficient dimension to satisfy all off-street parking needs, and be located along major arterial streets, where the traffic generated can be accommodated in a manner consistent with the public health, welfare and safety. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the B-3 Shopping Center Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures unless a use is found to be substantially similar in nature by the City Manager. Also, reference Article II, Overlay Districts, for any additional applicable regulations. 
Any use listed as a permitted use in the B-2 Classification unless use is listed as a special exception use in this classification. 
Art, dance, modeling and music schools. 
Artist studios. 
Auction parlors. 
Banks. 
Bars and liquor stores. 
Beauty shops, barbershops. 
Bowling alleys. 
Cafeterias. 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Employment agencies. 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Exercise and health spas. 
Financial institutions. 
Laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
Locksmiths. 
Outdoor display of retail merchandise (refer to section 3-133(10)). 
Pet stores. 
Printing and publishing establishments. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Restaurants, Types A and B. 
Restaurants with outside service of alcoholic beverages. The restaurant must operate under a 4COPSRX license or shall meet similar limitations. Outside service and consumption of alcohol shall be limited to the same hours of operation as interior service and consumption. The establishment's license from Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco and Bureau of Licensing must include the outside area as part of the licensed premises. 
Retail sales and services, excluding sales or rental of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, motor homes, or travel trailers, automobile driving schools, boat or mobile home sales and services. 
Tailor shops. 
Theaters. 
Travel agencies. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Bars with outside service and consumption of alcoholic beverages (refer to 3-134(9)). 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Day care centers (refer to section 3-134(5)). 
Fireworks sales. 
Public utility uses and structures (refer to section 3-134(1)). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
Restaurants and bars with outside entertainment (refer to 3-134(18)). 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum project size: 
Area: ten acres. 
Width: 300 feet. 
(2)	Minimum lot size for out-parcels within a project: 
Area: One acre. 
Width: 100 feet. 
(3)	Minimum yard size for project, excluding out-parcels: 
Front yard: 100 feet. 
Rear yard: 50 feet. 
Side yard: 50 feet. 
Waterfront yard: 50 feet. 
(The minimum required side or rear yards shall be 100 feet where they abut a residential or mobile home zoned property.) 
(4)	Minimum yard size for out-parcels within a project: 
Front yard: 35 feet. 
Side and rear yard: 
ten feet, if abutting the B-3 classified project; 
50 feet if abutting nonresidentially classified land outside the B-3 project; and 
100 feet if abutting residential or mobile home zoned property. 
Waterfront yard: 50 feet. 
(5)	Maximum building height: 40 feet. 
SEC. 3-101(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Project size, min. (acre) 	10 
Width, min. (ft.) 	300 
Out-Parcel area, min. (acre) 	1 
Parcel width, (ft.) 	100 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
PROJECT SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	100 
Rear (ft.) 	50 
Rear, abutting residential or 
mobile home (ft.) 	100 
Side(ft.) 	50 
Side, abutting residential or 
mobile home (ft.) 	100 
Waterfront (ft.) 	50 
OUT-PARCEL STANDARDS,
MINIMUM
Front (ft.) 	35 
Rear, abutting B-3 (ft.) 	10 
Rear, abutting non-residential (ft.) 	50 
Rear, abutting residential or 
mobile home (ft.) 	100 
Side, abutting B-3 (ft.) 	10 
Side, abutting non-residential (ft.) 	50 
Side, abutting residential or 
mobile home (ft.) 	100 
Waterfront (ft.) 	50 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	40 
 
 
(e)	Final site plan requirements. Final site plan approval meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. Out parcels limited to internal/roadway access only. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 22-02, 12-11-2002; Ord. No. 02-04, § 2, 5-5-2004; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 06-14 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 3-102. - B-4 General Commercial Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the B-4 General Commercial Classification is to encourage the development of intensive commercial areas providing a wide range of goods and services, and located adjoining at least one major collector or arterial road. The B-4 classification is intended to be applied to existing or developing strip retail areas which, because of the nature of existing development, are not appropriate for inclusion in the B-3 Shopping Center Classification. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the B-4 General Commercial Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures unless a use is found to be substantially similar in nature by the City Manager. Also, reference Article II, Overlay Districts, for any additional applicable regulations. 
Any use listed as a permitted use in the B-3 Classification unless the use is listed as a special exception use in this classification. 
Art, dance, modeling and music schools. 
Auction parlors. 
Automobile driving schools. 
Automobile service station, Type A. 
Automobile and motorcycle vehicle sales. 
Barbershops and beauty shops. 
Bars and liquor stores. 
Bowling alleys. 
Catering services. 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Convenience store with or without gas sales. 
Day care centers (refer to section 3-133 (9)). 
Drug and sundry stores. 
Dental laboratories. 
Employment agencies. 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Financial institutions. 
Funeral homes with crematory as an accessory use. 
Game rooms or arcades for pool, billiards, pinball machines, jukeboxes or other coin-operated amusements. 
General offices, medical and professional. 
Government owned public safety facilities. 
Hardware stores. 
Hobby and craft stores. 
Laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
Luggage shop. 
Outdoor display of retail merchandise (refer to section 3-133(10)). 
Pest exterminators. 
Pet grooming. 
Private clubs and lodges. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Restaurants with outside service of alcoholic beverages. The restaurant must operate under a 4COPSRX license or shall meet similar limitations. Outside service and consumption of alcohol shall be limited to the same hours of operation as interior service and consumption. The establishment's license from Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco and Bureau of Licensing must include the outside area as part of the licensed premises. 
Restaurants, Types A and B. 
Retail paints and wallpaper stores. 
Retail plant nursery. 
Retail sales and services. 
Tailors. 
Theaters. 
Travel agencies. 
Veterinary clinics. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Assisted living facilities (ALF) approved by the appropriate state agency (refer to section 3-134(10). 
Bars with outside service and consumption of alcoholic beverages (refer to 3-134(9)). 
Bus stations. 
Car washes. 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Fireworks sales. 
Group homes (refer to section 3-134(10)). 
Hotel/motel. 
Houses of worship (refer to section 3-134(3)). 
Miniwarehouses (refer to section 3-134(4)). 
Nightclubs. 
Nursing homes approved by the appropriate state agency (refer to section 3-134(10)). 
Professional or trade schools related to permitted uses. 
Public uses not listed as a permitted principal use. 
Public utility uses and structures (refer to section 3-134(1)). 
Restaurants and bars with outside entertainment (refer to 3-134(18)). 
Schools, parochial or private. 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: One acre. 
Width: 100 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 35 feet. 
Side and rear yard: ten feet unless abutting any residential or mobile home zoned property, then 35 feet. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 40 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
SEC. 3-102(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot size, min. (acre) 	1 
Width, min (ft.) 	100 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	35 
Rear (ft.) 	10 
Rear, abutting residential or mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Side(ft.) 	10 
Side, abutting residential or mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	40 
 
 
(e)	Final site plan requirements. Final site plan approval meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 22-02, 12-11-2002; Ord. No. 02-04, § 2, 5-5-2004; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 06-14 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 3-103. - B-5 Heavy Commercial Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the B-5 Heavy Commercial Classification is to provide areas for commercial uses and structures that are not generally compatible with B-4 uses and structures. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the B-5 Heavy Commercial Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures unless a use is found to be substantially similar in nature by the City Manager. Also, reference Article II, Overlay Districts, for any additional applicable regulations. 
Any of those uses permitted in the B-4 Classification unless the use is listed as a special exception use in this classification. 
Automobile, bicycle, boat, mobile home, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, trailer, truck sales, rental, storage (not including salvage or junkyards), or service establishments. 
Assisted living facilities (ALF) approved by the appropriate state agency. 
Automobile body shops. 
Automobile driving schools. 
Automotive, boat, motorcycle, mobile home and recreational vehicle sales. 
Automobile service stations, Types A and B. 
Bars and liquor stores. 
Bowling alleys. 
Building material sales and storage. 
Cabinetry and woodworking shops. 
Car washes. 
Catering services. 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Contractor's shop, storage and equipment yard. 
Dental laboratories. 
Employment agencies. 
Essential utility services. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Funeral homes. 
Game rooms or arcades for pool, billiards, pinball machines, jukeboxes or other coin-operated amusements. 
Laundry and dry cleaning off-site establishments. 
Marine engine repair and service. 
Miniwarehouses which meet the requirements of section 3-134(4). 
Nursing homes. 
Outdoor display of retail merchandise (refer to section 3-133(10)). 
Paint and body shops. 
Pawnshops. 
Pest exterminators. 
Printing and engraving, including photostating and publishing. 
Private clubs. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Radio and television broadcasting stations. 
Restaurants with outside service and consumption of alcoholic beverages. The restaurant must operate under a 4COPSRX license or shall meet similar limitations. Outside service and consumption of alcohol shall be limited to the same hours of operation as interior service and consumption. The establishment's license from Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco and Bureau of Licensing must include the outside area as part of the licensed premises. 
Restaurants, Types A and B. 
Retail sales and services. 
Rug cleaning establishments. 
Small engine repair shops. 
Tailors. 
Veterinary clinics. 
Welding and soldering shops. 
Wholesale-retail nursery. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Bars with outside service and consumption of alcoholic beverages (refer to 3-134(9)). 
Bus garages and repair shops. 
Bus stations. 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Day care center (refer to section 3-134(5)). 
Fireworks sales. 
Hospitals. 
Houses of worship (refer to section 3-134(3)). 
Moving and storage companies. 
Nightclubs. 
Professional or trade schools related to permitted uses. 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
Restaurants and bars with outside entertainment (refer to 3-134(18)). 
Schools, parochial or private and public. 
Tattoo and body piercing parlors. 
Warehouses. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: One acre. 
Width: 100 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 35 feet. 
Rear yard: 25 feet unless abutting any residential or mobile home zoned property, then 35 feet. 
Side yard: ten feet unless abutting any residential or mobile home zoned property, then 35 feet. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 40 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
SEC. 3-103(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot size, min. (acre) 	1 
Width, min. (ft.) 	100 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	35 
Rear (ft.) 	25 
Rear, abutting residential or 
mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Side(ft.) 	10 
Side, abutting residential or 
mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max (ft.) 	40 
 
 
(e)	Final site plan requirements. Final site plan approval meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 22-02, 12-11-2002; Ord. No. 02-04, § 2, 5-5-2004; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 06-14 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 3-104. - B-6 Highway Interchange Commercial Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the B-6 Highway Interchange Commercial Classification is to provide a specialized classification for hotels, motels and tourist-related retail facilities near major highway interchanges. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the B-6 Highway Interchange Commercial Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures unless a use is found to be substantially similar in nature by the City Manager: 
Automobile rental agencies. 
Automotive service stations, Types A and B. 
Bars as accessory uses to hotels and restaurants. 
Barbershops and beauty shops. 
Car washes. 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Convenience stores, with or without fuel dispensers. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Hotels/motels. 
Laundry and dry cleaning off-site establishments. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Restaurants, Types A and B. 
Retail sales and service. 
Tire sales. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/ requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Fireworks sales. 
Houses of worship (refer to section 3-134(3)). 
Nightclubs. 
Pole/pylon signs within 1,000 linear feet of Interstate 4 (I-4) (refer to sec. 3-134(12)). 
Professional or trade schools related to permitted uses. 
Public uses not listed as a permitted principal use. 
Public utility uses and structures (refer to section 3-134(1)). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
Schools, parochial, private or public. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: 20,000 square feet. 
Width: 100 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 40 feet. 
Rear yard: 25 feet unless abutting any residential or mobile home zoned property, then 35 feet. 
Side yard: ten feet unless abutting any residential or mobile home zoned property, then 35 feet. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 40 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
SEC. 3-104(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot size, min. (sq. ft.) 	20,000 
Width, min. (ft.) 	100 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	40 
Rear (ft.) 	25 
Rear, abutting residential or mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Side(ft.) 	10 
Side, abutting residential or mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	40 
 
 
(e)	Final site plan requirements. Final site plan approval meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 22-02, 12-11-2002; Ord. No. 02-04, § 2, 5-5-2004; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-105. - B-7 Commercial Marina Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the B-7 Commercial Marina Classification is to provide appropriate locations for pleasure or commercial boats and other water-oriented facilities. Its application is primarily intended along the St. Johns River and other water bodies or watercourses. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the B-7 Commercial Marina Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures unless a use is found to be substantially similar in nature by the City Manager. Also, reference Article II, Overlay Districts, for any additional applicable regulations. 
Bait and tackle sales. 
Bars (ancillary to principal water-dependent use). 
Boat and marine engine sales, service and rentals. 
Boat docks and moorings. 
Boat fuel sales. 
Boat storage. 
Commercial fishing, pleasure or excursion boat dockage. 
Convenience stores, with or without fuel dispensers. No more than eight vehicular service positions per fuel dispenser island. Maximum of four fuel dispenser islands. 
Excavations only for stormwater retention ponds for which a permit is required by this Code. 
Fishing docks, wharves and piers. 
Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations. 
Laundry and dry cleaning, self-service establishments. 
Marinas (refer to section 3-133(8) for additional regulations). 
Marine-oriented research facilities. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Restaurants, Types A and B. 
Retail sales or rental of boating, fishing, diving, water skiing, and bathing supplies, equipment and accessories. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Convenience stores, with more than eight vehicular service positions per fuel dispenser island. 
Financial institutions. 
Hotels/motels (ancillary to principal water-dependent use). 
Mobile recreational vehicle and shelter parks (refer to section 3-128). 
Nightclubs (ancillary to principal water-dependent use). 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: One acre. 
Width: 100 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 35 feet. 
Rear yard: ten feet unless abutting any residential, agricultural or mobile home zoned property, then 35 feet. 
Side yard: ten feet unless abutting any residential, agricultural or mobile home zoned property, then 35 feet. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 40 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: 35 percent. 
SEC. 3-105(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot size, min. (acre) 	1 
Width, min. (ft.) 	100 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	35 
Rear (ft.) 	10 
Rear, abutting residential, agricultural, or mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Side(ft.) 	10 
Side, abutting residential, agricultural, or mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max (ft.) 	40 
 
 
(e)	Final site plan requirements. Final site plan approval meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-04, § 2, 5-5-2004; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-106. - B-9 General Office Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the B-9 classification is to provide areas for general office use. It is intended that this classification apply to suitable properties which are situated in urban areas to provide a transitional area between residential development and more intensive land uses. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the B-9 General Office classification, no premises shall be used except for the following uses and their customary accessory uses or structures unless a use is found to be substantially similar in nature by the City Manager. Also, reference Article II, Overlay Districts, for any additional applicable regulations. 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Exempt excavations requiring a permit as required by this Code. 
Financial institutions. 
Professional, Medical and General offices. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Day care center. 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum project size: 
Area: one acre. 
Width: 100 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 35 feet. 
Rear yard: 20 feet, unless abutting a residential or mobile home zoned property, then 35 feet. 
Side yard: ten feet, unless abutting a residential or mobile home zoned property, then 35 feet. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
SEC. 3-106(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot size, min. (acre) 	1 
Width, min. (ft.) 	100 
Lot coverage, max. (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	35 
Rear (ft.) 	20 
Rear, abutting residential or 
mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Side(ft.) 	10 
Side, abutting residential or 
mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	35 
 
 
(e)	Final site plan requirements. A final site plan meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-107. - I-1 Light Industrial Classification. 
 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the I-1 Light Industrial Classification is to provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for industrial operations engaged in the fabricating, repair or storage of manufactured goods of such a nature that objectionable by-products of the activity (such as odors, smoke, dust, refuse, electro-magnetic interference, noise in excess of that customary to loading, unloading and handling of goods and materials) are not nuisances beyond the lot on which the facility is located. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses and structures. In the I-1 Light Industrial Classification, no premises shall be used except for the following industrial uses and their customary accessory uses or structures unless a use is found to be substantially similar in nature by the City Manager. Permitted and special exception uses must also be consistent with the uses permitted by the property's future land use designation on the City's adopted Future Land Use Map. Also, reference Article, II Overlay Districts, for any additional applicable regulations. 
Any of those uses permitted in the B-5 Classification unless the use is listed as a special exception use in this classification. 
Adult bookstores (refer to section 3-133(1)). 
Adult theaters (refer to section 3-133(1)). 
Automobile, truck, truck-trailer, motorcycle, mobile home, manufactured dwelling, recreational vehicle and bicycle manufacturers. 
Automobile service station, Types A and B. 
Bakeries. 
Blood banks and laboratories that offer cash or any other form of compensation for blood or plasma. 
Bottling and distribution plants. 
Building materials storage and sales. 
Bus garages and repair shops. 
Communication towers not exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Cold storage and frozen food lockers. 
Contractor's shop, storage and equipment yard. 
Convenience stores, with or without gasoline pumps. 
Display and sale (retail or wholesale) of products or parts manufactured or assembled on the premises. 
Employment agencies offering day labor services and where workers congregate at the business location to receive daily assignments. 
Essential utility services. 
Establishments offering on-site internet or computer access, or phone card sales, the primary activity or business of which is the sale of internet, computer or phone access or time for compensation or value whether for profit or not. 
Feed and seed processing and storage. 
Industrial vocational training school. 
Laundries and linen services. 
Machinery and machine shops. 
Moving and storage companies. 
Pain management clinics registered with the Florida Department of Health. 
Pawn shops. 
Pest exterminators. 
Plumbing supply. 
Printing, publishing and engraving. 
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas. 
Radiator repair, cleaning and flushing establishments. 
Restaurants, Types A and B, when contained within the principal industrial structure. 
Sign and paint shop. 
Tattoo and body piercing parlors. 
Testing of materials, equipment and products. 
Truck, automobile, boat, mobile recreational vehicle and shelter, motorcycle and trailer storage. 
Warehouses. 
Welding or soldering shops. 
Wholesale houses and distributors. 
Wholesale meat and produce distribution with meat cutting but no butchering. 
Exempt excavations for stormwater ponds as required by this Code. 
Manufacturing. 
(c)	Permitted special exceptions. Additional regulations/requirements governing permitted special exceptions are located in section 3-134. 
Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics. 
Communication towers exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level. 
Professional and trade schools related to permitted uses. 
Public uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 
Area: One acre. 
Width: 100 feet. 
(2)	Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: 30 feet. 
Side yard: ten feet. Abutting any residential or mobile home zoned property: 35 feet. 
Rear yard: 20 feet. Abutting any residential or mobile home zoned property: 35 feet. 
For buildings over 35 feet in height, the side and rear yards shall be increased by one foot of yard for each foot of building height over 35 feet. 
Waterfront yard: 25 feet. For buildings over 35 feet in height, the waterfront yard shall be increased one foot for each foot of height over 35 feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height: 45 feet; abutting a residential classification, 35 feet. 
(4)	Maximum lot coverage: 35 percent. 
SEC. 3-107(d) 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
LOT STANDARDS 
Lot size, min (acre) 	1 
Width, min (ft.) 	100 
Lot coverage, max (%) 	35 
SETBACKS, MINIMUM 
Front (ft.) 	30 
Rear (ft.) 	20 
Rear, abutting residential or 
mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Side(ft.) 	10 
Side, abutting residential or 
mobile home (ft.) 	35 
Waterfront (ft.) 	25 
BUILDING STANDARDS 
Building height, max. (ft.) 	45 
Building height, abutting 
residential, max. (ft.) 	35 
For buildings over 35 feet in height, the side and rear yards shall be increased by one foot of yard for each foot of building height over 35 feet 
For buildings over 35 feet in height, the waterfront yard shall be increased one foot for each foot of height over 35 feet. 
 
 
(e)	Final site plan requirements. Final site plan approval meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.3), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 05-10, § 2, 6-16-2010; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-108. - PUD Planned Unit Development. 
(a)	Purpose and intent. 
(1)	The purpose and intent of the PUD Planned Unit Development classification is to provide for integrated developments, which are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, so as to promote a mixture of land use types and economical and orderly development consisting of a single or of a mixture of compatible land uses. Further, it is intended that a proposed development be sensitive to existing adjacent and future land uses as depicted by the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan, the natural environment and the impact upon supporting public infrastructure through such mechanisms as, but not limited to, the establishment of appropriate buffer areas between land uses, limitations upon the types of permissible uses and structures which are to be permitted in the development. 
(2)	The PUD Planned Unit Development classification has been divided into four sub-classifications. These sub-classifications are Residential, Business, Industrial and Mixed Use. 
(3)	The procedure for review and approval of a planned development shall be as set forth in this section. Subsequent to approval, major modifications shall be reviewed as for a new development plan and/or development agreement. 
(b)	Regulations. The following regulations apply to all Planned Unit Developments (PUD) unless the specific type (i.e., RPUD, MPUD, BPUD, or IPUD) is otherwise referenced. 
(1)	Unified ownership. All land within the PUD shall be under the ownership of one person, either by deed, agreement for deed or contract for purchase or lease. PUD applicants shall present either an opinion of title by an attorney licensed in the state or a certification by an abstractor or a title company, authorized to do business in the state, that, at the time of initial application, unified ownership of the entire area within the proposed PUD is in the applicant, or contract seller. Unified ownership shall thereafter be maintained until after the recording of the master development plan or final plat. 
(2)	Commercial uses in an MPUD. Commercial areas should normally be located in an area accessible only from streets within the MPUD. When commercial uses or structures are approved as part of an MPUD, the commercial operation shall not begin until certificates of occupancy have been issued for all dwelling units in the total project, unless otherwise provided in the development agreement. 
(3)	Utility distribution lines. All utility distribution lines within the PUD shall be located underground; however, those appurtenances requiring aboveground installations may be exempted by the City Council. 
(4)	Open space requirements. Twenty percent of an RPUD project or the residential portion of an MPUD containing residential uses shall be common open space. Common open space shall meet the following standards: 
a.	It shall be dedicated by plat, deed or other suitable instrument to and usable by all residents of the RPUD/MPUD. Useable space may be in the form of active or passive recreational areas with residents having physical access to the space. Passive facilities such as picnic tables and nature trails shall be placed in a manner that functions with the site's natural amenities or recreational needs of future residents. Examples of active recreational useable space are playgrounds, free play areas, golf courses, nature trails, swimming pools, and tennis courts. 
b.	To further the City's efforts of tree protection, 15 percent of the site shall be preserved in a natural state (passive recreational uses may be permitted). 
c.	Common open or public space should have the following qualities: accessibility, visibility, security, and interconnection (either physical or visual). 
d.	Its location, shape, size and character shall be illustrated on the master development plan. 
e.	Provisions for maintenance of the common open space may be provided in the development agreement. 
(5)	Procedure for rezoning to PUD. 
a.	Preapplication stage. A preapplication meeting is required before a PUD rezoning application can be accepted. After the preapplication meeting, a sketch plan may be submitted for review and comment prior to filing the application for rezoning. 
1.	Preapplication meeting. The preapplication meeting is intended to provide an opportunity for an informational exchange between the applicant and the administrative staff. No fee shall be charged. The applicant need not submit any plans or other information; however, the more information, such as sketch plans, proposed land uses, site information, adjacent land uses, and proposed density, that the applicant does submit, the more complete the responsive comment can be. As a minimum, the applicant will be advised of the usual procedures and requirements. Forms, application materials, guidelines, checklists, and copies of the Comprehensive Plan, and of the zoning and subdivision regulations, will be made available at a reasonable cost. 
2.	Sketch plan. After the preapplication meeting, a sketch plan may be submitted to the City Planner. If submitted, written comments on the sketch plan shall be made by the City Planner and any interested departments within 30 days, including TRS. The City Planner shall coordinate this review. If submitted, a sketch plan shall indicate general land use categories and the approximate height, location, architectural character and density of dwellings, and other structures. The sketch plan shall also show the tentative major street layout, approximate street widths, sites of schools, open space areas and parks, existing structures, waterways, wooded areas, wetlands, floodplain areas (if applicable), total acreage and existing zoning. Finally, it shall include a vicinity map, and any other information deemed appropriate by the applicant. Written comments on the sketch plan are informational only and are subject to change after a more detailed review of the rezoning application. 
b.	RPUD application stage. An application for rezoning to RPUD, together with a master development plan (MDP) and such application fees as are set at the preapplication meeting, shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. If a rezoning applicant desires concurrent review under chapter 4 of this Code, he shall so state at the time of application, and shall submit any additional information required by those regulations. The master development plan shall consist of a preliminary plan and a written development agreement. Those documents shall include the following information: 
1.	Preliminary plan exhibits. The preliminary plan shall consist of the following: 
i.	Name of project and name, address, telephone number of the developer and the professional project engineers, architects and planners. 
ii.	The date the plan was drawn, its scale, and a north arrow. 
iii.	Names and location of adjoining streets and names of abutting property owners. 
iv.	Legal description of property, boundary survey and the location of all existing streets, buildings, railroads, bulkhead lines, easements, and other important features in or adjoining the property. 
v.	The general topography and physical conditions of the site, including natural areas of vegetation and type, general soil types, wetland areas, 100-year floodplain areas, watercourses, water bodies, and natural drainage patterns. 
vi.	Conceptual configuration of proposed streets, which depict access into and traffic flow within the development, with particular reference to the separation of vehicular traffic from pedestrian or other types of traffic. 
vii.	General feasibility plans for potable water, sewage disposal, and stormwater drainage. 
viii.	Approximate location and area encompassed for each proposed land use within the development. 
ix.	Approximate location and size of common open space. 
x.	Such additional material, maps, studies, or reports subsequently deemed necessary by any reviewing department or agency. 
2.	Written development agreement. In addition to a preliminary plan, a written development agreement shall be prepared, following a general format supplied by the LDM at the preapplication meeting. The development agreement, along with the preliminary plan, shall govern the development of the PUD and shall regulate the future use of the land. The development agreement shall include any statements or information requested by any reviewing department or agency at the preapplication meeting, such as: 
i.	Evidence of unified ownership and control. 
ii.	Statement agreeing to: 
A.	Proceed with the proposed development according to all regulations; 
B.	Provide appropriate performance and maintenance guarantees; 
C.	Follow all other provisions of this Code to the extent not expressly inconsistent with the written development agreement, and bind the applicant's successors in title to his commitments. 
iii.	The acreage and percentage of the total land area devoted to each of the proposed land uses. 
iv.	Maximum density for each type of dwelling. 
v.	Maximum building heights. 
vi.	Minimum building spacing and floor areas. 
vii.	Lot sizes, yard areas and buffer areas, including perimeter buffers. 
viii.	Statement regarding the disposition of sewage and stormwater, and arrangements for potable water. 
ix.	When the PUD is planned for phase development, a schedule of the phases. 
x.	The proposed language of any covenants, easements or other restrictions. 
xi.	Maximum number of dwelling units by type. 
xii.	Any additional information or statements subsequently deemed necessary by any reviewing department or agency. 
xiii.	Conditions that all provisions of the development agreement shall expire 720 days following execution of the development agreement by the City, if a subsequent development order has not been secured in writing by the applicant. Upon expiration of the agreement the zoning designation will revert to its previous designation and the PUD entitlements become null and void. 
c.	BPUD, IPUD or MPUD application stage. An application for rezoning to BPUD, IPUD or MPUD, together with a master development plan (MDP) and such application fees as are set at the preapplication meeting, shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. If an applicant for rezoning desires concurrent review under chapter 4 of this Code, he shall so state at the time of application and shall submit any additional information required by those regulations. The master development plan shall consist of a preliminary plan and a written development agreement. Those documents shall include the following information: 
1.	Preliminary plan exhibits. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to an appropriate engineer's scale to include the location and boundary of the site referenced by the legal description and boundary survey; the date the plan was drawn, its scale, and a north arrow; and the name, address and telephone number of the developer and his professional project engineers, architects and planners. In addition, the preliminary plan shall include all of the following, if applicable. The PUD establishes the zoning/permitted use of property; items i, vi, viii, x below if not known or applicable at the time of the zoning request will be provided on the overall development plan or final site plan as appropriate. 
i.	The approximate size and location of all proposed buildings and other structures, if known, and the specified use of buildings and structures may be indicated, if known. 
ii.	Generalized off-street parking area and loading plans, including circulation plans for vehicular movement. 
iii.	Driveway and access controls, including number and approximate location of driveways. 
iv.	Approximate location, size and description of open spaces, landscaped areas, or buffers. 
v.	Approximate location and size of all easements, rights-of-way, or drainage facilities and structures. 
vi.	Approximate boundary lines and dimensions of parcels proposed to be subdivided, if applicable. 
vii.	The general topography and physical conditions of the site, including features such as water bodies, wooded areas, wetland areas, vegetation types, soils, 100-year floodplain areas, and steep grades or depressions on the site. 
viii.	General location of signs, if known. 
ix.	Any other conditions of development, specifications, limitations, constraints, standards or proposed physical features not specifically included in subsections i. through x. of this subsection (b)(5)c.1. 
x.	Approximate location of dumpsters, solid waste receptacle enclosures, etc., if known. 
2.	Written development agreement. In addition to a preliminary plan, a written development agreement shall be prepared, following a general format supplied by the City Manager at the preapplication meeting. The development agreement, along with the preliminary plan, shall govern the development of the BPUD, MPUD or IPUD and shall regulate the future use of the land. The development agreement shall include the following information: 
i.	Evidence of unified ownership and/or control. 
ii.	Statement agreeing to: 
A.	Proceed with the proposed development according to all regulations; 
B.	Provide appropriate performance and maintenance guarantees; 
C.	Following all other provisions of this Code to the extent not expressly inconsistent with the written development agreement, and bind the applicant's successors in title to his commitments. 
iii.	A listing of the land uses agreed upon in each component of the BPUD, MPUD or IPUD. 
iv.	Maximum building heights. 
v.	Minimum building spacing and floor areas. 
vi.	Lot sizes, if known, yard areas, and buffer areas, including perimeter buffers. 
vii.	Statement regarding ingress/egress controls to the site. 
viii.	Statement regarding any road improvements to be made and the thresholds for the traffic impact analysis. 
ix.	Statement regarding the disposition of sewage and stormwater, and arrangements for potable water. 
x.	When the BPUD, MPUD or IPUD is planned for phase development, a schedule of the phases. 
xi.	The proposed language of any covenants, easements or other restrictions. 
xii.	Maximum amount of square footage by use. 
xiii.	Any additional information or statements subsequently deemed necessary by any reviewing department or agency. 
xiv.	Condition that all provisions of the development agreement shall expire 720 days following execution of the development agreement by the City, if a subsequent development order has not been secured in writing by the applicant. Upon expiration of the agreement the zoning designation will revert to its previous designation and the PUD entitlements become null and void. 
(6)	Post-approval stage. 
a.	Recording MDP. After City Council approval of the rezoning application to PUD, the preliminary plan, and the written development agreement, both signed by the Mayor, and attested by the City Manager, shall be recorded in the public records of the county at the expense of the applicant. 
b.	Final site plan approval. After the MDP is recorded, a final site plan shall be prepared and submitted in the manner required by this Code. If the PUD includes a subdivision required to comply with this Code, preliminary and final plats of the subdivision portion may be submitted in lieu of the final site plan, for review and approval as governed under this Code. 
c.	Construction. During construction, the City Manager shall enforce compliance with the approved final site plan or the final plat. 
(7)	Residential Planned Unit Developments (RPUDs), Business Planned Unit Developments (BPUDs), and Industrial Planned Unit Developments (IPUDs). Residential Planned Unit Developments (RPUDs), Business Planned Unit Developments (BPUDs), and Industrial Planned Unit Developments (IPUDs) which were in existence prior to October 27, 1990, shall continue in the manner approved by the county council. To the extent of any specific amendment to these aforesaid PUDs, said amendment must comply with the requirements of this chapter. Terms previously used in said PUDs may continue to be employed. 
(c)	Permitted principal uses and structures. The permitted principal uses and structures shall be those agreed upon by the City Council and are dependent upon which sub-classification is requested. 
(1)	A Residential Planned Unit Development shall be indicated by an R. The permitted uses within a RPUD may be those found in any of the residential zoning classifications of this chapter, provided that said uses are listed in the development agreement and have been approved by the City Council. 
(2)	A Business Planned Unit Development shall be indicated by a B. The permitted uses within a BPUD may be those found in any of the business zoning classifications of this chapter, provided that said uses are listed in the development agreement and have been approved by the City Council. 
(3)	An Industrial Planned Unit Development shall be indicated by an I. The permitted uses within an IPUD may be those found in the industrial zoning classifications of this chapter, provided that said uses are listed in the development agreement and have been approved by the City Council. 
(4)	A Mixed Use Planned Unit Development shall be indicated by an M. The permitted uses within an MPUD must consist of a combination of uses allowed from at least two of the above three PUD subclassifications as approved by the City Council. 
(5)	Other uses and structures of a similar nature to those listed, after determination by the City Council at the time of master development plan approval that such uses and structures are compatible with the PUD development and the surrounding area. 
(6)	The procedure for review and approval of a planned development shall be as set forth in this section and sections 3-109—3-132. Subsequent to approval, major modifications shall be reviewed as for a new development plan and/or development agreement. 
(d)	Dimensional requirements. 
(1)	Minimum parcel size: 
Area: 
Residential only: five acres. 
Business only: one acre. 
All others: one acre. 
(2)	Minimum lot area and yard requirements. Minimum lot sizes, width, and yard areas shall be described in the development agreement. In determining yard sizes, the City Council shall consider whether or not the proposed PUD will have adverse effects upon adjoining properties. Factors which may be considered in determining yard sizes include, but are not limited to, existing and future land uses, lot size, and buffer requirements. 
(3)	Density. The total number of dwelling units per acre of land shall be calculated and described in the development agreement. 
(e)	Landscape buffer requirements. A landscape buffer area meeting the requirements of chapter 5, articles I and V shall be constructed unless otherwise negotiated and approved by City Council as part of the master development plan and written development agreement. 
(f)	Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(1)	Off-street parking and loading areas meeting the requirements of section 3-129 shall be constructed. 
(2)	The City Council may modify the off-street parking requirements for the number of the individual spaces provided that such action has been substantiated by a study prepared by a professional traffic engineer. 
(3)	Any modifications to said requirements which may be granted by the City Council shall be described in the development agreement. 
(g)	Transportation impact analysis report. 
(1)	Purpose. The transportation impact analysis report is designed to identify the transportation impacts and problems which are likely to be generated by a proposed use because of size, density, traffic generation rates, or location. The report will also identify all improvements required to ensure safe ingress and egress from a proposed development, maintenance of adequate street capacity, and elimination of hazardous conditions and improvements necessary for immediately surrounding roadways and intersections as a result of the property development. 
(2)	Thresholds for traffic impact analysis report. A transportation impact analysis report shall be required, unless waived by the City Traffic Engineer, for any use which, according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual, latest edition, rates published by the Florida Department of Transportation or rates documented by study and agreed to prior to use by the City Traffic Engineer, will generate in excess of 1,000 trips per day. 
(h)	Effect of approval; minor modifications. 
(1)	After approval of a Planned Unit Development and its corresponding development agreement and master development plan, the city may issue development permits which are consistent with the approved Planned Unit Development until its expiration specified in the development agreement. The City Council may grant extensions to a Planned Unit Development and its corresponding development agreement and master development plan. 
(2)	Subsequent to the approval of the planned unit development, the City Council may approve minor modifications of the Planned Unit Development. Minor modifications are those for which: 
a.	The proposed site alterations must not increase the building size more than ten percent of the gross floor area of all buildings within the development. 
b.	The proposed site alteration must not adversely affect traffic circulation on- or off-site. 
c.	The proposed site alterations must not have a significant impact upon the utility system. 
d.	The proposed site alterations must comply with all codes, rules, and regulations of the city, county, state and federal governments, and must not require variances. 
e.	The proposed modification must not increase the maximum density of development. 
f.	The proposed modification does not change permitted uses or special exception uses. 
(3)	Requests for modifications to a planned unit development which meet the standards of subsection (h)(2) may be adopted by resolution of the City Council after one public hearing and notice as provided in accordance with subsection 1-10(c). After City Council approval of a minor amendment, the adopted resolution along with its corresponding revisions to the development agreement and master development plan shall be recorded in the public records of Volusia County, Florida, at the expense of the applicant. 
(4)	Requests for modifications which do not meet the standards in subsection (h)(2) shall be reviewed and processed in the manner provided for new planned unit development applications. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, §§ 1(204), 1(205), 1(301), 1(301.3), 2(813.00)), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 05-09, § II, 5-6-2009; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Secs. 3-109—3-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 3-121. - Purpose; access control. 
The purpose of this division is to promote the safety of vehicular traffic and pedestrians and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict. Access to any project or development shall comply with the requirements of division 4, article II of chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(800.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-122. - Exceptions to minimum yard or lot coverage requirements. 
Every part of every yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground up, except as follows: 
(1)	In the RR, RA, R-1 through R-8, MH-1, MH-5, and RPUD classifications, except for the provisions of chapter 5, article 3, accessory structures shall not be located in front yards. However, accessory structures may be located in rear or side yards not less than five feet from the lot lines except for atypical lots and except where an accessory structure is 600 square feet or greater, in which case, an increased building setback of 15 feet is required from the side and rear property lines. However, garage apartments shall not be located in any required yard. On atypical lots, accessory structures may be located not less than five feet from the side lot line provided such structures, except for swimming pools, are not located in the side yard area between the rear lot line and the rearmost point of the principal structure. Accessory structures and swimming pools shall be located at least five feet from any side or rear lot line, but not in platted easements. 
(2)	In the RR, RA, R-1 through R-6, MH-1, MH-5, and RPUD classifications, on double-frontage lots or corner lots, accessory structures shall not be located in any yard abutting a street but may be located not less than five feet from any adjacent lot line. However, where an accessory structure is 600 square feet or greater an increased building setback of 15 feet is required from the side and rear property lines. 
(3)	In all zoning classifications, fences, walls and hedges may be located in yards to the extent permitted by chapter 5, articles I and III. However, on any corner lot, no structure or shrubbery shall cause any obstruction to vision of motorists in accordance with the provisions for obstructions to vision in division 4, article II of chapter 4. 
(4)	In all zoning classifications, off-street parking lots may be in yards to the extent permitted by sections 3-129 and 3-130, but not within buffers. 
(5)	In all zoning classifications, boathouses and boat docks may be located in waterfront yards but shall not be permitted within 15 feet of any side lot line, or its extension into the water. 
(6)	Moveable awnings may project into any yard for either 3½ feet or half of the yard, whichever is less. 
(7)	Chimneys, fireplaces, pilasters, roof overhangs, unenclosed balconies and unenclosed stairways may project into any yard for 3½ feet or half of the yard, whichever is less. 
(8)	Those exceptions permitted in section 3-133(2) pertaining to automobile service stations. 
(9)	In all residential classifications, where a lot is situated between two lots, each having a principal building which projects beyond the minimum front yard requirements for its classification, its minimum front yard requirement shall be the average of the distance between the front lines and the fronts of the principal buildings on the adjacent properties. 
(10)	If, because of prior zoning regulations, or because of a unified plan of development, or for any other reason, a majority of the houses already constructed in a particular residential neighborhood observe a setback greater than that which is required by these regulations, the average setback actually observed shall apply to all new construction in that neighborhood, anything in these regulations to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(801.00)), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 06-14 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 3-123. - Boat docks and boathouses. 
The following regulations shall apply in all residential zoning classifications: 
(1)	No boathouse extending into any waterway shall have more than 500 square feet area. The highest point of such structure shall not exceed 15 feet above the ordinary high-water mark in nontidal areas. 
(2)	No more than one boathouse may be erected on an individual waterfront lot. 
(3)	Boathouses shall not be used for dwelling purposes or contain any sleeping or living quarters. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(802.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-124. - Construction in platted easements. 
Principal and accessory structures, other than boat docks, boathouses and walkways, shall not be erected in platted easements. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(803.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-125. - Erection of more than one principal structure on a lot. 
In the RC, A-2, and A-3 classifications, more than one principal structure may be erected on a lot, but only one principal standard or manufactured single-family or mobile home dwelling may be erected. In R-7, R-8 and MH-1 classifications, more than one principal structure may be erected on a lot. In commercial, industrial, conservation and public use classifications, more than one principal structure may be erected on a lot, provided that the requirements of this Code shall be met for each principal structure as though it were on an individual lot, except hotels and multifamily structures. In all other classifications, only one principal structure may be erected on a lot. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(804.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-126. - Exceptions to height regulations. 
Spires, belfries, cupolas, clerestory windows, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, solar panels, windmills, chimneys, or other similar accessory structures customarily required to extend above the roof level may extend for an additional 25 feet above the maximum building height prescribed for the classification in which they are located. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(805.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-127. - Home occupations. 
The following regulations shall apply to home occupations: 
(1)	Home occupations shall be categorized as follows: 
a.	Class A. Class A home occupation shall be limited to office use or arts and handicrafts only on the premises of the home occupation where there are no supplier or client business visits to the premises permitted. The only supplies and equipment accessory to the home occupation that are permitted on the premises are those common to a small business office. No stock-in-trade or commodities shall be delivered or sold upon the premises. No business activities, other than office use by the occupants of the premises, shall take place on the premises. The home occupation shall not adversely affect nearby dwellings or properties through noise, vibrations, odors, fumes, fire hazards, light glare, electrical or radio wave interference, or the like. Class A home occupations shall be allowed as permitted uses in all resource corridor, residential, mobile home and agricultural classifications. 
b.	Class B. Home occupations not included in Class A. Class B home occupations shall be allowed in agricultural classifications, when approved as a special exception. Some examples of Class B home occupations are beauty shops and barbershops, music lessons, art, handicraft, ceramics classes, lawn mower repair services and dog grooming. 
(2)	Only persons who reside in the dwelling unit shall be employed or act as an independent contractor in said dwelling unit permitted as a Class A home occupation. Other employees or independent contractors of the Class A home occupation may be permitted; provided that said persons do not assemble upon the premises for any purpose relating to the business. For Class B home occupations, the City Council may allow, as a condition of the requisite special exception, one or more employees or independent contractors who are not residents of the dwelling unit. 
(3)	The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the residential use and shall under no circumstances change the residential character of the dwelling. 
(4)	The floor area devoted to the home occupation shall not exceed 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling. For Class B home occupations, not more than 500 square feet in an attached or detached garage of a dwelling, or not more than 500 square feet in any accessory building in an agricultural classification, may be used for a home occupation in lieu of floor space within the dwelling. 
(5)	There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the premises. No on-premises signs identifying the home occupation are permitted in conjunction with a Class A home occupation. Class B home occupations may have one nonilluminated on-premises sign, not to exceed 1½ square feet in area. Any sign shall be mounted flat against the wall of the building. 
(6)	All office equipment used in the home occupation on the premises shall be inside the dwelling or in enclosed structures and within the space limitations in subsection (4) of this section. No products shall be displayed on the premises. 
(7)	No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which creates fire hazards, electrical interference, noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odors detectable to the normal senses off the premises. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
(8)	No vehicular traffic shall be generated by the home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be generated by the dwelling unit. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 3-130(a), no more than one vehicle associated with the home occupation may be kept on the premises. Any need for parking generated by the conduct of the home occupation shall be met off the street and on the premises, but other than in the front yard. 
(9)	The home occupation shall not adversely affect the habitability or value of the surrounding properties nor alter the essentially residential character of the neighborhood. 
(10)	Any violation of these regulations may result in the revocation of any home occupation permit, in addition to any other remedy for such violation provided in this Code or by law. 
(11)	The issuance of a permit to engage in a home occupation in accordance with this Code shall not be deemed to be a change of zoning nor an official expression of opinion as to the proper zoning for the particular property. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(807.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-128. - Mobile home and mobile recreational vehicle park requirements. 
(a)	General requirements. The following regulations apply to both mobile home and mobile recreational vehicle parks: 
(1)	Recreation area. There shall be at least one active recreational area. It shall constitute at least five percent of the total land area of the project. The recreation area shall be easily accessible to all residents of the project. Any recreational building shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Guidelines for Hurricane Evacuation Shelter Selection ARC (American Red Cross) 4496, July 1992, as amended. 
(2)	Internal streets width. Required paving for two-way streets with no parking on street: 20 feet. An additional ten feet of right-of-way shall be provided if parking on one side of the street is permitted only. An additional 20 feet of right-of-way shall be provided if parking on both sides of the street is permitted. 
a.	The additional right-of-way for parking purposes as herein provided is required to be paved. 
b.	Streets shall be constructed of materials which meet the specifications of this Code. 
(3)	Project entrances and exits. Entrances and exits shall be limited in number and, when combined, shall be separated with a landscaped median strip not less than five feet wide. There shall be no direct vehicle access from any space to any exterior street. 
(4)	Water supply, sewage disposal and garbage and refuse handling. All mobile home and recreational vehicle parks shall comply with this Code regarding water supply and sewage disposal and the applicable provisions of the Florida Administrative Code regarding garbage and refuse handling. 
(5)	Landscape buffer requirements. Landscaped buffer areas meeting the requirements of articles I and V of chapter 5 shall be constructed. 
(6)	Project perimeter setback. No structure shall be located within 30 feet of the project's perimeter. 
(7)	Final site plan development order required. A final site plan development order for new parks and expansion of existing parks, meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4, shall have been issued prior to commencement of construction. Prior to issuance of any building permit for any sale of the mobile homes in the park, construction of the required improvements shall have been completed in accordance with division 5, article II of chapter 4. 
(b)	Additional requirements for recreational vehicle parks. 
(1)	Minimum project size: ten acres. 
(2)	Maximum recreational vehicle spaces at eight dwelling units per acre. 
(3)	Minimum recreational vehicle space size: 
Space area: 1,500 square feet. 
Space width: 30 feet. 
(4)	Project perimeter setback: No recreational vehicle space, campsite or structure shall be located within 30 feet of the project perimeter. 
(5)	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(6)	Site-built cabins: one unit per 20 recreational vehicle or campsite spaces. In addition, the following requirements shall apply: Said cabins shall contain no plumbing, cooking or sanitary facilities, and contain a maximum of 220 square feet. 
(7)	Park trailers are permitted and must comply with F.S. § 320.8325. 
(8)	Park models. 
(c)	Existing mobile home parks; compliance. Any subsequent construction or alteration that extends an existing mobile home park shall comply with the provisions of these regulations, including those provisions requiring a permit. No changes shall be made to the existing design of spaces or streets which increase their nonconformity. Subsequent changes to the basic design of existing spaces or streets which do not increase their nonconformity shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(809.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-129. - Off-street parking and loading. 
Where required by this Code, every use or structure shall have an adequate number of off-street parking and loading spaces for the use of occupants, employees, visitors, customers, patrons or suppliers. Except as noted in this section, division 4, article II of chapter 4 shall apply to the design and construction of all required off-street parking and loading areas. 
(1)	Surfacing, lighting and access. Except in the C, RC, A-2 and A-3, and P classifications, any required off-street parking drives, parking spaces and loading areas shall be surfaced with brick, asphalt, bituminous concrete and maintained in a smooth, well-graded condition. If lighted, no artificial lighting shall be directed upon adjacent property. All areas shall be designed for the safety and convenient access of pedestrians and vehicles. 
(2)	Location. If the required off-street parking spaces cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot on which the principal building or use is located, such required off-street parking spaces may be located on another lot, owned or leased by the owner of the lot on which the principal structure or use is located, provided that such spaces are located within 200 feet of the premises to be served, and are located only in one or more of the following classifications: B-2, B-4, B-5, B-6, B-9, and I-1. 
a.	Where opportunities exist for shared parking between generators having non-concurrent parking demand time frames, off-street parking spaces may be located within 400 feet of the premises to be served. Directional signage and parking signs shall be provided to assist patrons. 
(3)	Plan requirement. An off-street parking or loading space plan shall be submitted as follows: 
a.	For single-family and duplex uses, off-street parking plans shall be shown on the plot plans submitted with an application for a building permit. The plot plan shall accurately illustrate the number and location of parking spaces and driveways. 
b.	For all other uses, an off-street parking and loading space plan meeting the requirements of chapter 4, division 4, section 4-90 shall be submitted and approved during the site plan review process of this Code. 
(4)	Design and location requirements for off-street parking areas. Off-street parking areas shall be designed and located to meet the following requirements: 
a.	For single-family and duplex uses, each off-street parking space shall be located on the premises which it serves; have minimum dimensions of ten feet in width by 19 feet in depth; not be located in any front yard except on a driveway but may be located within any garage or carport on the premises; and/or may be located within any side or rear yard but not closer than five feet to any side or rear lot line, but not in any platted easements. Each such space must be accessible from a paved driveway connected to the street providing primary access to the premises. 
b.	For all other uses, off-site parking and loading areas shall be designed and located according to the requirements of this chapter and the applicable provisions of chapter 4. 
_____ 
(5)	Off-street parking spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined from the following table. Numbers for any use not specifically mentioned shall be the same as for the use most similar to the one sought. Fractional spaces shall be rounded up to the closest whole number. In houses of worship or other places of assembly where occupants sit on seats without dividing arms, each 18 linear inches of such seat shall be counted as one seat. 
The minimum and maximum number of parking spaces required for any use not specifically mentioned, shall be determined by the Planning Administrator or his or her designee based upon data from the Transportation Engineers Parking Generation Manual, from publications and data from the American Planning Association or the Urban Land Institute, from studies using ITE recommended methodology and other professionally acceptable sources. 
Use 	Number of Parking Spaces 
Amusement centers (arcades, skating rinks, miniature golf and similar uses) 	1 per each 250 sq. ft. of area within enclosed buildings, plus 1 space for 3 persons the outdoor facilities are designed for, at maximum capacity 
Automotive, boat, motorcycle, mobile home and recreational vehicle sales 	1 per 500 sq. ft. of GFA*; 1 per each employee on the largest shift; 2 per service bay 
Automobile service stations with retail sale, Types A and B 	1 space per gas pump, plus 3.6 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, plus 2 for each grease rack or other working bay, if applicable 
Automobile service stations, Types A and B 	1 for each gas pump, plus 2 for each grease rack or working bay 
Ball park or stadium (other than Little League) 	1 for each 3 seats, or 1 for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area, whichever is greater 
Banks and similar financial institutions 	1 per 275 sq. ft. of GFA* plus 4 reservoir spaces per drive through window and drive thru ATM 
Barbershops, beauty salons and cosmetic treatments 	2 per station or chair for a barber shop and 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of GFA for beauty salons 
Baseball/softball 	38 spaces per field 
Basketball court 	5 spaces per court 
Bed and breakfast homestay 	1 for each guest room plus 2 per dwelling unit 
Boat ramp 	30 spaces per ramp, 15 spaces per boat lane 
Bowling alleys 	3 for each alley, plus spaces required for other uses such as consumption of food and beverages or other recreational uses, plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift 
Commercial uses not listed 	1 per 275 sq. ft. of GFA* 
Community center or recreation center 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of GFA* 
Concession building 	1 space per concessionaire or employee 
Day care center 	1 per 10 children served, plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift, plus a pickup and drop-off area equal to 1 space per 25 children served 
Duplex and multifamily dwelling 	2 per dwelling unit with 2 or more bedroom units; 1.5 per each one bedroom unit; add guest parking at 1 space per 5 units 
Equipped playground 	10 spaces per site 
Fishing pier 	1 space per 50 lineal feet 
Furniture and flooring store 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA* 
General, nonmedical, offices 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of GFA* or one parking space for each 220 sq. ft. of gross floor space excluding areas of common public use and circulation. In computing the latter requirement the exclusion is to be used for public stairs, elevators, lobbies, arcades and atriums but not for common restrooms, mechanical areas or hallways beyond 20 feet from the lobby area 
Golf or country clubs 	3 spaces per golf hole, 1 for each 3 seats, or 1 for each 200 sq. ft. of GFA*, whichever is greater 
Group homes 	1 for each 5 persons plus 1 for each employee on the largest shift 
Handball/racquetball court 	2 spaces per court 
Hardware store, home improvement stores 	1 per 350 sq. ft. of GFA* 
Health club, Fitness Club/Gym 	6 spaces, per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA* 
Hospital 	1 for each employee on the largest shift, plus ½ for each bed, and ½ for each staff doctor 
House of worship, auditoriums, funeral homes and other places of assembly not listed 	1 space for each 4 seats in the principal place of assembly or 1 space for every 50 sq. ft. of seating area where there are no fixed seats 
Industrial uses 	1 space for each bay, plus 1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA* 
Library, art gallery 	1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of GFA* 
Manufacturing industries 	1 for each employee on the largest shift 
Marinas 	for each boat slip, plus 8 boat-trailer spaces for each boat launching ramp 
Medical offices, dental offices, clinics and laboratories 	1 per 225 sq. ft. of GFA* 
Mini-warehouses 	1 for every 10 storage cubicles or units 
Mixed use projects, Village Center Overlay by special exception 	Shared parking is permitted when data is provided demonstrating a shared parking model based on professionally accepted sources and where generators have non-concurrent parking demand timeframes 
Mobile home dwellings 	2 per dwelling unit 
Mobile home parks 	2 per dwelling unit, plus any additional spaces reasonably required for accessory buildings or structures 
Motels or hotels 	1 for each unit, plus 1 for each 5 employees, in addition to spaces required for accessory uses 
Motor vehicle repair 	1 per 350 sq. ft. of GFA* and 2 spaces per service bay 
Multipurpose court 	5 spaces per court 
Multipurpose field 	8 spaces per acre 
Municipal, county, state, federal and community buildings 	4 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA* 
Nursing homes, convalescent facilities and assisted living facilities 	1 for each 4 beds, and 1 for each employee and/or visiting doctor on the largest shift 
Open "free play" area 	8 spaces per acre 
Picnic area 	1 space per table 
Pool halls and billiard parlors 	2 for each pool or billiard table 
Primitive camping 	1 space per site 
Professional office 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. of GFA* 
Restaurants, Types A and B, nightclubs or bars 	1 per 4 seats or 1 for each 200 sq. ft. of GFA* for take-outs, plus 1 space for each employee on the largest shift 
Restaurants (fast food) 	6 reservoir spaces per service lane with a minimum of 3 spaces behind the order station or menu, plus 10 spaces per 1,000 GFA* 
Retail sales and service establishments 	1 per 275 sq. ft. of GFA* 
Senior housing 	1.25 spaces per unit plus 1 guest space per every five units 
Schools: private elementary schools 	1 for each faculty member, plus 1 for each employee 
Schools: private high school 	1 for each faculty member, plus 1 for each employee, plus 1 space for each 10 students 
Schools: colleges or other institutions of higher learning, trade/vocational 	1 for each staff member and employee, plus 1 for each 3 students 
Shopping centers 	4 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA* Garden center area shall be included 
Shuffleboard court 	2 spaces per court 
Single-family dwellings 	2 per dwelling unit 
Swimming pool (50m) 	1 per 200 sq. ft. of pool surface area, plus 1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of building area in accessory structures in excess of 1,000 sq. ft. 
Tennis court 	2 spaces per court 
Theaters 	1 for each 4 seats, plus 1 for each employee 
Veterinary clinic 	1 space per 275 sq. ft. GFA* 
Volleyball 	6 spaces per court 
Warehousing (commercial and industrial) 	1 for each employee, plus 1 for each 1,500 sq. ft. of storage 
 
*GFA—Gross floor area 
(6)	Required off-street loading. Off-street loading areas are required in order to provide adequate space for the loading and unloading of goods, without interfering with the public use of streets, or off-street parking spaces. Off-street parking spaces may not be used to meet off-street loading requirements. 
(7)	Off-street loading space dimensional requirements. The dimensions, design, and location of all off-street loading spaces shall meet the requirements of division 4, article II of chapter 4. 
(8)	Minimum off-street loading spaces. The minimum number of off-street loading spaces shall be determined from the following table: 
Use Category 	Floor Area 

in Square Feet 	Loading Space 

Required 
Retail sales and services, restaurants 
(Types A and B) or similar uses 	3,000—10,000 
10,001—20,000 
Each additional 20,000 square feet or fraction 	1 
2 
1 
  		
Offices, hotels, hospitals, nursing homes, 
adult congregate living facilities, multifamily 
dwellings, or similar uses 	30,000—100,000 square feet 
each additional 100,000 square feet or fraction 	1 
1 
  		
Arenas, auditoriums, stadiums, convention 
centers, exhibition halls, museums, or 
similar uses 	10,000—50,000 
50,001—100,000 
Over 100,000 	1 
2 
4 
  		
Any industrial use and any wholesale, retail 
and commercial storage facility and solid 
waste transfer facility 	15,000—40,000 
40,001—100,00 
100,001—160,000 
Each additional 80,000 square feet or fraction 	1 
2 
3 
1 
 
_____ 
(9)	Minimum requirements for off-street handicapped parking. Except for standard and manufactured single-family dwellings, mobile homes, and two-family standard or manufactured dwellings, where off-street parking spaces are required by this Code, the number to be reserved for the handicapped shall be determined from the following table: 
Total Number of 

Off-Street Parking 

   Spaces 	No. of Spaces 
Required To Be 
Reserved for Handicapped 
Up to 25 ..... 	 1 
26 to 50 ..... 	 2 
51 to 75 ..... 	 3 
76 to 100 ..... 	 4 
101 to 150 ..... 	 5 
151 to 200 ..... 	 6 
201 to 300 ..... 	 7 
301 to 400 ..... 	 8 
401 to 500 ..... 	 9 
501 to 1,000 ..... 	2% of total 
Over 1,000 ..... 	20 
Plus, for each 100 over 1,000 ..... 	 1 
 
(10)	Bicycle parking. Each of the following uses shall be required to provide parking spaces for bicycles: parks/recreation areas, convenience stores, restaurants (Types A and B), game rooms, pharmacies, shopping centers (regional, community and neighborhood), and any employment facility (i.e., office, industrial) with at least 50 employees. The minimum number of bicycle spaces to be provided shall be determined from the following table: 
 Required 
Number of 
Automobile 
Spaces 	Minimum Number 
of Required 
Bicycle Spaces 
 1—40 	2 
41—60 	3 
61—80 	4 
81—100 	5 
Over 100 	6 plus 1 for each 20 automobile parking spaces over 100, provided that the maximum number of required bicycle spaces shall not exceed 20 
 
  
All bicycle parking shall be located so as to not conflict with automobile or pedestrian traffic flow. 
(11)	Mass transit requirements. Community and regional shopping centers shall be designed to accommodate buses for convenient and safe boarding and unloading of passengers as well as maintaining a safe traffic pattern. Shopping centers of greater than 100,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area shall provide a passenger shelter or covered benches. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(810.00)), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-130. - Parking and storage of vehicles, shelters or watercraft. 
(a)	Large vehicles. 
(1)	No truck tractor, semitrailer, commercial bus, cutaway van, (except for those allowed in section 3-130(b)(6)), chassis-cab truck, or any other truck with a gross vehicle weight greater than 10,500 pounds (as determined by the greater of the vehicle registration or the manufacturer's specification) shall be parked, except while being actively loaded or unloaded for legitimate commercial purpose, in the RR, R-1 through R-8, MH-1, MH-2, MH-5, and the residential use areas of PUD classifications. 
(2)	The parking of truck tractors and/or semitrailers is prohibited in the B-2, B-3, B-4, B-6, B-7, B-9 and BPUDs and commercial use areas of RPUDs classifications unless said vehicles are accessory to or associated with the business on the premises. 
(b)	Mobile recreational shelters and vehicles. Mobile recreational shelters and vehicles, utility trailers, watercraft, and other trailers are permitted as an accessory use in all zoning classifications provided: 
(1)	They shall have a current license tag or validation sticker. 
(2)	The ground beneath shall be kept free from debris, including excessive weed growth. 
(3)	They shall not be parked or stored within a street or public right-of-way. 
(4)	All wastewater line caps shall be secured at all times in a manner to preclude any leakage from such vehicles, shelters, or watercraft onto a lot or street. 
(5)	They shall not be connected to water, sewer, or electric lines or be used for residential purpose, except in a recreational vehicle park. 
(6)	Park trailers shall only be parked in a recreational vehicle park. 
(c)	Mobile recreational shelters or vehicles in residential. Except as otherwise provided herein, mobile recreational shelters and vehicles, utility trailers, watercraft and other trailers are permitted as an accessory use in the RR, R-1 through R-6, MH-5, and the single- and two-family residential areas of the PUD classification provided that, in addition to the requirements of section 3-130(b), the following additional conditions are also met: 
(1)	They shall be parked or stored in full compliance with all requirements for accessory structures, except that pickup covers when appropriately mounted on a vehicle shall not be restricted to the parking requirements of this section. 
(2)	Mobile recreational shelters or vehicles and watercraft may also be temporarily parked on the driveway in the front yard of the principal structure for trip preparations, loading, unloading, and cleanup, for a maximum of 36 hours per week. 
(3)	Mobile recreational vehicles and cutaway vans may be parked on the driveway in the front yard of the principal structure when the occupant of the principal structure has a disability which may require facilities in the recreational vehicle or cutaway van, and if the occupant has received a handicapped parking decal from the state for the vehicle. 
(d)	Designated recreational parking. Mobile recreational shelters and vehicles, utility trailers, watercraft and other trailers are permitted to be parked or stored in the MH-1, R-7, R-8 and the multifamily areas of the PUD classifications; provided that, in addition to the provisions of section 3-130(b), they are located within areas designated for said use as depicted by the final site development plan (except that pickup covers when appropriately mounted on a vehicle shall not be restricted to the parking requirements of this section). 
(e)	Residential parking. In the RR, R-1 through the R-6, MH-5, and the single- and two-family residential use areas of PUD classifications, motor vehicles, mobile recreational shelters or vehicles, trailers, and watercraft shall not be parked anywhere within that portion of the lot lying across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the principal structure, except on driveways. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(811.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-131. - Environmental standards. 
These environmental standards shall apply in all classifications: 
(1)	Air pollution. There shall be no emission of fumes, odors, vapors, gases, chemicals, smoke, dust, dirt, fly ash, or any particulate matter in violation of applicable state standards. 
(2)	Water pollution and sewage control. There shall be no discharge of liquid or solid wastes into any public or private sewage disposal system, or into or on the ground, or into any stream, waterway, water body or drainage canal, nor any accumulation of any liquid or solid wastes, in violation of the applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, chapter 4 of this Code, or applicable state standards. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(812.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-132. - Portable shelters. 
(a)	Portable shelters shall be permitted to be assembled and emplaced upon properties within the city without the need for application or receipt of a use or development permit, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)	Portable shelters may be assembled and emplaced by lot owners only upon those properties authorized for single-family residential uses and utilized for single-family residential purposes. 
(2)	Portable shelters shall be treated under the Code as accessory structures to the extent that such treatment does not conflict with treatment under this section and must adhere to all applicable setback, yard, lot coverage, floor area and building height requirements. 
(3)	Under no circumstances shall a portable shelter exceed a total coverage area of 500 square feet or be grafted, connected or otherwise physically linked to a residence, fence, shed, carport, or other structure. 
(4)	Any portable shelter that is emplaced upon a property for a period of 180 days or more must be securely anchored to the ground in a manner so as to maintain the emplacement of its frame during adverse weather conditions, including severe thunderstorms and hurricanes. Such anchoring shall not be construed to alter the portability of a portable shelter pursuant to subsection 3-132(8) or otherwise change such device's definition within the Code. 
(5)	Portable shelters may be emplaced in the side yard or rear yard of a property; however, in no event shall a portable shelter be emplaced in the front yard of a property. 
(6)	Portable shelters emplaced upon a property shall be maintained in sound and serviceable condition. Portable shelters with bent, broken, cracked, crooked or otherwise compromised frames or wholly or partially detached, torn, tattered, or threadbare tarpaulins must be repaired, replaced or removed. Tarpaulins shall be of a uniform color and texture and, if patched, must be patched in such a manner so as to preserve the uniform appearance of the tarpaulin. 
(7)	Portable shelters authorized pursuant to this section shall not be utilized for human habitation or occupation, regardless of whether such habitation or occupation is temporary or permanent. 
(8)	Portable shelters must be portable in that they must be of relatively uncomplicated construction and capable of being easily disassembled, moved, and reassembled within a period of one hour or less. 
(9)	At no time shall more than one portable shelter be emplaced on a single property pursuant to this section. 
(b)	Property owners who have one or more portable shelters or similar devices emplaced upon their property or properties at the time this section takes effect shall have 180 days from the effective date of this section to: 
(1)	Bring such devices into compliance with this section; 
(2)	Remove and properly dispose of such devices; 
(3)	Replace such devices with substitute devices that are compliant with this section; or 
(4)	Have such device permitted and placed pursuant to applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § II, 5-7-2008)  
Sec. 3-133. - Additional regulations for certain permitted principal uses. 
The following additional regulations shall apply to specific permitted principal uses in all classifications where so permitted: 
(1)	Adult entertainment establishments. 
a.	Prohibited locations. 
1.	Zoning. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article or any provision of the City's planning, land development and zoning regulations, no person shall propose, cause or permit the operation of, or enlargement of, an adult entertainment establishment which, while in operation of, or enlargement of, an adult entertainment establishment unless the establishment would or will be located in an industrial zoned district where adult entertainment establishments are an expressly permitted use. 
2.	Distance minimums. In addition to the zoning requirements set forth in subsection (1)a of this section, an adult entertainment establishment shall not be allowed to open, operate or be enlarged within any of the following distances: 
(i)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 400 feet of any area of the county or the City classified as C, P, RC, A-2, A-3, RA, RR, R-1 through R-8, MH-1 through MH-5 or PUD, unless the adult entertainment establishment is a part of the PUD. 
(ii)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any preexisting adult entertainment establishment. 
(iii)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 400 feet of any religious institution, educational institution, public park or recreational facility or educational institution bus stop. 
3.	Enlargement. In this subsection, the term "enlargement" includes, but is not limited to, increasing the floor size of the establishment by more than ten percent. 
4.	Supplemental to alcoholic beverage regulations. The zoning and distance requirements of subsections (1)a.1, 2 of this section are independent of and do not supersede the distance requirements for alcoholic beverage establishments which may be contained in other laws, rules, ordinances or regulations. 
b.	Measurement of distance. The distance from the proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment mentioned herein to any area of the county or the City classified in subsection (1)a.2 of this section or to any preexisting adult entertainment establishment or to any religious institutional, educational institution, public park or recreational facility or educational institution bus stop shall be measured by drawing a straight line between the closest property lines of the proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment and the other zoning categories or uses identified in subsection (1) of this section. 
c.	Nonconforming uses. When a nonconforming use of an adult entertainment establishment has been discontinued for 90 consecutive days or more, the nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned and the future use of the premises or site shall revert to only those uses permitted on the site on which the establishment is located. 
d.	Variances. The City Manager or his designee is authorized to recommend a variance from the distance and zoning requirements of this article, pursuant to the procedures and criteria set forth for other variance requests as set forth in this Code and the City Council is authorized to make a determination on the City Manager or his designee's recommendation pursuant to this Code. 
(2)	Automobile service stations. The following regulations shall apply to automobile service stations, Types A, B and C. 
a.	Location of principal and accessory structures. No accessory structures shall be erected closer than ten feet to a street or within the landscape buffer area, whichever is wider. If accessory structures are erected within any front yard, they shall be removed before the property is converted to a use other than an automobile service station. 
b.	Points of access. The number of points of access for one automobile service station shall be governed by chapter 4 of this Code. 
c.	Landscape buffer requirements. Where lots to be used for service stations abut any property zoned for residential use, a landscaped buffer area meeting the requirements of article I of chapter 5 shall be constructed. 
d.	Permanent storage of materials, merchandise and equipment. All materials, merchandise and equipment, other than motor vehicle fuels, shall be stored within the principal building. 
e.	Trash facilities. Adequate, enclosed trash storage facilities shall be provided on the site. 
f.	Parking of vehicles or vehicles offered for sale or rent at Types A and B stations only. 
1.	Wreckers, service or customer vehicles, or vehicles offered for sale or rent, may be parked on the premises but shall be parked in a manner that will not create a traffic hazard or interfere with any vehicular maneuvering area necessary for gasoline pump areas, service bays, or with any required off-street parking spaces. No more than two motor vehicles may be offered for sale on the premises at any one time unless otherwise authorized by the provisions of this Code, and in conformity with all applicable state regulations. 
2.	A truck or trailer rental service, established primarily for the transporting of household goods, shall be permitted, subject to the following: 
i.	The required minimum lot area shall be increased by 480 square feet for the parking of each rental truck proposed, and 50 square feet for each rental trailer proposed. 
ii.	On corner lots, no vehicles offered for sale or rent shall be parked within a yard abutting a street. 
(3)	Community residential homes. 
a.	Dwellings of six or fewer residents which otherwise meet the definition of a community residential home are permitted principal uses and structures in all single-family and multiple-family zoning classifications and residential areas of PUD; provided that such homes comply with all appropriate requirements of this Code and are not located within a radius of 1,000 feet of another existing such home with six or fewer residents. The sponsoring agency or the state department of children and family services (CFS) shall notify, in writing, the City Manager at the time of occupancy that the home is licensed by the CFS. 
b.	When a premises that is classified as R-7, R-8, or is within a multiple-family residential use area of a PUD has been selected by a sponsoring agency as a site for a community residential home of seven to 14 residents, then said agency shall provide notice to the City consistent with the requirements of F.S. ch. 419. 
(4)	Package sewage treatment plants and/or package water treatment plants. 
a.	Package sewage treatment plants may be permitted provided that they are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and meet all applicable state requirements and the following additional requirements: 
1.	Package sewage treatment plant structures shall not be located closer than 50 feet to adjoining lot lines. 
2.	Evaporation/percolation ponds shall not be located within 100 feet of adjoining lot lines, streets rights-of-way, the mean high-water mark of water bodies, or bulkhead lines. 
3.	Subsurface drainfields shall not be located within 50 feet of bulkhead lines or the mean high-water mark of the water bodies. 
4.	When spray irrigation fields are used, the minimum distance between said fields and adjoining lot lines, street rights-of-way, the mean high-water mark of water bodies, or bulkhead lines shall be determined on a case-by-case basis after due consideration of prevailing wind direction, average wind velocity, or other conditions that might carry sprayed effluent onto adjoining premises. 
5.	The package plant structures shall, in the absence of an appropriate natural vegetation screen, be visually screened from adjoining properties or street rights-of-way with an appropriate fence, decorative masonry wall, or plant materials. 
6.	Plants shall be designed to be transformed into a pump station when public central wastewater facilities are constructed to serve the area; provided that said availability is to be not more than ten years distant from the issuance of the development order/permit, except as provided for in subsection (4)a.7 of this section. 
7.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (4)a.6 of this section, a package plant intended to correct any existing problem of public health, safety or welfare, may be permitted. 
b.	Package water treatment plants may be permitted providing they are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and meet all applicable state requirements and the following additional requirements: 
1.	Package water treatment plant structures shall not be located less than 50 feet from adjoining lot lines. 
2.	Package water treatment plant structures shall, in the absence of an appropriate natural vegetation screen, be visually screened from adjoining properties or street rights-of-way with an appropriate fence, decorative masonry wall or plant material. 
(5)	Publicly owned parks and recreation areas. Location of principal and accessory structures. No buildings, bleachers, dugouts, restrooms, concession stands, off-street parking areas or other structures shall be located less than 20 feet from any property line. Edges of playing fields and courts shall be located no closer than 20 feet from any property line. 
(6)	Publicly owned or regulated water supply wells. All publicly owned or regulated water supply wells must be permitted by the Saint Johns River Water Management District, and meet the requirements of this Code. 
(7)	Outside sales. Retail sales from other than a store, shop, or similar building may only be permitted when located on the same lot as an existing retail business that is operating from an approved building; provided that the outside sales are subordinate and accessory to the existing business, it is conducted only by the owner or lessee of the premises, it is limited to the goods and services normally offered by the owner or lessee, it is consistent with the zoning for that parcel, it does not hinder required access to the premises, and it does not reduce the parking spaces to less than the required minimum. Outside sales on public rights-of-way, landscape buffers and vacant lots are prohibited. Firework sales are not permitted in the Village Center Overlay Classification. 
(8)	Marinas. The following standards shall apply to marinas: 
a.	Contain sufficient uplands to accommodate support facilities such as adequate parking, dry storage, work areas, stormwater management facilities, and other nonwater dependent uses. 
b.	Facilities shall be designed to maximize or improve water circulation patterns and shall not adversely affect existing circulation patterns. 
c.	Any buffer zones established by FDEP's Shellfish Environmental Assessment Section shall be maintained and where necessary, enhanced or expanded. 
d.	Prior to the operation of any new marina fueling facility or expansion of an existing facility, a fuel management/spill contingency plan shall be approved by the applicable governing authority. The plan shall describe methods to be used in dispensing fuel and all the procedures, methods, and materials to be used in the event of a spill. 
e.	In the event new boat slips are constructed, sewer pump-out service and facilities shall be available and accessible. 
(9)	Day care centers. Day care centers are permitted provided that they are designed and constructed according to the applicable state standards and the following. 
a.	Off-street parking meeting the requirements of section 3-129 is provided. 
b.	Owner/operator possesses a valid license to operate a child care facility from the Florida Department of Children and Families. 
(10)	Outdoor display of retail merchandise. All businesses which engage in outdoor display of merchandise shall comply with the following. 
a.	Outdoor display shall only include incidental outdoor display items, consisting of a small sample of merchandise or decorative items, placed outdoor adjacent to the responsible business, which represent or complement the goods and services sold or provided by the responsible business. Vendors operating independently from the indoor business shall not be permitted. 
b.	Display items shall only be placed outdoors during the time the responsible business is open to the public and shall be removed prior to the close of business each day. 
c.	Display items shall at all times be maintained in a safe, sound, and visually attractive condition. The business owner shall be responsible for continuously supervising the safe, sound, and visually attractive condition as well as the appropriate placement of the display items. 
d.	Display items shall only be located adjacent to the building of the responsible business no further than ten feet from the building walls of the business. Merchandise cannot be affixed to buildings or hung on fences, utility poles or vehicles. No tents or canopies can be placed over the display area. 
e.	One item per every five linear feet of store frontage shall be permitted to be displayed and the total display area shall not exceed 100 square feet. 
f.	Display items shall not extend into the safe line-of-sight at intersections, as determined by the City Engineer. 
g.	Display items shall not encroach into landscape areas. 
h.	The display items shall not obstruct any entries, exits, permitted signs, mailboxes, utilities, public seating, public safety measures, or interfere with ADA compliance or pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
i.	Temporary signs cannot be added to the display area. 
j.	The merchandise cannot be displayed on mannequins, body forms, or similar devices. 
k.	City staff shall have the authority to request that item(s) be removed from public or private property if it is felt the item(s) constitute a potentially hazardous distraction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic; constitute a potential health or safety hazard; are not appropriately maintained or located; are excessive in size or quantity; or compromise the public peace, morals or welfare. If City staff request item(s) be removed, the business owner shall cause the item(s) to be removed immediately. 
l.	Business owners shall indicate on their City Business Tax Receipt (BTR) application whether they intend to engage in outdoor display of retail merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(814.00)), 11-3-1999; Ord. No. 22-02, § 3, 12-11-2002; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-134. - Special exceptions. 
The following uses or structures are permitted as special exceptions only when listed as permitted special exceptions in Chapter 3, Article II, Overlay Districts, and Chapter 3, Article III, Division 3, Zoning Classifications: 
(1)	Public utility uses and structures. 
a.	Unless waived by the City Council, a landscape buffer meeting the requirements of article I of chapter 5 is required. 
b.	A final site plan meeting the requirements of division 3, article II of chapter 4 is required. 
c.	Package sewage treatment plants may be permitted; provided that they are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and meet all applicable state requirements and the following additional requirements: 
1.	Package sewage treatment plant structures shall not be located closer than 50 feet to adjoining lot lines. 
2.	Evaporation/percolation ponds shall not be located within 100 feet of adjoining lot lines, streets rights-of-way, the mean high-water mark or water bodies, or bulkhead lines. 
3.	Subsurface drainfields shall not be located within 50 feet of bulkhead lines or the mean high-water mark of the water bodies. 
4.	When spray irrigation fields are used, the minimum distance between said fields and adjoining lot lines, street rights-of-way, the mean high-water mark of water bodies, or bulkhead lines shall be determined on a case-by-case basis after due consideration of prevailing wind direction, average wind velocity, or other conditions that might carry sprayed effluent onto adjoining premises. 
5.	The package plant structures shall, in the absence of an appropriate natural vegetation screen, be visually screened from adjoining properties or street rights-of-way with an appropriate fence, decorative masonry wall, or plant materials. 
6.	Plants shall be designed to be transformed into a pump station when public central wastewater facilities are constructed to serve the area, provided that said availability is to be not more than ten years distant from the issuance of the development order/permit, except as provided for in subsection (1)c.7 of this section. 
7.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1)c.6 of this section, a package plant intended to correct any existing problem of public health, safety or welfare may be permitted. 
d.	Package water treatment plants may be permitted providing they are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and meet all applicable state requirements and the following additional requirements: 
1.	Package water treatment plant structures shall not be located less than 50 feet from adjoining lot lines. 
2.	Package water treatment plant structures shall, in the absence of an appropriate natural vegetation screen, be visually screened from adjoining properties or street rights-of-way with an appropriate fence, decorative masonry wall or plant material. 
(2)	Golf courses, country clubs, swim clubs, tennis clubs. Golf courses, country clubs, swim clubs, tennis clubs and similar uses are permitted, provided: 
a.	The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 percent. 
b.	No dwelling units shall be provided on the premises except for living quarters for a resident manager, watchman or caretaker. Those living quarters, if any, shall be constructed as part of the principal building. 
c.	No principal or accessory building, swimming pool or tennis court shall be located less than 50 feet from any lot line. 
d.	No outdoor loudspeaker or call system shall be audible on adjoining property. 
e.	All artificial lights shall be directed away from adjoining properties. 
f.	Unless waived by the City Council, off-street parking areas meeting the requirements of section 3-129. 
(3)	Houses of worship, cemeteries, parochial or private schools. Houses of worship, cemeteries and parochial or private schools are permitted, provided: 
a.	No principal or accessory building shall be located less than 50 feet from any property line in agricultural and residential zoning districts. Principal and accessory buildings for parochial and private schools shall also be located at least 50 feet from any property line in all applicable zoning districts. 
b.	Unless waived by the City Council, off-street parking areas meeting the requirements of section 3-129. 
c.	Cemeteries shall comply with F.S. ch. 497, including the minimum acreage requirements and any other applicable governmental regulations. 
(4)	Miniwarehouses. Miniwarehouses shall be designed and operated according to the following standards: 
a.	No garage sales shall be conducted on the premises. No servicing or repair of motor vehicles, watercraft, trailers, lawn mowers and other similar equipment shall be conducted on the premises. 
b.	There shall be a minimum of 30 feet between warehouse buildings for driveway, parking and fire lane purposes. 
(5)	Day care centers. Day care centers shall be designed and constructed according to the applicable state standards and the following: 
a.	The intensity of the facility (e.g., number of users—children or adults) shall be compatible with the density and character of the surrounding residential area. 
b.	In addition to the required numbers of parking spaces, day care centers must also provide dropoff and pickup spaces, separate from parking spaces at a rate of one space per 25 users. 
(6)	Hours of operation. The hours of operation shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(7)	Permanent and temporary asphalt and cement batching plants. Permanent and temporary asphalt and cement batching plants shall be permitted, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.	Each application shall be accompanied by a sketch plan at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, showing the location of the facilities with the proper legal description and such other information as may be necessary to explain the proposed site and facilities operation. 
b.	The applicant shall submit a written report outlining the reasons for placing the batching facilities in the particular location and stating the duration of time for which the applicant intends to operate said batching facilities. Permission to locate and operate temporary batching facilities shall be granted for a period not to exceed 180 days. An additional extension of time not to exceed 180 days may be granted upon expiration of the time period initially granted if exceptional circumstances warrant it. 
c.	All batching facilities shall be located no closer than 150 feet to the nearest public road, and shall be located no closer than 100 feet to any perimeter property lines, and shall be located no closer than 300 feet to any existing residential dwelling. 
d.	All permitted materials shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner and shall be covered and/or wet down regularly so as to prevent debris from leaving the area of the site. 
e.	Routes of supply vehicles or material handling vehicles shall be arranged so as to minimize nuisances or hazards to existing residential neighborhoods or commercial businesses. 
f.	The City Council may limit the time of day during which the batching plant may be operated and may make such further conditions as would protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare. 
g.	If the plant is temporary, the City Council shall require a performance bond or surety bond conditional upon the removal of the facilities and restoration of the site to an acceptable condition at the time specified by the City Council. 
(8)	Junkyards. 
a.	No principal or accessory building shall be located less than 50 feet from any property line of the premises. 
b.	No junk shall be maintained less than 50 feet from any property line. 
c.	A solid fence or wall at least six feet in height shall completely surround the area of the premises used for placing or storing any of the junk. 
d.	Unless waived by the City Council, off-street parking areas meeting the requirements of section 3-129 and landscape buffer areas meeting the requirements of articles I and V of chapter 5 shall be constructed. 
e.	All liquid pollutants, including but not limited to petroleum derivatives, shall be contained in such a manner as to prevent said liquids/wastes from reaching the ground and any watercourse or water body. 
(9)	Bars with outside service and consumption of alcoholic beverages subject to the following. 
a.	Sufficiency of setbacks, screens, buffers and general amenities to preserve internal and external harmony and compatibility with uses inside and outside the proposed development and to control adverse effects of noise, lights, and other nuisances. 
b.	Sufficiency of delineation of outdoor portions of licensed premises from public rights-of-way, sidewalks and other public areas, including without limitation, use of fencing, screens or buffers. 
c.	The proposed use is compatible with the surrounding uses and outside services shall not negatively impact adjacent residential uses. 
d.	The designated space shall meet fire code and American Disability Act (ADA) requirements. 
e.	Area shall have direct access to the building containing the restaurant or to a sidewalk network and be placed in a visible location that is convenient for use by the general public. 
f.	The establishment shall carry liquor liability insurance at its own expense and liability. 
g.	There shall be adequate parking for the outside seating area. 
h.	License from Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco and Bureau of Licensing shall include outside service area. 
i.	A building permit shall be required for any exterior modifications to accommodate outside seating. 
(10)	Assisted living facilities, group homes (seven or more residents) and nursing homes. 
a.	The scale of the facility (e.g., number of residents) shall be compatible with the density and character of the surrounding residential area. 
b.	No principal or accessory building shall be located less than 45 feet from any property line. 
(11)	Private clubs. Private clubs are permitted provided: 
a.	The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 percent. 
b.	No principal or accessory building, swimming pool or tennis court shall be located less than 50 feet from any lot line. 
c.	No outdoor loudspeaker or call system shall be audible on adjoining property. 
d.	All artificial lights shall be directed away from adjoining properties. 
e.	Unless waived by the City Council, off-street parking areas meeting the requirements of section 3-129 and landscaped buffer areas meeting the requirements of article I of chapter 5 shall be constructed. 
(12)	Interstate commercial pole/pylon signs. A pole/pylon signs are permitted in the B-6 (Interstate Commercial) Zoning District on Dirksen Drive provided that it does not exceed 30 feet above ground level in height and has a maximum of one and one-half square feet of copy area for every linear foot of lot frontage or 150 square feet, whichever is less. 
(13)	Excavations. 
a.	A special exception is not required for the following activities: 
1.	Installation of utilities, provided a valid underground utility permit or right-of-way utilization permit has been issued. 
2.	Grading and filling in conjunction with commercial, industrial or residential construction, provided a development order or permit has been obtained. 
3.	Foundations and building pads for any building or structure, provided that a valid building permit has been issued by the growth management department. 
4.	Minor landscaping projects, provided they do not encroach in floodprone areas as depicted on the flood insurance rate maps, promulgated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or change the natural drainage pattern of the ground surface at the property line. 
5.	Swimming pool construction, provided a building permit has been issued for construction of the pool. 
6.	For excavations relating to the accessory use of land and designed to be filled upon completion of excavation, such as septic tanks, graves, etc. 
7.	Borrow pits designated or controlled by any federal or state agency or local government; or any federal or state agency or local government created by law to provide for mosquito control or drainage, or any drainage district created pursuant to Laws of Fla. ch. 298. 
8.	Where not otherwise governed by zoning requirements, any leveling of land within the confines of a single tract of land where the plans for such leveling are authorized by the Land Development Code. If such plans are disapproved by the Land Development Code, the applicant may, upon application, appeal such decision directly to the City Council. 
9.	Excavations of leveling for private drives to provide ingress or egress authorized by the Land Development Code. 
10.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (13)7 of this section to the contrary, excavated material from a tailwater recovery system or farm pond may be transferred from one parcel of land to a noncontiguous parcel when such system is designed to meet the standards and specifications of the United States Department of Agricultural Soil Conservation Service, or designed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. Said tailwater recovery system is defined as a facility to collect, store and transport irrigation tailwater in a farm irrigation distribution system. In order to qualify for said exemption, the design for said system shall be approved by the St. Johns River Water Management District or U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service and submitted for authorization by the enforcement official. Each tailwater recovery system must be completed within 180 days of receiving approval. 
11.	All projects funded by the county department of public works and the state department of transportation. These projects would include but not be limited to borrow pits, road-building activities and installation of utilities. 
12.	Farm ponds. Accessory ponds established in conjunction with an agricultural use and which are three-fourths of an acre or less ins size. The boundaries of excavation are to be wholly within one owner's property. Off-site drainage is not to be affected. Farm ponds are to be constructed to the standards and specifications promulgated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, and shall be approved by that agency. The landowner shall forward to the growth management department a copy of the approved plans prior to construction of the pond. Each pond must be completed within 180 days of receiving soil conservation service approval. Farm ponds shall be permitted at a rate of not more than one pond per ten acres of land. 
b.	The following requirements and conditions must be met for any nonexempt excavation. A nonexempt excavation requires a special exception to this Code and issuance of a permit in accordance with the final site plan procedures of division 3, article II of chapter 4, Land Development Code. 
1.	Each application for a special exception shall be accompanied by plans, drawings and information prepared by a state registered engineer depicting, at a minimum: 
i.	Existing and proposed topography at one-foot contour interval. Such topography shall extend a minimum 150 feet beyond the top of the bank of excavations. 
ii.	Proposed side slopes and depths which meet these minimums: All sides of the excavated area shall, at a minimum, comply with the following: 
A.	One foot vertical for each six feet horizontal to a depth of ten feet below the dry season water table elevation, unless waived by the commission. 
B.	For depths greater than ten feet below the dry season water table elevation, the slope may be one foot vertical for each one foot horizontal. Notwithstanding section 4-186 of this Code, any excavation in excess of the aforementioned slope shall be enclosed by a six-foot high chain link fence approved by the development engineering division which shall include a gate that shall be closed and locked at all times during which the excavation pit is not in use. Said fencing shall be completely installed prior to initiation of the excavating activity and shall remain in place, unless determined otherwise by the development engineering division, until the excavation is satisfactorily reclaimed. 
iii.	Wet and dry season water elevations and the existing surface drainage pattern. 
iv.	Notwithstanding any other minimum yard sizes required by this Code, the top of the bank of an excavation shall be set back the following minimum distance: 
A.	One-hundred and fifty feet from the right-of-way of any public street, road or highway. 
B.	One-hundred and fifty feet from abutting residential or mobile home classified property. 
C.	One-hundred and fifty feet from any other abutting property. 
D.	One-hundred and fifty feet from any natural or manmade surface water body, watercourse or wetland. 
v.	Perimeter landscape buffers shall be established prior to initiation of the excavating activity and shall meet the requirements of section 5-4, "Provision of bufferyards and screening." 
vi.	The area and amount of material to be excavated in cubic yards. A discussion of the proposed method of excavation shall be provided. 
vii.	The proposed method of dewatering. 
viii.	The time, duration, phasing and proposed work schedule of the total project. 
ix.	A detailed reclamation plan, drawn to an acceptable scale, and program to be performed upon completion of the project. As a minimum, the plan of reclamation shall include: 
A.	Time, duration, phasing and proposed work schedule of the reclamation. 
B.	Depiction of finished, stabilized, side slopes, including methods and plant materials proposed for use. For a wet excavation, a littoral zone is required to be established around the resultant water body. The specifications of said zone shall be determined in conjunction with the City's environmental management department. The establishment, to the fullest extent practical, of sinuous shorelines is required. 
C.	Landscape plan for the portion of the property disturbed by excavation and associated activities, including an inventory of plant/tree species to be used. 
D.	The resultant artificial water body shall comply with the standards established by the St. Johns River Water Management District and other appropriate agencies. Said water bodies may be required to be stocked with fish. Ambient water quality testing may also be required. 
The reclamation plan must be approved by the Development Review Committee. 
x.	A hydrogeologic report, prepared by a qualified engineer of hydrologist, of the proposed excavation site. Such a report shall, at a minimum, provide: 
A.	A detailed description of subsurface conditions. 
B.	A groundwater contour map. 
C.	A map depicting the thickness and depths of material to be excavated. 
D.	A discussion of the environmental impacts of the proposed excavation, including but not limited to the impact of the proposed excavation upon existing area wells. 
E.	A recommendation of the necessity to install monitoring wells. 
xi.	The proposed location of access points to the site and proposed haul routes for disposal of excavated material. Vehicular access to and from excavations shall be designated by the Council at the time of approval of the special exception. 
xii.	Proposed plans for fencing and signs. 
xiii.	A statement from the applicant identifying all other federal, state and local permits required, if any. 
2.	The bottom of any reclaimed excavation should be graded to allow all water to drain to a sump area not less than 15 feet by 15 feet (225 square feet). The bottom of the excavation shall be graded in a fashion which will not cause water to accumulate in stagnant pools. The bottom of excavations shall be uniformly graded to prevent anoxic sinks. 
3.	Whenever the City determines that the use of any right-of-way designated by the applicant for ingress and egress to and from the excavation site will be subject to excessive deterioration resulting in the breakdown of the subsurface and base of such right-of-way, the applicant may be required to agree to provide the City with funds in the amount necessary to mitigate the adverse impact upon the right-of-way which is caused by the excavation operation and to ensure that said roadway is maintained in a satisfactory condition. In furtherance of this agreement, the excavator may be required by the City Council to post an acceptable performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or funds in escrow in the amount up to 100 percent of the estimated reconditioning costs, as estimated by the City Engineer. 
4.	All excavations, as applicable, shall be reclaimed in accordance with the rules of the state department of environmental protection, division of resource management, found in the Florida Administrative Code. The requirements of this Code shall not relieve a person from complying with the above said state rules, as applicable. Should the requirements of this Code conflict with said state rules, the stricter reclamation and restoration requirements shall govern. 
5.	All reclamation activities shall be initiated at the earliest possible date. Reclamation of the site concurrent with excavation activities is encouraged provided that the reclamation activities will not interfere with the excavating activity or if the excavating activity will damage the reclaimed areas. 
6.	All temporary structures shall be removed from the premises upon completion of the excavation activity unless said structures are of sound construction and are compatible with the reclamation goals. Said structures shall be accurately depicted upon the approved reclamation plan. 
7.	Whenever it is determined that reclamation of the excavation pit is required at the termination of the project in order to prevent soil erosion, adverse effects on maintained rights-of-way or natural drainage pattern, to protect the natural environment surrounding the excavation pit or to protect the character and value of surrounding property, the commission may require an acceptable performance bond, funds in escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of 110 percent of the estimated cost of reclamation. Said cost shall be derived using the proposed plan of reclamation. Said bond or letter of credit shall be conditioned that the excavation and reclamation shall be in accordance with the approved plan. 
8.	No person may engage in the business of being an excavator until such person has secured an occupational license in accordance with the county occupational license requirements. 
9.	No excavator may excavate a parcel of land until he obtains an excavation permit issued by the growth management department in accordance with the terms of this Code prior to any excavation being made on the property to be excavated. 
10.	The excavation shall not be used for the disposal of material generated off-site without prior approval from the environmental management department and the state department of environmental protection and without obtaining all appropriate federal, state and local permits. 
11.	The excavation shall comply with the tree protection requirements specified by article IV of chapter 5, Land Development Code, and with the requirements of the City noise ordinance. 
12.	If upon the conclusion of public hearings the special exception is approved, final site plan approval, as specified by division 3, article II of chapter 4, Land Development Code, is required. 
13.	Off-site discharge is prohibited. 
c.	Any excavator shall be responsible for notifying the City and the Florida Department of State, Bureau of Historical Resources when human remains and/or artifactual materials are discovered. The City reserves the right to monitor the excavation activity and to prohibit such activity if artifactual materials and/or human remains are encountered. 
d.	All excavations shall use the most current best management practices (BMPs) so as to control erosion and limit the amount of sediment reaching surface waters. The City reserves the right to monitor the excavation activity and prohibit said activity if it is determined that said activity is responsible for off-premises erosion. 
(14)	Landfills, construction and demolition debris disposal facility, materials recovery facility, recovered materials facility or off-site disposal of land clearing debris facility. 
a.	No special exception for the deposition of material is required by this Code for the following activities; provided that the activity does not violate any federal or state laws, rules, regulations or orders: 
1.	Normal farming operations/agricultural use. 
2.	Grading, filling and moving of earth in conjunction with commercial, industrial or subdivision construction, provided a development order or permit has been obtained. 
3.	Foundations and building pads for any building or structure; provided that a valid building permit has been issued by the growth management department. 
4.	Minor landscaping projects provided they do not encroach in flood-prone areas as depicted on the flood insurance rate maps, promulgated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or change the natural drainage pattern of the ground surface at the property line. 
5.	Exemptions contained in Rule 62-701.320(2), F.A.C. 
b.	The following requirements and conditions shall be met for landfills or other facilities as provided herein, subject to state department of environmental protection permit approval: 
1.	Each application for a special exception shall be accompanied by plans, drawings, and information prepared by a state registered engineer depicting, at a minimum: 
i.	Existing and proposed topography at one-foot contour intervals. Such topography shall extend a minimum of 150 feet beyond the toe of slope of the landfill or facility. 
ii.	Wet and dry season water elevations and the existing surface drainage pattern. 
iii.	Notwithstanding any other minimum yard size requirements of this ordinance, the sides of a landfill or facility shall be set back the following minimum distances: 
A.	One-hundred and twenty-five feet from the right-of-way of any public street, road, or highway. 
B.	One-hundred and twenty-five feet from abutting residential or mobile home classified property. 
C.	One-hundred and twenty-five feet from any other abutting property. 
D.	One-hundred and twenty-five feet from any natural surface water body, watercourse, or wetlands. 
iv.	Perimeter landscape buffers shall be established prior to initiation of the activity and shall meet the requirements of section 5-4, "Provision of bufferyards and screening." 
v.	A description of the area and volume of material to be filled. 
vi.	A description of the time, duration, planning and proposed work schedule of the project. 
vii.	A detailed reclamation plan, and program to be performed upon completion of the project. As a minimum, the plan of reclamation shall include: 
A.	Time, duration, phasing and proposed work schedule. 
B.	Depiction of finished, stabilized sides. 
C.	Landscape plan for portion of property disturbed by landfill and associated activities, including an inventory of plant/tree species. 
The reclamation plan must be approved by the Development Review Committee. 
viii.	The proposed location of access roads to the sites and proposed haul routes for material to be deposited. Vehicular access to and from the landfill or facility shall be designated by the City Council at the time of approval of the special exception. 
ix.	Proposed plans for fencing and signs. All proposed signs shall be consistent with section 5-31. Notwithstanding the provision of section 4-186, the landfill or facility shall be fenced in a manner approved by the City Engineer. 
x.	A report prepared by a qualified engineer of the proposed landfill or facility site. Such a report shall at a minimum provide a detailed discussion of the environmental impacts of the proposed landfill or facility and a recommendation of the necessity to install monitoring wells. 
xi.	Evidence that the applicant has contacted the state department of environmental protection, by certified mail with a copy of the return receipt to the growth management services group, and all other appropriate state and substate agencies, for the requisite permit. Such a landfill or other facility, as a condition of approval of the special exception, shall obtain a permit from the state department of environmental protection. 
2.	Whenever the City Manager determines that the use of any right-of-way designated by the applicant for ingress and egress to and from the site will be subject to excessive deterioration resulting in the breakdown of the subsurface and base of such right-of-way, the applicant may be required to agree to provide the City with funds in the amount necessary to mitigate the adverse impact upon the right-of-way which is caused by the operation and to ensure that said roadway is maintained in a satisfactory condition. In furtherance of this agreement, the operator may be required by the City Council to post an acceptable performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or funds in escrow, in the amount up to 110 percent of the estimated reconditioning costs, as estimated by the City Engineer. 
3.	If upon completion of the public hearings the special exception is approved, final site plan approval, as specified by division 3, article II of chapter 4, Land Development Code, is required. 
4.	The City Council as a condition of the approved special exception may further limit the types of materials that may be deposited in a landfill or facility. 
5.	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary within this Code, no landfill or facility shall exceed 25 feet in height above existing grade. 
(15)	Drive-through restaurants shall be permitted provided that: 
a.	The use will not substantially increase traffic on streets in a residential zone. 
b.	The site will be adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use and to accommodate all yards, walls, parking, landscaping and other required improvements. 
c.	Any outdoor facility including menu boards, speakers etc., shall be a minimum of 80 feet from the property line of a residential use. 
d.	Restaurants shall maintain drive-thru lanes that are a minimum of 180 feet in length to provide on-site storage for a minimum of ten vehicles. 
e.	Each drive-thru lane shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. The lane shall be independent of any on-site parking, parking maneuvering areas, public streets, alleys or traffic ways. 
f.	Drive-thru windows shall not be on the front building elevation directly facing a street frontage. 
g.	Drive-thru lanes shall be designed in such a way as to be screened from view of the street through, elevation differences, landscaping, canopies, walls, and other architectural features to reduce the visual presence of drive-thru operations. 
h.	Where a drive-thru abuts a residential use, drive-thru service shall be prohibited between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on weekdays and from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays. 
(16)	Bed and breakfast homestay. 
a.	Maximum number of guest rooms for bed and breakfast use in the home: Five. 
b.	Owner must reside in the building. 
c.	Separate cooking facilities are not permitted in the guest rooms. 
d.	Each guest room shall have private toilet and shower facilities, except where the building is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, in which case a minimum of one bathroom shall be provided exclusively for use by the guests. 
e.	Minimum bedroom area shall be 150 square feet. 
(17)	Hazardous waste transporter facility. A hazardous waste transporter facility permit may be permitted, provided that the use complies with the standards and regulations adopted by the state. 
(18)	Restaurants and bars with outside entertainment subject to the following. 
a.	There shall be a designated area that has direct access to the building containing the restaurant or bar and be placed in a visible location that is convenient for use by the general public. 
b.	The proposed use is compatible with the surrounding uses and outside entertainment shall not negatively impact adjacent residential uses. 
c.	Outside entertainment shall conclude at 11:00 p.m. or normal closing time of the restaurant or bar, whichever is earlier. 
d.	The City Council may impose conditions limiting the number of days or times per week for outside entertainment if deemed necessary to ensure compatibility and consistency with code. 
e.	Sufficiency of setbacks, screens, buffers and general amenities to preserve compatibility with adjacent uses and to control adverse effects of noise, lights, and other nuisances. 
(19)	Cluster subdivisions. Cluster subdivisions may be permitted provided that the use complies with the criteria specified in section 3-137. 
(20)	Communication towers. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of permitted special exceptions relating to communication towers: 
a.	Granting special exception; conditions. In granting a special exception, the City Council may impose conditions, including such conditions as are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed communication tower on adjoining properties. 
b.	Certification. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a professional engineer licensed in the state. 
c.	Information required. 
1.	To ensure that communication towers are located and buffered for compatibility with the surrounding land use, each applicant requesting a special exception pursuant to this Code shall submit a scaled site plan (not more than one inch equals 100 feet) and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography; site specific radio frequency coverage information; communication tower height requirements; color; setbacks; location of equipment structures/cabinets; separation distance from other communication towers and specified dwellings; drives; parking; fencing; landscaping; adjacent uses; location, type and intensity of lighting, and any FAA reports. 
2.	In addition, the applicant shall identify all public and/or private airports and helipads within four miles from the proposed communication tower. Said four statute miles shall be measured in a straight line from the proposed location of the tower to the nearest point of the airport runway or helipad. Further, the applicant shall send a notice of the time, day, place and purpose of the public hearing of the City Council at least ten days prior to the date of such public hearing to the last known address of the owner, operator or licensee of said airport by reference to the latest ad valorem tax record. The owner, operator or licensee of said airport or helipad, or his duly authorized agent, shall acknowledge receipt of the notice on a form provided by the City Manager. 
3.	The applicant shall supply such other information deemed appropriate by the City Manager to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter. 
d.	Factors considered in the granting of special exceptions. The City Council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special exception, although the City Council may waive or reduce the burden of one or more of these criteria as to the applicant if the City Council concludes that the goals of this Code are better served thereby: 
1.	Height of the proposed communication tower; 
2.	Proximity of the communication tower to residential structures; 
3.	Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
4.	Surrounding topography; 
5.	Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
6.	Design of the communication tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
7.	Proposed ingress and egress; 
8.	Safety aspects relating to the proposed communication tower; and 
9.	Availability of suitable existing communication towers and other structures. No new communication tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Council that no existing communication tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed tower. Evidence submitted to the City to demonstrate that no existing communication tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna shall be for any of the reasons provided as follows: 
i.	No existing communication towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements; 
ii.	Existing communication towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
iii.	Existing communication towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment; 
iv.	The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing communication towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing communication towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; or 
v.	The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors, including adverse economic reasons, that render existing communication towers and structures unsuitable. 
e.	Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all communication towers and antennas for which a special exception is required: 
1.	Communication towers must be set back a distance equal to one-half of the height of the communication tower from the property line. 
2.	Communication tower anchors and guyed supports must meet the zoning classification minimum yard size requirements. 
_____ 
3.	Except for alternative support structures, communication towers, whether lattice, guyed or monopole, shall be separated as follows: 
TOWER TO TOWER SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS 
TOWER TYPES 
Proposed tower type: 
(1)	Lattice. 
a.	Lattice ..... 5,000 
b.	Guyed ..... 3,000 
c.	Monopole exceeding 170 feet in height above ground level ..... 1,500 
d.	Monopole exceeding 100 feet in height above ground level, but not exceeding 170 feet in height above ground level ..... 1,200 
e.	Monopole exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level, but not exceeding 100 feet in height above ground level (feet) ..... 750 
f.	Camouflaged ..... 0 
(2)	Guyed. 
a.	Lattice ..... 3,000 
b.	Guyed ..... 3,000 
c.	Monopole exceeding 170 feet in height above ground level ..... 1,500 
d.	Monopole exceeding 100 feet in height above ground level, but not exceeding 170 feet in height above ground level ..... 1,200 
e.	Monopole exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level, but not exceeding 100 feet in height above ground level (feet) ..... 750 
f.	Camouflaged ..... 0 
(3)	Monopole exceeding 170 feet above ground level. 
a.	Lattice ..... 1,500 
b.	Guyed ..... 1,500 
c.	Monopole exceeding 170 feet in height above ground level ..... 1,500 
d.	Monopole exceeding 100 feet in height above ground level, but not exceeding 170 feet in height above ground level ..... 1,200 
e.	Monopole exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level, but not exceeding 100 feet in height above ground level (feet) ..... 750 
f.	Camouflaged ..... 0 
(4)	Monopole exceeding 100 feet above ground level, but not exceeding 170 feet in height above ground level. 
a.	Lattice ..... 1,200 
b.	Guyed ..... 1,200 
c.	Monopole exceeding 170 feet in height above ground level ..... 1,200 
d.	Monopole exceeding 100 feet in height above ground level, but not exceeding 170 feet in height above ground level ..... 1,200 
e.	Monopole exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level, but not exceeding 100 feet in height above ground level (feet) ..... 750 
f.	Camouflaged ..... 0 
(5)	Monopole exceeding 70 feet above ground level, but not exceeding 100 feet in height above ground level. 
a.	Lattice—10 times proposed tower height. 
b.	Guyed—10 times proposed tower height. 
c.	Monopole exceeding 170 feet in height above ground level—10 times proposed tower height. 
d.	Monopole exceeding 100 feet in height above ground level, but not exceeding 170 feet in height above ground level—10 times proposed tower height. 
e.	Monopole exceeding 70 feet in height above ground level, but not exceeding 100 feet in height above ground level (feet) ..... 750 
f.	Camouflaged ..... 0 
_____ 
4.	Communication tower separation shall be measured from the perimeter of the base or slab of the communication tower to the closest point of the off-site existing communication tower base or slab. 
5.	In addition, said towers shall be separated from a single-family, two-family, multifamily, or mobile home dwelling by a distance of at least 1,000 feet. However, this separation requirement may be waived by the City Council, but in no case shall said separation distance be less than 500 feet. 
f.	Design and lighting standards. 
1.	Communication towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
2.	At a communication tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
3.	If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a communication tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
4.	Communication towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required or recommended by the City Manager, FAA, or FDOT. If this lighting is so required or recommended, the City Manager may review the available lighting alternatives permitted by the FAA or FDOT and approve the alternative that balances the need for safety and causes the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
g.	Security fencing. Communication towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that the City Manager may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate. Access to the communication tower shall be through a locked gate. 
h.	Landscaping. 
1.	The visual impacts of a communication tower upon nearby viewers shall be mitigated through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the communication tower and accessory structures. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of a fence and shall include a landscape buffer of 15 feet. Further, existing vegetation shall be preserved and may be used as a substitute for or in supplement towards meeting landscaping requirements. 
2.	A row of trees a minimum of six feet tall and 1½ inches in caliper (diameter at breast height) and a maximum spacing of 20 feet apart shall be planted around the perimeter of the fence. 
3.	A continuous hedge at least 24 inches high at planting capable of growing to at least 36 inches in height within 540 days shall be planted in front of the tree line referenced in subsection (20)h.2 of this section. Hedge material shall be no less than three feet on center. 
4.	All landscaping shall be drought resistant or irrigated and properly maintained to ensure good health and viability. 
5.	The City Council may at their discretion, based on good cause shown, waive these landscaping requirements. 
i.	Camouflaged towers. The applicant may use a camouflage agent in order to achieve compatibility with the surrounding area in an aesthetic manner. Camouflaging shall be determined on a case by case basis. Any proposed camouflaging shall be submitted in conjunction with the special exception application. It shall include the following documentation: 
1.	Colorized pictorial representation, artist's rendering, or the like; 
2.	Design specifications as follows: total height, diameter, and colorations; 
3.	A corresponding statement accompanying the graphic representation explaining the following: 
i.	What is the nature and character of the area within which the camouflaged tower is proposed, with respect to: land use, surrounding environment, a general statement of building heights and designs in the area, and building/environment density; 
ii.	How the proposed camouflaged agent will blend in and harmonize with the nature and character of the area. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 06-14 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 3-135. - Waterfront yards. 
Such a yard shall be measured from the ordinary high-water mark on nontidal waters whenever the ordinary high-water mark falls within the lot lines. For the purposes of determining the maximum lot coverage and density for lots with waterfront yards, the ordinary high-water mark shall be substituted for lot lines wherever said lines fall within the lot lines; provided, however, on lots with seawalls, the yard shall be measured from the seawall or top of revetment.  
Sec. 3-136. - Temporary uses and structures. 
(a)	Dwelling unit, model. Any new dwelling unit may be used as a model dwelling unit provided: 
(1)	It shall have received an approved final inspection pursuant to the building permit which was issued for it. 
(2)	There may be displayed per unit used as a model not more than one identification sign not exceeding 16 square feet in size facing any public right-of-way. Additionally, there may be displayed per unit used as a model not more than one flag not larger than 16 square feet in size. 
(3)	The model dwelling unit shall not be used as a residence or for a storage area for building materials or equipment. 
(4)	Any off-street parking areas temporarily provided in addition to those required by section 3-129(5) are exempt from any of the other provisions of section 3-129. 
(5)	All models must be removed at the point in time when 90 percent of the lots have been sold. 
(b)	Mobile offices. Mobile offices or mobile units designed as offices shall be permitted for only the initial builder/developer as temporary on-site contractor construction offices, on-site sales offices or as on-site security offices, providing: 
(1)	Such mobile offices may only be used in conjunction with the development of approved subdivisions, mobile home parks, mobile recreational vehicle shelter parks, or in conjunction with the construction of commercial, multifamily or industrial buildings. 
(2)	A mobile office may be used in conjunction with the rental or sale of mobile homes from licensed mobile home sales lots. 
(3)	Such mobile office shall not be used as a residence. The use shall be limited to on-site construction, sales or security purposes in connection with the project on which the structure is located. 
(4)	The person responsible for the development on which the mobile office is to be located shall obtain the proper permits from all applicable governmental agencies, including but not limited to electrical, plumbing and building permits. 
(5)	Permits for mobile offices shall be issued as follows: 
a.	For the construction of approved subdivisions, only after preliminary plat approval. 
b.	For the development of mobile home parks, and mobile recreation vehicle shelter parks, only at the same time or after any applicable building permits for the installation of improvements are issued. 
c.	For commercial, industrial or multifamily projects, only after final site plan approval. 
d.	For the sale or rental of mobile homes, only at the same time or after the occupational license has been issued. 
(6)	Permits for mobile offices shall expire and such mobile offices shall be removed as follows: 
a.	For the development of approved subdivisions, after 80 percent of the lots have been sold. 
b.	For the development of mobile home parks, and mobile recreation vehicle shelter parks, immediately after the park is abandoned. 
c.	For commercial, industrial or multifamily projects, immediately after the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
d.	For the rental or sale of mobile homes from mobile home sales lots, immediately after the rental or sales lot is abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, §§ 1(301.2(819.00)), 1(401(618)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-137. - Clustering of dwelling units and zero lot line residential subdivisions. 
(a)	Purpose and intent. A development design technique that permits a reduction in lot area by concentrating buildings in a specific area to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, open space, or preservation of environmentally sensitive areas. This technique allows for a reduction in lot area, provided there is no increase in the number of lots that are permitted under a conventional subdivision. 
(b)	Applicability. The following regulations shall apply to cluster and zero lot line subdivisions: 
(1)	The subdivision must be platted for this type of development, in accordance with this Code. 
(2)	Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
(3)	Minimum lot width: 45 feet. 
(4)	All lot area reduction amounts shall be combined to set aside an equivalent land area for common open space or for preserving environmentally sensitive areas that are not jurisdictional wetland under county, state or federal regulations. The set-aside area cannot be used for stormwater retention or detention. 
(5)	The minimum setbacks for the principal structure shall be: 
a.	Front yard: 25 feet, except on a corner lot, one front yard may be reduced to 15 feet. 
b.	Rear yard: 20 feet. 
c.	Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
d.	Side yard: Five feet for nonzero-lot-line lots, zero feet on one side and 15 feet on the other side yard for zero-lot-line lots. 
e.	Where a dwelling unit is located on a lot line, a legal provision acceptable to the City Council shall be made for permanent access to maintain the exterior portion of the dwelling unit wall along the zero lot line. Doors or other access openings are prohibited on the zero lot line side of the dwelling unit. 
f.	Maximum lot coverage: The total lot area covered with principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
(6)	Accessory structures shall be located behind the frontmost part of the principal structure and shall have the following side and rear setbacks: 
a.	Rear yard: Five feet. 
b.	Waterfront yard: 25 feet. 
c.	Street side yard: 15 feet. 
d.	Side yard: Five feet. 
(7)	The maximum permissible density of the cluster subdivision shall be consistent with that permitted by the corresponding future land use designation accorded the property by the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(8)	All other requirements of the applicable zoning classification shall be met. 
(9)	All cluster and/or zero lot line subdivisions shall adhere to all applicable requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-99, § 1(301.2(828.00)), 11-3-1999)  
Sec. 3-138. - Accessory structures. 
Accessory buildings and structures are permitted ancillary to a principal structure subject to the following standards: 
(1)	Accessory buildings and structures associated with a non-residential use shall meet all setback requirements for the principal building on the lot and shall not interfere with required landscaping. 
(2)	Setbacks for residential accessory buildings and structures shall be in accordance with section 3-122 Exceptions to minimum yard or lot coverage requirements. 
(3)	Garage apartments shall meet all setback requirements for the principal building on the lot. 
(4)	No accessory structure shall exceed a height of 20 feet. 
(5)	The number of accessory structures per lot and the maximum floor area for an accessory building shall be based on the size of the lot. The number and size of accessory structures is also controlled by the lot coverage maximum of the applicable zoning district. The total number of accessory structures per lot as provided below is not inclusive of swimming pools, swimming pool enclosures, fences or well houses. This provision is not applicable to agricultural zoned properties. 
One-half acre or less: Limited to two accessory structures. Cumulative area of accessory structures cannot exceed 50 percent of the square footage of the principal structure and cannot exceed the maximum allowable lot coverage percentage. 
Greater than one-half acre to one acre: Limited to three accessory structures. Cumulative area of accessory structures cannot exceed 50 percent of the square footage of the principal structure and cannot exceed the maximum allowable lot coverage percentage. 
Greater than one acre to 2.5 acres: Limited to four accessory structures. Cumulative area of accessory structures cannot exceed 55 percent of the square footage of the principal structure and cannot exceed the maximum allowable lot coverage percentage. 
2.5 acres or more: No limit on number of structures but cumulative area of accessory structures cannot exceed 60 percent of the principal structure, and cannot exceed the maximum allowable lot coverage. 
(6)	Maximum lot coverage with principal and accessory structures shall not exceed that of the applicable zoning district requirements. 
(7)	Separation of accessory structures from principal structures shall be as required by the building code. 
(8)	Accessory uses in residential districts shall not include the conduct of any business, trade or industry. 
(9)	Clothing donation drop boxes may be permitted in commercial and industrial zoning districts as accessory structures subject to the following additional provisions. 
a.	A building permit is required to place a clothing donation drop box on a property. 
b.	Clothing donation drop boxes are not permitted as the sole use on a lot. 
c.	Setbacks for clothing donation drop boxes shall meet all setback requirements for the principal building on the lot. 
d.	Clothing donation drop boxes may not be located in any required buffer yard, landscaped open space including parking lot landscaping, required parking spaces, in the public right of way or in any location that could impede vehicular or pedestrian circulation, vision or access within a site. 
e.	Clothing donation drop boxes shall not exceed 8.5 ft. in height. 
f.	Clothing donation drop boxes must be structurally sound, clean and well-maintained. They should be emptied regularly to prevent overflow of materials onto surrounding areas. It is the property owner's responsibility for ensuring the upkeep of these boxes. 
g.	If a clothing donation drop box is located under a building awning or canopy it and the principal structure may be subject to additional fire protection requirements. 
( Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 ; Ord. No. 06-14 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-3-2014)  
Chapter 4 - LAND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Rules of construction. 
Where the sections of this chapter identify actions or responsibilities of other officials or boards, the action or responsibility is assigned by this Code to the City Manager, and the provision in question shall be so interpreted. Where there is a question as to whether the provision involves a procedure, or how the standard shall be administered, the City Manager will make the determination, which may be appealed pursuant to section 1-7.  
Sec. 4-2. - Abbreviations. 
AASHTO 	The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
ANSI 	American National Standards Institute 
ASTM 	American Society for Testing and Materials 
CPN 	Conceptual Site Plan 
CDE 	City Development Engineer 
DRC 	Development Review Committee 
EMD 	Environmental Management District 
FDOT 	Florida Department of Transportation 
FPL 	Final Plat 
FSP 	Final Site Plan 
LDD 	Land Development Division 
LDM 	Land Development Manager 
ODP 	Overall Development Plan 
PPL 	Preliminary Plat and Construction Plan 
PUD 	Planned Unit Development 
SJRWMD 	St. Johns River Water Management District 
  
Sec. 4-3. - List of reference publications, latest editions. 
Following is a list of the latest editions of reference publications: 
(1)	Highway Capacity Manual, Transportation Research Board. 
(2)	"County of Volusia Soil Survey" - Soil survey of Volusia County, Florida, United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. 
(3)	ITE Trip Generation Manual. 
(4)	"FDOT Minimum Standards for Streets and Highways" - Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, State of Florida, Developed by the state department of transportation in accordance with F.S. § 335.075, (herein referred to as the "Green Book"). 
(5)	"AASHTO Geometric Design of Highways and Streets" - A Policy of Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
(6)	"FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" - Florida Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. 
(7)	"USDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" - Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, United States Department of Transportation. 
(8)	"FDOT Utility Accommodation Guide" - Utility Accommodation Guide, State of Florida Department of Transportation. 
(9)	"FDOT Roadway and Traffic Design Standards" - State of Florida Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 96-32, § I, 12-19-1996)  
Secs. 4-4—4-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LAND DEVELOPMENT  
DIVISION 1. - DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 4-21. - General provisions. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this Code is to establish standards, procedures and minimum requirements for the issuance of all development orders and development permits as required by this Code and to regulate and control the platting and development of land within the City limits, except as otherwise specifically set forth herein; provided, however, it is not the purpose of this Code to regulate any bona fide agricultural production, including, but not limited to, horticulture, citrus, dairy, livestock, poultry, forestry or vegetables. 
(b)	Violations and penalties. If it is determined by the City Manager that any person is violating any provision of this Code, the City Manager shall notify that person, in writing, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering any action necessary to correct it. The order may include, but not be limited to, a stop work order. Any violation of this Code may be referred to the City code enforcement board. Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this Code, or any lawful order of the City Council, or City Manager, shall be punished in accordance with F.S. § 162.22, or any amendments thereto, with a fine not to exceed $500.00, and/or incarceration not to exceed 60 days. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, a violation of this Code may be abated by any manner as provided by law. Each day the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)	Injunctive relief. In addition to any penalty provided by law for the violation of any of the provisions of this Code, the City Council may bring suit in the appropriate circuit court to enjoin, restrain or otherwise prevent the violation of any of the provisions of this Code in any manner, as provided by law. 
(d)	Fee requirements. Reasonable fees to offset the costs of administration of this Code shall be set by resolution of the City Council. All fees must be paid at the time set out in said resolution. 
(e)—(n)	Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 21-07, § 3, 9-5-2007)  
Sec. 4-22. - Administration. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to set out the various administrative procedures of this Code and to provide for the establishment of the Development Review Committee. 
(b)	Development Review Committee. 
(1)	Established. There is hereby established a Development Review Committee (DRC). 
(2)	Membership. Membership of the Development Review Committee shall include the following, or their designated representative: 
a.	The City planner, who shall act as chairman; 
b.	Two additional members who shall be appointed by the City Manager. 
County, local, state or federal agencies may be consulted by the Development Review Committee for advice or recommendations on any matter or application being considered by the Development Review Committee. 
(3)	Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the Development Review Committee shall include: 
a.	Reviewing all applications under this Code to: 
1.	Delineate areas of noncompliance with City development requirements; and 
2.	Define steps necessary to bring applications into compliance with City development requirements. 
b.	Approving applications for development orders. 
c.	When, in the judgment of the Development Review Committee, strict application of the requirements of this Code would result in an inequitable or unreasonable result, stifle innovative or creative design, or create undue hardship when applied to a specific project or development, the Development Review Committee may recommend modifications of such requirements to the extent necessary to achieve equity or reasonableness, or relieve the undue hardship; provided that no such modification shall be contrary to requirements of law or the general policies of this Code; nor shall any such modification, as applied to one development, establish precedent with regard to any other development subject to review. Application for such modification may be submitted with the development review application at any phase of the review process. 
d.	Performing such additional duties as the City Manager may, from time to time, assign. 
(4)	Meetings. The Development Review Committee shall meet at least twice per 30 days at such place as determined by the Development Review Committee. A schedule of the meeting times and places shall be adopted annually by the Development Review Committee. An agenda shall be prepared and distributed to each member and to the applicant at least five working days prior to each meeting. All applicants having requests to be reviewed by the Development Review Committee shall be invited to attend and participate in the meeting. Such records of the proceedings of the Development Review Committee meetings as required by law shall be kept. 
(5)	Responsibilites of the LDD : 
a.	Being a central intake point for applications; 
b.	Reviewing applications for completeness; 
c.	Providing liaison between applicants and the DRC; 
d.	Preparing and distributing agendas and reports for meetings of the DRC and the City Council; 
e.	Taking and preparing the minutes of all DRC meetings; 
f.	Comparing final construction plans and final plats with the approved development order to ensure consistency; 
g.	Performing such other functions as the City Manager may, from time to time, assign. 
(6)	Duties and responsibilities of the LDM. Duties and responsibilities of the LDM shall include: 
a.	Coordinating application review procedures; 
b.	Issuing concurrency certificates of capacity; 
c.	Administration and management of the land development division; 
d.	Issuing development orders and development permits in compliance with the requirements and procedures of this ordinance; 
e.	Filing final subdivision plats with the clerk of the circuit court. 
f.	Ensuring that final construction plans and final plats are consistent with approved development order.  
Sec. 4-23. - Development orders, development permits, approval authority, installation of improvements, public services and facilities agreements, and appeals. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to: 
(1)	Provide for the applicability, approval and issuance of development orders and development permits to ensure that all of the provisions of this Code are complied with, to ensure the installation of required improvements; 
(2)	Provide for public services and facilities agreements; and 
(3)	Provide an appeal process. 
(b)	Applicability. No person shall undertake the development of land in the City except pursuant to a valid development order or development permit issued under this Code unless specifically exempted as provided by this Code. All development shall meet the requirements of this Code prior to the approval and issuance of any development order or development permit, unless specifically exempted from the requirements of this Code by provisions set forth herein, or one or more such requirements are waived in accordance with provisions set forth herein. 
(c)	Approving authority. The Development Review Committee shall make a recommendation to City Council for approval, approval with conditions or denial of all development order applications for which the City Council makes a final decision. The Development Review Committee shall have authority to approve, approve with conditions or deny a development order for final site plan, sketch plan, overall development plan, preliminary plat and construction plan meeting the definition of this code except as otherwise provided herein. All development order approvals and approvals with conditions for final site plans, sketch plans, overall development plans, preliminary plats and construction plans by the Development Review Committee must have a final signature of approval by the City Manager or the City Manager's designated LDM before such are deemed issued. Final site plans, sketch plans, overall development plans, preliminary plat and construction plans shall not require City Council approval if a development order on such is issued after approval or approval with conditions by the Development Review Committee unless an appeal of a Development Review Committee decision is brought in accordance with subsection (g). The Development Review Committee, on their own motion and for cause, may continue consideration of an application to a subsequent meeting. 
(d)	Issuance of development orders and development permits. A preliminary development order, upon issuance, shall authorize continuation to the next step in a development review process. A final development order, upon issuance, shall authorize issuance of appropriate development permits. A development permit, upon issuance, shall authorize commencement of construction of the work covered by the scope of the permit. No development or construction shall commence unless a valid final development order or development permit has been issued as provided by this Code. All development or construction commenced pursuant to a valid development order or development permit shall be completed in a manner which is consistent with the approved development order or development permit. 
(e)	Installation of improvements. All improvements required to be installed, constructed or provided by the developer as a condition to the approval of a development order shall be installed and completed or guaranteed as specified in section 4-111(a)(1). 
(f)	Public services and facilities agreements. In order to further the purposes of this Code regarding the provision of public services and facilities to a proposed development, the City may enter into an agreement with the developer of the proposed development which will provide a means to: 
(1)	Ensure the certainty of providing public services and facilities for the proposed project; 
(2)	Ensure the provision of public services and facilities to other developments in the vicinity of the proposed development; 
(3)	Allocate the costs of providing public services and facilities; 
(4)	Allocate the capacities of the public services and facilities; 
(5)	Determine the responsibilities for construction and maintenance of the public services and facilities. 
(g)	Appeals. Any applicant or owner of property subject to the action being appealed, and/or the City Council acting as a body, aggrieved by a decision of the Development Review Committee, may file a written appeal with the City Manager within ten days after the date said decision is rendered in writing in order to have the decision reviewed by the City Manager. The City Manager shall then review the appeal for sufficiency and determine if the petition meets the appeals process pursuant to this section of the Code. The appeal shall state fully the specific grounds for the appeal and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. The City Council may then hear the appeal de novo and may consider those items specified in the petition and any related new evidence. The City Council may, upon appeal, reverse, affirm or modify any decision of the Development Review Committee. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 03-16 , Exh. A, 1-20-2016)  
Sec. 4-24. - Application review requirements. 
An application for a development order shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee in accordance with section 4-25. No application for a development order shall be approved which does not comply with the following: 
(1)	The City Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)	The City Land Development Code.  
Sec. 4-25. - Development review procedures. 
All applications and supporting information required by this Code shall be filed with the LDD. All required application fees, as set by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid prior to acceptance of the application. The number of copies of the supporting information needed for distribution to all concerned reviewing agencies, as determined by the LDM, shall be submitted with the application prior to acceptance. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the following procedures shall govern the review of such applications: 
(1)	Completeness of application. The LDM shall review the application to determine its completeness. Within three working days after receipt, he shall either accept the application if it is complete and forward to the applicant a notice of acceptance, or reject the application if it is incomplete and forward to the applicant a notice of incompleteness specifying the data missing from the application received. 
a.	If neither a notice of acceptance nor incompleteness is sent, the application shall be deemed accepted for purposes of beginning the time limits of this division on the fourth working day after the filing of the application. 
b.	If a notice of incompleteness is sent, the applicant shall resubmit the application with the additional data required. Upon receipt, the LDM shall review the resubmittal application in the manner provided in this subsection for the original application. 
(2)	Distribution of accepted application. Following acceptance of an application, the LDM shall forward a copy of the application to all review agencies and to any state or federal agency deemed by the LDM to be a concerned agency for the review process. 
(3)	Review responsibilities. Each member of the City review agency shall prepare a report which sets out, in writing, their comments specifying the exact references to the Code or other regulation being commented on and recommendations regarding the application and shall forward such report to the LDM at or before the meeting of the Development Review Committee held in accordance with this division. The LDM may waive one or more agency reviews, in whole or in part, under this section upon his determination that such a review has already been made regarding the same land and no change in standards or circumstances has occurred which necessitates further review. 
(4)	Review. Applications shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee and shall be discussed at a meeting held in accordance with the requirements of the Development Review Committee. 
(5)	Application revision. An application may be revised by the applicant after it has been reviewed by the Development Review Committee. Any application so revised must include a revision date on the plans. If any portion of the review process must be repeated to accommodate the revised application, the time limits prescribed in this division shall be extended but not to exceed 20 working days from the date that the revision has been received. 
(6)	Development order review and final action. 
a.	Within 60 working days from the acceptance of an application or revised application, the Development Review Committee shall make one of the following determinations: 
1.	That the application or revised application is in compliance with the requirements of this Code, and shall approve, or recommend approval of the application; 
2.	That the application or revised application is not fully in compliance with the requirements of this Code, stating those conditions which they find are necessary to ensure compliance with this Code, and shall approve, or recommend approval of the application subject to those conditions being met; or 
3.	That the application or revised application is not in compliance with the requirements of this Code, and shall deny, or recommend denial of the application, stating the basis for such denial, or may continue consideration of and final action on the application pending submittal of a revised application. 
b.	Reserved. 
c.	Site plans approved by the Development Review Committee shall not require City Council approval pursuant to section 4-23. 
d.	An applicant may appeal the Development Review Committee's denial pursuant to section 4-23(g) and request to have the site plan considered by City Council. 
(7)	Subdivision final plat review and final approval; Development Review Committee consideration and City Council final action. 
a.	Within 20 working days from the acceptance of the application or revised application for a subdivision final plat development order, the Development Review Committee shall consider the application and shall make a recommendation to the City Council for final action or, if the Development Review Committee determines the application is not in compliance with the requirements of this Code, the Development Review Committee may continue consideration of the application pending submittal of a revised application. 
b.	If the application is recommended for approval with conditions by the Development Review Committee, the LDM may request that the applicant submit a revised application incorporating the conditions of approval prior to sending the application to the City Council for final action. After submittal of a revised application which meets the conditions of the Development Review Committee, the LDM shall transmit the revised application to the City Council at their next regular meeting for final approval, noting any conditions of approval by the Development Review Committee. The LDM may request subsequent revised applications prior to transmitting the application to the City Council if the application, as revised, does not meet the requirements of the Development Review Committee's conditional approval. 
c.	If the application is recommended for approval by the Development Review Committee without conditions; or if the City Manager determines that all of the Development Review Committee's conditions have been resolved, or that any remaining conditions should be resolved by the City Council, the LDM shall transmit the application to the City Council for consideration for final action at the next available City Council meeting. 
d.	No application recommended for denial by the Development Review Committee shall be transmitted to the City Council for final action except that the applicant may appeal from the Development Review Committee's denial pursuant to section 4-23(g). 
(8)	Subdivision final plat review; City Council final action. 
a.	At a regularly scheduled public meeting, the City Council shall review the application and the Development Review Committee recommendation for conformity to this Code and shall act appropriately upon the application. 
b.	The appropriate action of the City Council shall be one of the following determinations: 
1.	That the application is in compliance with the requirements of this Code, in which case the City Council shall approve the application; 
2.	That the application is not fully in compliance with the requirements of this Code, stating those conditions which they find are necessary to ensure compliance with this Code, in which case the City Council shall approve the application subject to those conditions being met; or 
3.	That the application is not in compliance with requirements of this Code, in which case the City Council shall deny the application and state the basis for such denial. 
c.	A final determination by the City Council under this subsection (8) may be deferred if the City Council finds that available information is insufficient on which to base either approval or denial of a particular application, and the City Council directs or has directed that a specific study commence to provide the City Council with information sufficient to form the basis on which to approve or deny the application, and the study will be completed within a time certain, not to exceed 180 days from the date of the City Council's determination under this subsection; provided, however, as a prerequisite to directing that a specific study commence to provide the City Council with information sufficient to form the basis on which to approve or deny a particular application, the City Council shall identify the inadequacy of the information available with respect to the application. 
d.	If the City Council determines that adequate public facilities required under this Code are not available, but are planned to become available in the future, they may: 
1.	Defer action until adequate public facilities are available; 
2.	Approve the application, subject to the condition that no building permit shall be issued until adequate public facilities are available; 
3.	Approve the application, subject to the condition that no certificate of occupancy be issued until adequate public facilities are available; or 
4.	Approve the application, subject to the condition that the developer enter into a public services and facilities agreement pursuant to this Code to ensure that adequate public facilities are available at the time the impacts of the development occur. 
(9)	Valid period and issuance of development orders. 
a.	The valid period of any development order shall begin on the date of approval by the City Council and shall remain valid for a period of 360 days from the date of issuance. 
b.	Development orders shall be issued by the LDM within five working days after being notified of the actions of the City Council; provided all conditions of approval, if any, have been resolved and that the approved concurrency certificate of capacity, if required, can be or has been issued. 
(10)	Effect of development order. 
a.	If construction of a site development has commenced pursuant to a valid building permit during the valid period of a final site plan development order, construction may be completed in accordance with the approved development order as long as the building permit remains valid. 
b.	If construction of the required improvements in a subdivision development has commenced during the valid period of a preliminary plat development order, the improvements may be completed in accordance with the approved development order beyond the valid period of that development order only if the subdivision final plat development order has been approved by the City Council. Construction of the required improvements in a subdivision shall be completed or shall be guaranteed for completion pursuant to division 5 of this article prior to recording the final plat. 
c.	A development order for a subdivision final plat shall be issued only after the final plat is recorded and upon issuance shall remain valid until the subdivision or any part thereof is abandoned in accordance with the laws of the City and the state. 
d.	During the period of 90 days before and 90 days after the expiration of any development order, the developer may request an extension of that valid period from the City Council. Such request shall be submitted to the LDM. The City Council may approve an extension of that valid period for a period of time not to exceed 360 days and may attach such conditions as they determine appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 03-16 , Exh. A, 1-20-2016)  
Sec. 4-26. - Availability of pedestrian and bicycle circulation facilities. 
There is hereby established a City sidewalk improvement trust fund. Money deposited in this fund shall be used for the purpose of constructing pedestrian and bicycle facilities in areas determined by the City to be needed for the safety and convenience of the pedestrians and bicyclists of the City. 
(1)	The DRC or City Council, in their consideration of a development application, may approve the payment of money into the trust fund in lieu of construction of the sidewalks required by section 4-90. 
(2)	The amount of money to be paid in lieu of construction shall be determined by the City Engineer by establishing the average cost of constructing such facilities. The City Engineer shall review such cost annually and certify such cost to the LDM prior to October 1 of each year. Such cost shall be utilized by the LDM to make a determination of the amount of money owed by the developer as payment into the trust fund. The City Manager may approve a different amount of money to be paid into the trust fund by the developer based upon the actual cost of constructing the facilities in the development as evidenced by a construction bid, submitted by the developer and verified by the City Development Engineer (CDE) for that purpose. 
(3)	The total amount of money owned shall be paid to the LDD prior to or concurrent with issuance of a building permit for a site development or prior to recording the final plat for a subdivision development. The City shall keep a record of all money paid into the trust fund and shall, upon payment, deposit the money into the appropriate sub fund. Payment of all the money owned by the developer shall constitute full payment of the money necessary for the City to construct the required facilities at the location of the development at a future time deemed appropriate by the City Council.  
Secs. 4-27—4-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 4-41. - Purpose. 
(a)	Generally. The purpose of this division is to establish procedures for the subdivision of land in the City. 
(b)	Prohibitions on transfer of lots and issuance of development or building permits for lots not in compliance with this Code. It shall be a violation of this Code for anyone who is the owner, or agent of the owner, of any land to transfer, sell, agree to sell, or negotiate to sell such land by reference to, exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision of such land without having the plat approved as required by this Code. In addition, no development permit or building permit shall be issued on any lot unless that lot is in compliance with this Code. 
(c)	Exemptions. 
(1)	Acquisition for public use. 
(2)	Condominiums. 
(3)	Lot splits/adjustments. 
The City Manager or his/her designee, may waive the requirement for preliminary plat and final subdivision plat approval when a lot split or lot adjustment results in the creation of two lots either from the division of one existing lot or by the adjustment of two existing adjacent lots and the following conditions are satisfied: 
i.	Each parcel meets the zoning standards of the property's zoning classification without the necessity of a variance. 
ii.	Each parcel has a net buildable acreage equal to the minimum lot size requirement of the applicable zoning classification and located above the 100 year flood plain. 
iii.	Parcels have frontage on a public road. 
iv.	The addition of impervious area will not impact the stormwater system of the area. 
v.	Where property abuts an existing standard street and no new improvements for water, sewer or drainage improvements are required. 
vi.	Legal access to and from the lots and a public right-of-way is provided. 
vii.	Easements and access for public services and utilities are provided, if necessary. 
viii.	Executed joinder and consent to the proposed lot split or adjustment from all owners of the property and mortgage holders, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 03-16 , Exh. A, 1-20-2016)  
Sec. 4-42. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-43. - Sketch plan review. 
The intent of this review is to give the developer an opportunity to introduce a proposed subdivision to the Development Review Committee for the purpose of familiarizing the developer with a broad range of Development Review Committee considerations prior to the preparation of detailed plan documents. These considerations include, but are not limited to, such items as the Comprehensive Plan, City development policies and regulations, other development in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision, soil types, area drainage patterns, floodplain and floodprone areas, and the capability of the land to support the proposed development. One specific purpose of this procedure is to provide the applicant with staff comments concerning floodprone areas in the proposed subdivision and to provide staff recommendations concerning those floodprone areas and the level of development considered to be acceptable by the City Council. 
(1)	Procedures. 
a.	An application for sketch plan review shall be filed and processed pursuant to section 4-25(1)—(5). Exhibits shall be submitted in sufficient copies, as determined by the LDM, to meet the requirements of the Development Review Committee and any additional agency deemed to be a concerned review agency. 
b.	A developer may elect to omit the sketch plan review and proceed directly to the overall development plan review at section 4-44. If the sketch plan review is omitted, the Development Review Committee shall consider the extent to which the flood-prone area shall be developed in accordance with subsection (4) of this section at the overall development plan review stage. 
(2)	Required submittals. A sketch plan shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 200 feet and shall illustrate clearly: 
a.	Vicinity map at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 2,000 feet with sufficient information to locate the property in the field. 
b.	Total acreage. 
c.	Floodprone area (if applicable). 
d.	Water bodies or courses. 
e.	Swamp or wetland areas as defined herein. 
f.	Specific soil types and their limitations for planned use. Soil information is to be taken from the most recent soil survey of the county. The soil types and boundaries shall be delineated on the plan. 
g.	Graphically depict on plan, predominant plant communities and identify types by common name and location. 
h.	Parcel number according to the county property appraiser. 
i.	Topography of the site at not more than five-foot vertical contour intervals based on mean sea level data furnished by a professional engineer or surveyor. The topographical survey shall be consistent with current land development. 
j.	Tentative layout of street system, lot patterns, drainage systems, approximate subdivision boundaries, and existing zoning. 
k.	Areas that may be reserved for parks or recreation sites, conservation easements, or natural open space areas. 
l.	Streets adjacent to the tract, including rights-of-way and pavement widths, and driveways on both sides of adjacent streets within 300 feet of proposed development. 
m.	Lots and blocks of adjacent recorded plats, giving plat book and page number along with names of such plats. 
n.	Current zoning and existing uses of subject property and of adjacent and surrounding properties. 
o.	Proposed location of water and wastewater treatment facility lines. 
p.	All existing on-site or adjacent easements, including drainage, electricity, gas, water, wastewater, or other pipeline or utility easements. 
q.	The legal description of the property proposed for platting. 
r.	Any other appropriate information thought necessary by the prospective applicant to make a schematic presentation. 
s.	Identify known wildlife corridors for federal and state endangered species, threatened species or species of special concern. 
t.	Identify known plants and animals which inhabit the site that are listed as federal and state endangered species, threatened species or species of special concern. 
u.	Identify known historic and archaeological sites. 
v.	Boundary survey. 
(3)	Development Review Committee review. The Development Review Committee shall review the application and informally discuss with the applicant any steps necessary to bring the application into compliance with the requirements of this Code. Thereafter, the applicant may submit an overall development plan application pursuant to section 4-44. 
(4)	Floodprone areas. 
a.	If the Development Review Committee determines that a development lies within a floodprone area, it shall provide written recommendations to the applicant regarding the level of development that may be acceptable in such areas. Development Review Committee recommendations may address preservation of land contour, species preservation, development and maintenance of aesthetic values such as scenic views, and maintenance of freedom of movement of wildlife. 
b.	In defining the floodprone areas, the Development Review Committee shall consider topography, flood maps, soil conditions, vegetation, seasonal high-water table, manmade drainage systems and the storage capacity thereof, natural watersheds, watercourses and basins. The applicant shall provide the Development Review Committee with the information it deems necessary regarding these items. 
(5)	Request for determination by City Council. 
a.	If the applicant is aggrieved by the Development Review Committee's recommendations regarding development in floodprone areas, he may request an appeal to the City Council. Appeals must be filed with the City Manager within 20 working days following the transmission of the Development Review Committee's recommendations to the applicant and must state with particularity the points of disagreement and the specific basis for such disagreement. All other Development Review Committee recommendations are advisory only and not subject to City Council review under this appeal. 
b.	The appeal to the City Council may be based only on evidence reviewed by the Development Review Committee. No additional evidence shall be submitted to the City Council by either the applicant or the Development Review Committee subsequent to the Development Review Committee's review; provided, however, the applicant may submit additional evidence to the Development Review Committee within 20 working days following the transmission of the Development Review Committee's recommendations to the applicant. Within 20 working days following the receipt of the additional evidence by the Development Review Committee, it shall then transmits its written response to the additional evidence to the applicant. The time to appeal to the City Council shall begin to run upon the applicant's receipt of the response from the Development Review Committee.  
Sec. 4-44. - Overall development plan review. 
(a)	Procedures. After a sketch plan review has been completed or omitted pursuant to section 4-43, an overall development plan application shall be filed, processed and reviewed pursuant to sections 4-24 and 4-25. The application and exhibits shall be consistent with the recommendations developed by the Development Review Committee during the sketch plan review, if applicable. 
(b)	Required submittals. The application shall include the following supporting information: 
(1)	Information submitted for sketch plan review. All items required for sketch plan review under section 4-43(2). 
(2)	General information. 
a.	Name of subdivision; name, address, telephone number of the subdivider, subdivision designer, professional engineer and registered surveyor; 
b.	A signed and sealed survey depicting the proposed lots, adjacent rights-of-way, all on-site and adjacent off-site improvements (i.e., structures, sidewalks, streetlights, fire hydrants, etc.); 
c.	Total acreage in tract, acreage in public or other land usage, total number of lots, linear feet in streets; 
d.	Names and location of adjoining subdivisions and streets; 
e.	Other supplemental materials or any deed restrictions or protective covenants for the subdivision and any other information considered by either the applicant or the Development Review Committee to be pertinent to the review of the overall development plan. 
(3)	Existing site data. 
a.	Property lines, rights-of-way, pavement widths, easements, streets, driveways, railroads, utility transmission lines, storm sewers, ditches and culverts, sanitary sewers, water mains, bridges, buildings, bulkhead and bulkhead lines; 
b.	Wooded, wetland, and 100-year floodplain areas, marshes, watercourses, ponds, and other similar conditions affecting the site; 
c.	Topography of the site at not more than two-foot vertical contour intervals based on mean sea level data furnished by a professional engineer or surveyor; 
d.	Soil borings if required; 
e.	GPS coordinates. 
(4)	Proposed site data. 
a.	Street rights-of-way and pavement widths; 
b.	Other rights-of-way or easements; 
c.	Schematic plans of all underground utilities, including but not limited to sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water lines or electric lines if located underground; schematic details indicating proximity and/or connections to existing systems or proposals for development of new systems; 
d.	Proposals for dikes or any created water bodies or changed watercourses; 
e.	Locations of bulkheads and bridges, if any; 
f.	Typical lot dimensions; 
g.	Parks, school sites, and other public uses, if any; 
h.	Designation of areas to be used for purposes other than residential and public, if any; 
i.	Surface drainage patterns with direction of flow and method of disposal on site and off site; 
j.	Approximate spot elevations sufficient to indicate proposed grading of the streets and landscapes; 
k.	Plans and information required pursuant to all other applicable provisions of this Code; 
l.	Tentative construction schedule for the proposed development, including, if applicable, a tentative schedule for phasing construction, the date potable water facilities are needed to serve the proposed development and a commitment from the appropriate potable water provider, demonstrating that adequate capacity shall be available to service the proposed development at the time of impact; 
m.	The date sanitary sewer facilities are needed to service the proposed development and a commitment from the appropriate sanitary sewer system provider that adequate capacity shall be available to service the proposed development at the time of impact.  
Sec. 4-45. - Preliminary plat and construction plan review. 
After issuance of an overall development plan development order, the developer may file an application for a preliminary plat and construction plan (PPL) development order. The PPL shall be filed, processed and approved pursuant to sections 4-24 and 4-25. The application shall be consistent with the approved overall development plan and the requirements of this Code. 
(1)	Procedure and required submittals. An application for preliminary plat and construction plan review, the proper fee, and sufficient copies of the exhibits, as determined by the LDM, shall be filed with the LDM. Exhibits shall include: 
a.	General information. 
1.	All plans shall be submitted on 24 inch × 36 inch sheet sizes. 
i.	Construction plans shall be submitted in a format and scale approved by the City Development Engineer. 
ii.	A preliminary plat shall be submitted in the same format as required for final plats by F.S. ch. 177, and by the applicable provisions of this Code. 
2.	A signed and sealed survey of the subject property, prepared by a surveyor having a valid state professional surveyor and mapper license, showing the boundaries of the project must be submitted. Said survey must include the width of the right-of-way of the street on which the property is situated and those of the closest streets in both directions together with dimension ties to the centerline of the rights-of-way. It must also include any buildings on the property, any existing streets or roads (whether by plat, deed, easement or physically on-site), watercourses and section lines abutting the property or included in the legal description and any known easement. When any public corner, required by F.S. ch. 177, part III, to be reported, is used in the boundary survey, the certified corner report number must be depicted on the survey drawing. If a new report is required by the statute or in a case where the corner has not previously been reported, a copy of the new report must be attached to the survey if the survey is submitted before the certified corner report number is available. Said survey must be certified as meeting the requirements of F.A.C. ch. 61G17-6, pursuant to F.S. § 472.027. 
b.	Proposed site data and construction details. 
1.	Street rights-of-way, pavement widths, grades and elevations, street names, plans, profiles, and, when requested by the City Development Engineer, cross sections. 
2.	Other rights-of-way or easements, including locations, dimensions and purposes. 
3.	Plans for all underground utilities, including but not limited to sanitary sewers; storm sewers; water lines; and electric lines showing connections to existing systems, or proposals for developing new water supply; storm drainage; and sewage disposal systems; storm and sanitary profiles; and, when required by the City Development Engineer based on site conditions, cross sections; and inverts and top elevations of structures. 
4.	Contour changes, dikes or any created water bodies or changed watercourses. 
5.	Bulkheads and bridges; engineering plans, and cross sections. 
6.	Street centerline dimensions, scalar block and lot layouts, lot and block numbers. 
7.	Areas to be used for purposes other than residential and public; and with the purposes, location and dimensions of each indicated. 
8.	Information on essential services, including electric or gas services, including a commitment from the provider that adequate electric or gas service, where appropriate, will be available prior to issuance of the development order. 
(2)	Developer's option to commence construction. The developer may elect to commence construction of the subdivision after the preliminary plat development order has been issued and may at the same time apply for a final plat development order or may apply for a final plat development order prior to commencement of construction. 
(3)	Development permits required prior to commencement of construction. No construction shall commence nor shall an application for a final plat development order be accepted unless a preliminary plat development order has been issued. If the developer elects to commence construction prior to or concurrently with final plat approval, he shall notify the City Manager of that intention. The City Manager shall then issue a development permit authorizing the commencement of construction pursuant to the approved construction plans; provided all other permits from federal, state or regional agencies have been issued.  
Sec. 4-46. - Final plat review. 
After the preliminary plat development order has been issued pursuant to section 4-45, the developer may submit an application for a final plat development order. No improvements, including streets, shall be accepted and maintained by the City unless and until the final plat has been approved by the City Council, and has been duly recorded by the clerk of the circuit court in the county. The clerk shall record only those final plats which have been submitted for recording by the City Manager. 
(1)	Procedures. An application for a final plat development order shall be filed, processed and approved pursuant to section 4-25. The submittals shall be consistent with the issued preliminary plat development order and shall include any conditions. 
a.	The developer shall submit as the final plat only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time. Such portion shall conform to all requirements of this Code. 
b.	The developer shall submit an appropriate number of blue line prints, as determined by the LDM, of the final plat to the LDM. 
c.	The final plat shall be prepared by a currently registered land surveyor at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, or such other scale approved by the City registered land surveyor. All final plats shall be prepared on standard sheet sizes as required by F.S. ch. 177, as amended, and shall be 22 inches × 28 inches, including a three-inch binding margin on the left side and a one-inch margin on the other three sides. To ensure legibility, all lettering upon the plat shall have a minimum height of 0.10 inches. 
(2)	Required submittals. 
a.	The following information shall be shown on the submittals: 
1.	Name of subdivision, date of survey, north point and graphic scale. 
2.	A vicinity map drawn at scale of one inch equals 400 feet, or other scale deemed appropriate by the City Development Engineer. 
3.	Names and locations of all adjoining or interior subdivisions, City limit lines, bulkhead lines, property lines, rights-of-way and easements. 
4.	Accurate location and legal description of all monuments, markers and control points. The legal description of the property being platted shall appear on sheet one of the final plat. 
5.	Sufficient survey data to readily determine and reproduce on the ground every straight or curved boundary line, lot line, right-of-way line, easement line, bulkhead line and setback line, including, but not limited to, linear dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii, arcs and central angles. All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest 1/100 of a foot and all angles to the nearest second of a degree. 
6.	All proposed rights-of-way, easements and areas to be dedicated to public use with the purpose of each stated. 
7.	Areas to be used for purposes other than residential and public, if any, with the purpose, location and dimensions of each indicated. 
8.	Lot and block numbers, street names and all right-of-way or easement widths. 
9.	Signed certificates shall appear on sheet 1 of all final plats. Such certificates shall be in accordance with the format and specific language set forth in this Code. The following signed certificates shall be completed on the final plat prior to submission: dedication, joinder and consent to dedication, all required acknowledgements, certificate of surveyor, certificate of approval by a City registered land surveyor, certificate of approval by the City Council, and certificate of approval by the City Manager. 
10.	The final plat shall include such additional information as may be required by F.S. ch. 177, as amended. 
b.	The following information shall be provided on sheets separate from the final plat: 
1.	Name, address and telephone number of the subdivider, subdivision designer, professional engineer, registered surveyor, abutting property owners, and mortgagees of the property. 
2.	A title opinion which meets the requirements of F.S. ch. 177, as amended, and includes other encumbrances which affect the property. 
3.	Any deed restrictions or protective covenants, with the appropriate filing fees. 
4.	Such engineering plans, cross sections, plan and profile drawings of streets, bulkheads, bridges, sidewalks, water distribution systems, water treatment plants, sewerage collection systems, sewage treatment plants, and storm sewer systems as required by the City. 
5.	A copy of the final plat reduced to 8½ inches × 11 inches. 
c.	If the developer elects to construct the improvements after the issuance of the final plat, the following information shall be provided in addition to subsections (2)a and b of this section: 
1.	A signed and sealed professional engineer's estimate of the total construction cost or a signed contract which encompasses all proposed improvements. 
2.	A performance guarantee in accordance with section 4-111(a)(1). 
3.	All items required in subsections (2)d.1—4 of this section must be provided after subdivision improvements have been completed. 
d.	Upon completion of construction of the required improvements, the following information shall be provided in addition to subsections (2)a and b of this section: 
1.	A signed and sealed professional engineer's certification of the constructed improvements and the total construction cost. If fire hydrants were installed, the professional engineer must certify that the water distribution system of the development meets the National Fire Protection Association capacity requirements for fire hydrants. 
2.	A maintenance guarantee as provided in section 4-111(a) in the amount of 15 percent of the total construction cost acceptable to the City Manager and the City Development Engineer. 
3.	One Mylar and two sealed bluelines as-built construction plans signed by the professional engineer which encompass all required improvements. If the as-built construction plans were prepared on an appropriate CAD system, the applicant shall provide such computer disks to the LDM. 
4.	Adequate test reports signed and sealed by a professional engineer, as required by the City Development Engineer, and to assure that all improvements substantially meet City standards and specifications. 
(3)	Recording requirements. 
a.	Recording period. No plat may be recorded except during the effective period of a final plat. 
b.	Platted dedications. All streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way, parks, school sites and public areas shown on an accepted and recorded plat, unless otherwise stated, shall be deemed to have been dedicated or granted, as appropriate, to the public for the uses of the public. The recorded plat shall constitute, unless otherwise stated, an acceptance of said offer to dedicate, grant or reserve. Reservations must be clearly indicated as such, and must include the word "reservations." 
c.	Necessary documents. Prior to recording, an applicant shall furnish the City with those documents necessary to evidence and ensure compliance with such requirements, standards, restrictions or conditions of this Code as requested by the City. Such documents may include, but are not limited to, bonds or other security, agreements, restrictive covenants, deeds and easements, if evidence of compliance with such requirements, standards, restrictions or conditions is not appropriately contained in the development order or on the final plat to be recorded. The final plat and declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall contain the language required by and comply with sec. 4-187 concerning stormwater maintenance. The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall give the city enforcement rights as an intended third party beneficiary to enforce any provision required by this code and any provision required as a condition of development approval. 
d.	Recordation of plats. Plats shall be recorded in the following manner: 
1.	All recording fees, documents and the original plat shall be submitted to the LDM. The LDM and applicant shall then transmit the required fees and documents to the clerk of the circuit court, hereinafter referred to as the clerk. The clerk shall, after recording the plat, make three Mylar copies and a number of bluelines as determined by the LDM. Also, if the application was prepared on an appropriate CAD/GIS system, the applicant shall provide such computer disks to the LDM. 
2.	The original plat and one Mylar copy of the plat will be retained by the Clerk. One Mylar copy will be returned to the applicant. 
3.	No plat of lands in the City subject to these regulations shall be recorded, whether as an independent instrument or by attachment to another instrument entitled to record, unless and until such plat has been approved by the City Council and a final plat development order has been issued. 
4.	The City Manager shall obtain a statement that all current and previous taxes have been paid in accordance with F.S. § 197.192, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 11-13, § 3, 11-6-2013 )  
Sec. 4-47. - Plat certification and dedications. 
Following are the plat certifications and dedications of the city: 
USE OF DEDICATIONS 
A dedication does not transfer ownership of property but is only a perpetual permission to enter upon and to use such areas, by the general public, government personnel (as representative of the public), and utility company personnel (authorized by the government) for the placement, maintenance and use of facilities within each area in accordance with its purpose as described on the plat. 
In using the following dedication forms, delete any of the named facilities not involved on the plat and add any other desired to be dedicated to the use of the public, such as retention areas, bike or riding easements, etc. 
In cases of multiple ownership, use the form for two persons and add the additional names in the second line and add spaces for appropriate signatures. 
For the man and wife ownership, add a comma and his wife after her name in the second line. 
The exact name of the subdivision should be placed in the blank following the word "entitled." 
(Single Owner) 
DEDICATION 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That, I, ____________ , being the owner in fee simple of the lands described in the attached plat, entitled ____________ , located in the City of DeBary, Florida, do hereby dedicate said lands and plat for the uses and purposes therein expressed and dedicate all Streets, Avenues, Roads, Alleys, Arterials, Parks, Canals, Utility Easements, Utility Rights-of-Way, and Drainage Easements shown or described thereon to the perpetual use of the Public, for proper purposes, and IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I, ____________ , hereunto set my hand and my seal on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ A.D. 20 ____________ . 
Signed _____ 	(Seal) 
Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 	
_____	
_____	
 
STATE OF ____________ 
COUNTY OF ____________ 
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this (date) by (name of person acknowledging), who is personally known to me or who has produced (type of identification) as identification. 
	      (Signature of person taking acknowledgment)       
	      (Name typed, printed or stamped)       
	      (Title or rank)       
	      (Serial number, if any)       
 
(Two Persons) 
DEDICATION 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That we, ____________ and ____________ , being the fee simple owners of the lands described in the attached plat, entitled ____________ located in the City of DeBary, Florida, do hereby dedicate said lands and plats for the uses and purposes therein expressed and dedicate all Streets, Avenues, Roads, Alleys, Arterials, Parks, Canals, Utility Easements, Utility Rights-of-Way, and Drainage Easements shown or described thereon to the perpetual use of the Public, for proper purposes, and 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, We set our hands and seals on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , A.D. 20 ____________ . 
Signed 	_____	(Seal) 
	_____	(Seal) 
Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 	
_____	
_____	
 
STATE OF ____________ 
COUNTY OF ____________ 
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this (date) by (name of person acknowledging), who is personally known to me or who has produced (type of identification) as identification. 
	      (Signature of person taking acknowledgment)       
	      (Name typed, printed or stamped)       
	      (Title or rank)       
	      (Serial number, if any)       
 
(Corporation) 
DEDICATION 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That ____________ incorporated under the laws of the State of ____________ being the owner in fee simple of the lands described in the attached plat, entitled ____________ , located in the City of DeBary, Florida, hereby dedicates said lands and plat for the uses and purposes therein expressed and dedicates all Streets, Avenues, Roads, Alleys, Arterials, Parks, Canals, Utility Easements, Utility Rights-of-Way, and Drainage Easements shown or described thereon to the perpetual use of the Public, for proper purposes, and 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, has caused these presents to be signed and attested to by the officers named below and its corporate seal to be affixed hereto on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ A.D. 20 ____________ . 
(Name of Corporation) _____ 
By _____ (Corporate Seal) 
Attest: 
_____
Title 
Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 
_____
_____
 
STATE OF ____________ 
COUNTY OF ____________ 
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this (date) by (name of officer or agent, title of officer or agent) of (name of corporation acknowledging) , a (state or place of incorporation) corporation, on behalf of the corporation. He/she is personally known to me or has produced (type of identification) as identification. 
	      (Signature of person taking acknowledgment)       
	      (Name typed, printed or stamped)       
	      (Title or rank)       
	      (Serial number, if any)       
 
(Individual) 
JOINDER AND CONSENT TO DEDICATION 
I, ____________ , hereby certify that I am the holder of a Mortgage, Lien, or other encumbrance upon the property shown and described in the attached plat, entitled ____________ located in the City of DeBary, Florida, and that I hereby join in, and consent to, the dedication, shown on the plat, of the lands therein, and described by the owner thereof, and agree that my Mortgage, Lien, or other encumbrance, which is recorded in Official Records Book ____________ , at Page ____________ , of the Public Records of Volusia County, Florida, shall be subordinate to the said dedication. 
Signed and Sealed on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , A.D. 20 ____________ . 
By _____ 	(Seal) 
Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 	
_____	
_____	
 
STATE OF ____________ 
COUNTY OF ____________ 
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this (date) by (name of person acknowledging), who is personally known to me or who has produced (type of identification) as identification. 
	      (Signature of person taking acknowledgment)       
	      (Name typed, printed or stamped)       
	      (Title or rank)       
	      (Serial number, if any)       
 
(Two Persons) 
JOINDER AND CONSENT TO DEDICATION 
WE, ____________ , and ____________ , hereby certify that we are the holders of a Mortgage, Lien or other encumbrance upon the property shown and described in the attached plat, entitled ____________ located in the City of DeBary, Florida, and that I hereby join in, and consent to, the dedication, shown on the plat, of the lands therein, and described by the owner thereof, and agree that our Mortgage, Lien, or other encumbrance, which is recorded in Official Records Book ____________ , at Page ____________ , of the Public Records of Volusia County, Florida, shall be subordinated to the said dedication. 
Signed and Sealed on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ A.D. 20 ____________ . 
By _____ 	(Seal) 
By _____ 	(Seal) 
Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 	
_____	
_____	
 
STATE OF ____________ 
COUNTY OF ____________ 
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this (date) by (name of person acknowledging), who is personally known to me or who has produced (type of identification) as identification. 
	      (Signature of person taking acknowledgment)       
	      (Name typed, printed or stamped)       
	      (Title or rank)       
	      (Serial number, if any)       
 
(Corporation) 
JOINDER AND CONSENT TO DEDICATION 
____________ incorporated under the laws of the State of ____________ hereby certifies that it is the holder of a Mortgage, Lien, or other encumbrance upon the property shown, and described in the attached plat, entitled ____________ , located in the City of DeBary, Florida, does hereby join in, and consent to, the dedication, shown on the plat, of the lands therein, and described by the owner thereof, and agrees that its Mortgage, Lien, or other encumbrance, which is recorded in Official Records Book ____________ , at Page ____________ , of the Public Records of Volusia County, Florida, shall be subordinated to the said dedication. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF: ____________ Has caused these presents to be signed in its Corporate Name by its ____________ , its Corporate Seal to be hereunto affixed and attested by its ____________ this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ A.D. 20 ____________ . 
Name of Corporation 
By       (Title)       	SEAL 
Attest       (Title)       	
Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 	
_____	
_____	
 
STATE OF ____________ 
COUNTY OF ____________ 
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this (date) by (name of officer or agent, title of officer or agent) of (name of corporation acknowledging) , a (state or place of incorporation) corporation, on behalf of the corporation. He/she is personally known to me or has produced (type of identification) as identification. 
	      (Signature of person taking acknowledgment)       
	      (Name typed, printed or stamped)       
	      (Title or rank)       
	      (Serial number, if any)       
 
CERTIFICATE OF PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR AND MAPPER 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That the undersigned, being a professional land surveyor and mapper licensed in the State of Florida, does hereby certify that this plat was prepared under my direction and it complies with all of the survey requirements of F.S. ch. 177. 
	Seal 
Dated _____ 	By 	_____
	LS# 	_____
 
CERTIFICATES OF APPROVAL 
Certificate of Approval by Land Development Manager 
THIS IS TO CERTIFY, THAT ON ____________ / ____________ / ____________ This plat was approved. 
	By  _____
Land Development Manager or 
His Authorized Representative 
 
Certificate of Approval by County Registered Surveyor 
THIS IS TO CERTIFY, THAT ON ____________ / ____________ / ____________ This plat was approved. 
	By  _____
County Registered Surveyor 
 
Certificate of Approval by City Council of the City of DeBary, Florida 
THIS IS TO CERTIFY, THAT ON ____________ / ____________ / ____________ the foregoing plat was approved by the City Council of the City of DeBary, Florida. 
_____
Mayor of the City of DeBary 	CITY 
SEAL 
Attest:  _____
City Clerk of the City of DeBary 	
 
Certificate of Clerk 
I HEREBY CERTIFY, That I have examined the foregoing plat and find that it complies in form with all the requirements of chapter 177, Florida Statutes, and was filed for record on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ at ____________ File No. ____________ . 
_____
Clerk of the Circuit Court in and for Volusia County, Florida 
  
Secs. 4-48—4-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FINAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 4-61. - Final site plan review. 
(a)	Approval required. Unless otherwise stated in this Code, granting of a final site plan development order (FSP) is required prior to the issuance of any development permit allowing the commencement of site construction of any development in the City. 
(b)	Exempt development. The following activities shall not require compliance with this division, but may be subject to other divisions of this article: 
(1)	Construction of a single-family home and customary accessory structures on an existing single-family zoned lot. 
(2)	Construction of a single duplex and customary accessory uses on an existing duplex zoned lot. 
(3)	The installation of those improvements which are required to develop a subdivision and for which development permits have been issued pursuant to division 2 of this article. 
(4)	Agricultural production practices, which include fencing, drainage, irrigation and other agricultural uses and structures, including portable structures which do not conflict with existing City ordinances. 
(c)	On- and off-site development. The provisions of this division shall be applied to all development which is the subject of an FSP, whether that development is on or off the subject site.  
Sec. 4-62. - Conceptual or final site plan review. 
(a)	Necessity for filing. 
(1)	All applicants for an FSP may first submit a conceptual site plan application (CPN) to the LDM. 
(2)	The LDM shall, within three working days of acceptance of the application, review the application for conformity with this Code and other development regulations and notify the applicant in writing of the results of the review. Thereafter, the applicant may submit an application for an FSP. 
(b)	Procedures. An application for an FSP shall be filed and processed pursuant to sections 4-24 and 4-25. 
(c)	Required submittals. A CPN or FSP application shall include the following: 
(1)	Conceptual site plan application. 
a.	Statement of ownership of the proposed development, and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the developer and any project engineers, architects or planners; 
b.	Legal description; 
c.	Current zoning classification; 
d.	Schematic representation of proposed use, including building size, shape and location on the site; 
e.	Schematic representation of vehicular circulation within the site, including driveways, parking areas and loading areas; 
f.	Schematic representation of points of connection to the public rights-of-way. 
(2)	Final site plan application. An FSP application for small and large scale site plans may be submitted pursuant to sections 4-24 and 4-25 and shall include the following information and exhibits drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet: 
a.	Statement of ownership of the proposed development, and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the developer and any project engineers, architects or planners; 
b.	Legal description; 
c.	Current zoning classification; 
d.	Vicinity map at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet with sufficient information to locate the property in the field; 
e.	A survey of the subject property, prepared by a registered surveyor, showing the boundaries of the project, and any existing streets, buildings, watercourses, easements and section lines; 
f.	Floodprone areas; 
g.	Water bodies or courses; 
h.	Swamp or wetland areas; 
i.	A plan, signed and sealed by a state registered professional engineer, containing the title of the project, its date, scale and a north arrow, and illustrating the location of all proposed buildings and structures, access and traffic flow, off-street parking and off-street loading areas, recreational facilities, landscaped and buffer areas, refuse collection areas, proposed utilities, and existing and proposed topography at one-foot contour intervals; 
j.	Total acreage, project density, and the percentages of total acreage for each permitted use, for building coverage and for impervious surface coverage; 
k.	Statement of the proposed number of off-street parking and loading spaces and how that number was calculated; 
l.	Statement of the proposed arrangements for the maintenance of common open space areas and facilities; 
m.	Location and height of all structures and total floor area with dimensions to lot lines, and designation of use; 
n.	Building separations; 
o.	Vehicular circulation system for bicycles, cars and other required vehicle types, with indication of connection to adjacent streets; 
p.	All adjacent rights-of-way, with indication of centerline and width, paving width, existing median cuts, driveways and intersections, street light poles and power company facilities; 
q.	Pedestrian circulation system; 
r.	Provider of water and sewerage facilities; 
s.	Existing and proposed fire hydrant locations and water main sizes; 
t.	Direction of drainage flows and nature of retention facilities; 
u.	Indication of existing native vegetation that will be preserved; 
v.	Identify known wildlife corridors for federal and state endangered species, threatened species or species of special concern; 
w.	Identify known plants and animals which inhabit the site that are listed as federal and state endangered species, threatened species or species of special concern; 
x.	Identify known historic and archaeological sites; 
y.	Tentative construction schedule for the proposed development, including, if applicable, a tentative schedule for phasing construction, the date potable water facilities are needed to serve the proposed development and a commitment from the appropriate potable water provider, demonstrating that adequate capacity shall be available to service the proposed development at the time of impact; 
z.	The date sanitary sewer facilities are needed to service the proposed development and a demonstration and commitment from the appropriate sanitary sewer system provider, that adequate capacity shall be available to service the proposed development at the time of impact; 
aa.	Location of solid waste disposal system and provisions for accessibility to refuse collection and recycling trucks; 
bb.	Off-street parking, loading, bicycle parking and mass transit loading (bus stop) areas and provisions for accessibility to vehicles of the required type; 
cc.	Areas for emergency vehicles and fire engines, and provisions for accessibility to vehicles of the required type; 
dd.	Design of all paved areas, including dimensions, radii and elevations, as well as plans for traffic control signs and pavement markings; 
ee.	Location of all drainage features, and retention areas; lowest floor elevation of proposed buildings; 
ff.	Plans and specifications required pursuant to all other applicable provisions of this Code; 
gg.	Computation of pervious and impervious area, in square footage and percentage; 
hh.	Building floor areas, elevations, sizes, types and typical floor plans; 
ii.	Plans for signs, which at a minimum shall include location, size and setbacks; 
jj.	A landscaping plan signed and sealed by a landscape architect meeting the requirements of this Code; 
kk.	Location and plans for any outside storage areas; 
ll.	Any additional information deemed necessary by any reviewing department or agency, or deemed appropriate by the developer; 
mm.	If the FSP was prepared on a geographic information system or CAD system, the applicant shall provide such computer disks to the LDM; 
nn.	Solid waste container and enclosure. Trash storage facilities in all commercial and industrial districts shall be screened by the owner so as to completely conceal such facilities from the view of persons in adjacent public rights-of-way normally reserved for vehicular traffic. This screening shall conform generally to the aesthetics and architectural characteristics of the adjoining principal structure or structures, and the use of natural materials and landscaping is encouraged. A dumpster pad detail and location plan shall be submitted to the zoning department for approval and permitting before any dumpster is located within the City limits. The specifications shall be as follows: A concrete pad shall be required, 12 feet wide and 16 feet long, with a six-foot high screened enclosure with a lockable gate. Said gate and screen are to be located outside of and not on the pad. The angle of the pad with the driving lane shall allow for a straight line maneuvering distance of 55 feet. A final inspection shall be required to ensure proper installation of the dumpster. 
One or more of the above items of information may be waived by the City Manager at the time of application if deemed unnecessary in a particular case. The waived item may still be subsequently required by any reviewing department or agency if they deem it necessary. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 4-63. - Conformity to recorded plat and zoning regulations. 
(a)	Conformity to recorded plat. If a FSP includes land previously platted, it shall conform to such plat. 
(b)	Conformity to zoning regulations. Development depicted in a FSP shall conform to all applicable zoning regulations.  
Secs. 4-64—4-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS OF IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 4-81. - General design criteria. 
(a)	Use of natural features. The arrangement of structures, buildings, lots, blocks, and traffic circulation systems and retention areas shall make the most advantageous use of topography, trees and other natural features. 
(b)	Consideration of soil and flood hazards. 
(1)	A development order shall not be approved unless all land intended for use as building sites can be used safely for building purposes without danger from flood or other inundation or from adverse soil or foundation conditions or from any other menace to health, safety or public welfare. Lands shall not be subdivided and/or developed until proper provisions are made for protective flood control measures and water management facilities necessary for flood-free development and flood-free vehicular access to such sites. It is the intent of this provision that no filling or grade level change will be permitted which will cause adverse drainage, or public health or public safety impacts to any surrounding area. 
(2)	The "County of Volusia Soil Survey" and any supplements thereto shall be used as a guideline in identifying soil properties, and for interpretations for various uses in terms of soil limitations and soil features adversely affecting a particular use. In addition, the "Soil Supplement and Vegetative Analysis" or supplemental soil borings are to be used in interpreting the basic properties of the soils in terms of their potential for a particular use. 
(c)	Finished floor elevation, utility lines and special considerations. No development shall be approved that does not contain a suitable building site of sufficient elevation to permit construction utilizing a first floor elevation based upon the following: 
(1)	Utility lines including, but not limited to, electric power and light, telephone and telegraph, cable television, water, sewer and gas shall be constructed and installed beneath the surface of the ground unless it is determined by the Development Review Committee that soil, topographical or any other compelling conditions make the underground installation of such utility lines unreasonable and impracticable. The underground installation of bulk electric power supply lines, including but not limited to transmission lines and primary distribution feeder lines, shall not be required. 
(2)	Special considerations shall be given in the layout of streets, lots, blocks, buildings and easements to the preservation of large and specimen individual trees; to preserving natural drainage methods and natural topography and landscape; and to providing screening, buffers or berms where developments abut noncompatible land uses. 
(d)	Required review for subdivisions platted before 1990 and unrecorded subdivisions or unplatted lands. In order to achieve the benefits of stormwater management on infill development, the City may require the provision of onsite stormwater retention if construction is proposed at a base elevation which is less than 12 inches below the crown of all roads abutting the subject parcel. The stormwater management requirement for new development shall be the retention onsite of the first inch of runoff from all impervious surfaces. The stormwater retention requirements of this section shall be achieved through the retention of stormwater runoff in surface retention facilities, such as grassed swales and retention ponds. The stormwater management requirement, renovation or additions to existing buildings shall be the retention onsite of the first one-half inch of stormwater runoff from all impervious surfaces. In subdivisions platted before 1990 in which areas were not delineated and provided in the plat to store stormwater from the developed lots, and on unrecorded and/or unplatted land proposed for residential development where the proposed construction is less than 12 inches below the crown of the roadway abutting the parcel, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)	Stormwater management requirement. The stormwater management requirement for development or redevelopment on properties within single-family districts shall include some method or methods of on-site retention for the building, parking and driveway areas. These methods shall include, but not are not limited to, the provision of swales or other retention areas; the sloping of parking areas and drives to landscaped areas where setback provisions limit the amount of pervious area available; and other such methods which provide opportunities for the percolation of stormwater. 
(2)	Applicability. These performance standards shall apply to all single-family residential and duplex by building projects on vacant land, or land made vacant after the demolition of existing structures. 
(3)	Stormwater management technical standards. 
a.	It is the responsibility of the applicant to submit sufficient information for the building official or their designee to determine whether the requirements of this section are being met. 
b.	The submittal information should detail elevations or contours, directions of flow, and other grading or fill information. Submittals should also detail the computations and calculations utilized to demonstrate satisfaction of the retention requirements. Submittals should also detail the type of soil conditions present and the depth of the water table. A soils report and/or survey may be required to verify the conditions represented on the plan. 
c.	It shall be the duty of the property owner to provide proper maintenance of the stormwater management system so that the system continues to meet the requirements of this section. The City shall have the power to inspect stormwater management systems and facilities as necessary. Necessary maintenance and repair shall be made by the property owner with a time period not to exceed 30 days after written notification by the City of the problem and the required corrective action. Failure to make the corrective actions within the required time frame specified shall result in either the corrective action being performed by the City and a lien placed on all property in the county owned by the property owner and/or the property owner will be cited by the Code enforcement officer and the case taken before the City Code enforcement board for action. 
(4)	Surface stormwater system standards. 
a.	Surface stormwater systems utilized to accomplish the stormwater retention and percolation requirements shall be designed so as to be readily accessible from rights-of-way, parking areas and driveways, court yards, and other open areas so that maintenance and clean-out of these areas can be easily accomplished. 
b.	The side slopes and bottoms of all retention areas shall have a grass or other landscape material cover. The maximum depth of retention areas shall be four feet from the surrounding average grade. The maximum side slopes of retention areas shall not exceed three to one. 
c.	Spillways or other entrance channels to retention areas shall be designed to prevent the flushing of these areas by heavy rains. 
d.	Retention areas shall be designed and function such that all retained water is removed after the third day. If this is not accomplished by percolation or evaporation, the retention area must be improved to include an underdrain system or other bottom materials to accomplish this requirement. 
(5)	Disposition of stormwater runoff. 
a.	All stormwater systems shall include a method for the disposition of excess stormwater runoff. This disposition is to be into the right-of-way of the City, if there is storm drainage facilities in place. 
b.	In cases where the disposition of excess stormwater runoff is to other than to public rights-of-way with storm drainage facilities, the approval of the City Engineer shall be required for the design and disposition of stormwater runoff in other areas such as lakes, ponds, streams, canals, wetlands, or rights-of-way without storm drainage facilities. 
(6)	Variances. Until such time as a City-wide stormwater management system is installed throughout the City, variances from the provisions of these amendments will not be accepted or approved by the City Council. 
(7)	Records notice. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the City, the property owner shall record a notice in the public records of the county with the clerk of the court, and producing a copy of the recorded document to the city clerk. Such notice shall explicitly state for the benefit of all future property owners that the subject property does not meet the minimum elevation requirements of the City Land Development Code. 
(e)	Monuments. Permanent survey reference monuments shall be installed in all subdivisions and condominium plats in accordance with F.S. ch. 177, as amended. Additional monuments such as along rear lot lines which do not abut the subdivision boundary may be required by the City registered land surveyor. 
(1)	At least one corner of a development shall be designated by course and distance (tie) from a readily discernible reference marker such as a U.S. government marker, section corner, or quarter-section corner. When such a monument or corner is not available, the tie shall be made to some permanent and readily recognizable landmark or identifiable point, physical object or structure, excluding trees. 
(2)	At least two monuments shall be installed as control corners within each block within the plat. The surveyor shall install additional monuments, if required by the county registered land surveyor, prior to final plat approval. All monuments shall be constructed of concrete and shall be at least four inches in diameter or square, and not less than two feet in length. Each monument shall have imbedded in its top or attached by a suitable means a metal plate of noncorrosive material marked plainly with the point, the surveyor's registration number, and the words "Permanent Reference Monument" or the initials "P.R.M." Monuments shall be set in the ground so that the top is flush with the finish grade. 
(3)	Property markers shall be installed in accordance with F.S. ch. 177, as amended. 
(f)	Impervious area and stormwater runoff. The area covered by structures and impervious surface shall not exceed 75 percent for any lot. 
(1)	Pervious areas may be used to satisfy requirements for landscaping and setbacks, buffer strips, drain fields, passive recreation areas, or any other purpose that does not require covering with a material that prevents infiltration of water into the ground. 
(2)	In the case of the use of an impervious material which does not cover all the surface to which it is applied, credit towards the computation of the pervious area shall be given according to the amount of percolation that is permitted. 
(3)	Parking areas, whether paved with impervious material or not, shall be considered impervious. 
(g)	Special considerations. Special consideration shall be given in the layout of streets, lots, blocks, buildings and easements to the preservation of larger and specimen individual trees; to preserving natural drainage methods and natural topography and landscape; and to providing screening, buffers or berms where developments abut noncompatible land uses.  
Sec. 4-82. - Streets. 
(a)	General requirements for paved streets. All proposed lots or developments, except for utilities such as cable substations, communication towers, etc., shall front on a paved street. Primary access to a subdivision or development shall be from a street paved to the standards of this section. This street, if not already paved, shall be paved by the developer from the entrance of the development to the nearest public paved street. The character, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the standards in this section and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Construction and material specifications for streets shall conform to FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, except as otherwise may be stated herein. 
(1)	All newly platted streets intended to serve residential uses shall be public. The Development Review Committee may recommend and the City Council may approve private streets for security purposes only, provided all such streets meet all design and construction criteria of this Code, a permanent security post or gate are provided, and a condominium or homeowners' association is created with all duties and powers necessary to ensure perpetual maintenance of such private streets. All streets shall be constructed to the exterior property lines of the development unless they are permanently terminated by a cul-de-sac or an intersection with another street. 
(2)	Newly platted streets intended to serve business or industrial uses may be private if approved by the City Council. In such cases, all streets shall meet the design and construction criteria of this Code unless overriding conditions, such as sharing entrances or parking areas, require different design criteria. 
(3)	Design and construction standards: 
a.	Street capacities shall be determined by the standards established by the Transportation Research Board Highway Capacity Manual. 
b.	The geometric design of streets shall conform to the minimum standards established by the FDOT Minimum Standards for Streets and Highways, except where changes are specified herein. 
c.	The construction of streets and work in the public right-of-way shall conform to the FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, except where changes are specified herein. 
d.	The determination of traffic generation rates for a particular development shall conform to the latest edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual, unless otherwise approved by the City Traffic Engineer. 
e.	Obstruction to visibility. At the intersection of any streets, no obstruction of any kind shall block the visibility of motorists between 30 inches and ten feet above the centerline grades of those intersecting streets within a triangular area of horizontal configuration as depicted in the FDOT Roadway and Traffic Designs Standards Index No. 546, as amended. 
(b)	Traffic impact analysis. Unless waived by the Development Review Committee, the developer at his expense shall have a registered professional engineer qualified in traffic engineering prepare and provide the City with a traffic impact analysis by means of the most current Volusia County MPO adopted Transportation Impact Analysis(TIA) Guidelines Methodology as amended. 
(c)	Arrangement of streets. The arrangement of streets in a development shall: 
(1)	Provide efficient and orderly hierarchy of streets; 
(2)	Conform with official plans and maps of the City; 
(3)	Be integrated with the existing and planned street system of the surrounding area in a manner which is not detrimental to existing neighborhoods; 
(4)	Be such that the use of local streets by through or commercial traffic is discouraged; 
(5)	When necessary, as determined by the Development Review Committee, provide at least two separate and remote entrances to a development, unless other provisions, such as easements, are made for emergency ingress and egress, and provided that such entrances will not adversely affect the overall street system; 
(6)	Facilitate and coordinate with the desirable future development of adjoining property of a similar character and provide for local circulation and convenient access to neighborhood facilities; 
(7)	Local streets shall be patterned in such a way that continuous traffic from one collector to another collector is discouraged. 
(d)	Intersections. Street intersections shall be laid out as follows: 
(1)	Streets shall intersect at an angle of 90 degrees, unless circumstances acceptable to the Development Review Committee indicate a need for a lesser angle of intersection. 
(2)	Spacing of street intersections. 
a.	A collector may intersect an arterial, but only if aligned with and extending an existing collector which intersects the arterial, or at a minimum distance of 1,320 feet from the intersection of an existing collector and the arterial. 
b.	A local street shall not intersect an arterial unless unavoidable, in which case the local street may intersect an arterial, but only if aligned with and extending an existing local street which intersects the arterial, or at a minimum distance of 660 feet from any other intersection of the arterial. 
c.	A collector may intersect another collector, but only if aligned with and extending an existing collector, or at a minimum distance of 660 feet from any other intersection. 
d.	A local street may intersect a collector if spaced at a minimum distance of 660 feet from any other intersection or, in the case of a T-type intersection, at a minimum distance of 330 feet from any other intersection. 
e.	The minimum spacing requirements of this section may be reduced upon a finding by the Development Review Committee that, given the particular conditions of the proposed development, such reduction will not compromise operational and safety standards or cause undo hardship. 
(3)	Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a minimum radius of 25 feet. A greater radius shall be required for angles of intersections less than 90 degrees. 
(4)	If required by the City Development Engineer, the right-of-way width shall be increased by at least ten feet on each side of an arterial street for a minimum distance of 150 feet from its intersection with another arterial street, to permit proper intersection design. 
(e)	Minimum right-of-way and pavement widths. New street minimum rights-of-way and pavement widths shall be as set forth in tables II and III. 
(f)	Additional right-of-way and/or pavement widths. 
(1)	Additional right-of-way shall be required for public safety and convenience, or to assure adequate access, circulation, parking and to provide turn lanes on any public road. Further, additional right-of-way may be required on existing or proposed roadways if such roadways are within the Capital Improvements Element of the City Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)	The roadways shown on the roadways system maps in the Traffic Circulation Element of the City's Comprehensive Plan, which are either located within or provide primary access as provided in subsection (f)(1) of this section, shall be conveyed or dedicated to the public by deed, or if acceptable to the City or other appropriate jurisdiction, by grant of easement. 
(3)	Half streets shall be prohibited. Where a previously dedicated half street, paved or unpaved, abuts or is within a tract to be developed, the second half of the street shall be dedicated to the City and the full width shall be paved by the developer where the subject street is necessary for the development of the subdivision or overall traffic circulation. 
(4)	Additional right-of-way required at intersections. For the installation of traffic-control equipment, a chord, based on a 30-foot radius curve at the intersection of the right-of-way lines, shall be provided at each arterial intersection, and the area between the chord and the tangents of the intersecting streets shall be dedicated or, if acceptable to the City, granted by easement. 
(g)	Access to development. 
(1)	Every lot or parcel shall have access from a publicly dedicated street, except as otherwise provided in section 4-82(a). 
(2)	Where development borders on or contains a right-of-way for a railroad, expressway, interstate highway, drainage canal or waterway, a street may be required approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land and in compliance with all provisions of this Code. 
(3)	Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited, unless dedicated to the public. 
(4)	Median openings. To assure traffic safety, capacity and control, median openings shall be spaced the maximum distance apart that will allow safe and adequate traffic circulation. 
a.	Location. 
1.	No median opening shall be spaced at a distance less than 660 feet from any other median opening unless specifically approved by the City Traffic Engineer on a finding that, given the particular conditions of the proposed development, such determination will not compromise traffic operational and safety standards. 
2.	Dedicated public streets are given priority consideration for median openings. 
b.	Design criteria. 
1.	All median openings shall include at least 105 feet storage with 50 feet transition, unless otherwise acceptable by the City Traffic Engineer. Increased storage and transition lengths may be required to eliminate disruption of through-traffic flow. 
2.	Final design of median openings shall be approved by the City Traffic Engineer. 
(h)	Street jogs. Street jogs or centerline offsets between streets shall be no less than 150 feet. 
(i)	Culs-de-sac. Cul-de-sac length shall be determined in the following manner: ten times typical lot width, with a maximum of 1,000 feet. Paved turnarounds shall be provided. In the center of the turnaround, an unpaved island, surrounded by a curb, improved with grass and landscaping that will not interfere with sight distance, may be provided. Center islands shall have a diameter of 17 feet. 
(j)	Street grade. Minimum centerline grade for all streets with curb and gutter shall be two-tenths of one percent. Maximum centerline grades for streets range from three to eight percent depending on type and design speed and shall meet the recommended maximum grades in the FDOT "Green Book." The centerline may be flat for all swale sections, provided the swale grade is a minimum of two-tenths of one percent. 
(k)	Minimum street elevation. New streets shall be designed flood free so as not to submerge, based on foreseeable flood stages. Generally, the minimum street centerline elevation shall be one foot above known or estimated flood stages of natural or manmade water bodies. Where flood stage recovery is expected to occur in less than one day (such as water sheds with positive outfall or tidal flood areas), the lowest edge of pavement elevation may be at the flood stage. 
(l)	Street names. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with other existing or approved named streets shall have the same name as the existing or approved streets. In no other case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing or approved street names, irrespective of the use of alternative suffixes, such as "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive," "place," "court," etc. Circle or loop streets shall bear the same name throughout. All street names shall require the approval of the 911 coordinator. 
(m)	Streetlights. All proposed urban development shall provide for street lighting installation. A petition for creation of a special assessment district for street lighting shall be submitted. 
(1)	Installation of street lighting. 
a.	Arterials. Lighting units of 22,000 lumen along arterials must be spaced 100 feet to 150 feet on alternate sides of the street. All intersections must be provided with street lighting. 
b.	Collectors. Lighting units of 16,000 lumen along collectors must be spaced 200 feet to 250 feet on alternate sides of the roadway. All intersections must be provided with street lighting. 
c.	Locals. New streetlights of 9,500 lumens on local streets must be provided at intersections or at points along the street such as sharp curves or existing overlength cul-de-sacs where streetlights would decrease the potential for accidents. 
(2)	Installation procedures. Proposed street lighting along all public rights-of-way must be coordinated through the City. Streetlight installation orders are issued by the City Manager to initiate the process and must be requested by the developer through the City as soon as street construction plans are complete. All costs for new street lighting on public streets must be paid for by the developer. 
(n)	Curbs and gutters. 
(1)	General. All streets shall be drained utilizing curb-and-gutter construction unless otherwise waived by the City Development Engineer. 
(2)	Width and permitted types. The width of curb and gutter shall be a minimum of 24 inches and shall be either state DOT type or Miami curb and gutter, depending upon the flow to be handled. Environmental curb or a minimum 18-inch wide curb surrounding medians may be permitted by the Development Review Committee in developments where soil types and/or topography indicate this method to be preferable. All curbs designed to handle water shall incorporate an approved gutter design. There shall be a stabilized subgrade beneath all curbs and one foot beyond the back of curbs. No water value boxes, meters, portions of manholes, or other appurtenances of any kind relating to any underground utilities shall be located in any portion of a curb and gutter section. 
(3)	Minimum grades. The minimum allowable flow line grade of curbs and gutters shall be two-tenths of one percent, except in intersections where flatter grades shall be allowable. The tolerance for ponded water in curb construction is one-fourth inch maximum. 
(4)	Other requirements. 
a.	Plastering shall not be permitted on the face of the curb. 
b.	Joints shall be provided at intervals of ten feet, except where shorter intervals are required for closures, but in no case less than four feet. 
c.	No raised portion of any type of curb shall be constructed closer than 12 feet from the pavement edge of an intersecting road without curbs. After concrete has set sufficiently, but in no case later than three days after construction, the curbs shall be backfilled. 
d.	All cross-street valley gutters shall be constructed of concrete. 
(o)	Street construction specifications. 
(1)	Clearing and grubbing of rights-of-way. The developer shall clear all traveled ways and recovery areas according to the FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. Trees may be selectively cleared outside of the recovery area to accommodate the installation of the drainage, water and sewer systems, or any other utilities. Any such tree removal shall be in accordance with the requirements of article IV of chapter 5. All debris shall be removed by the developer from rights-of-way after construction. 
(2)	Paving. 
a.	All paving shall be done in accordance with FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and FDOT Roadway and Traffic Design Standards, except where changes are specified herein. 
b.	All unstable materials such as muck, peat, plastic clays or marls shall be removed from roadbed areas. The areas then shall be backfilled with suitable material, and the subgrade stabilized to a depth below the base as shown in table I. Stabilization shall be to 75 pounds per square inch, Florida Bearing Value, for soils stabilized with clay, marl or other plastic type materials and to 40 percent limerock bearing ratio for soils stabilized with shell, concrete screenings or other granular materials. The materials to be added for stabilization, if needed, shall be either high-bearing soil, sand clay, ground lime rock, or any other suitable material. (Muck shall not be used.) For rural sections, subgrade shall be stabilized to include the entire width of both shoulders to a depth of six inches. Where curb and gutter is utilized, subgrade shall be stabilized underneath curb to a depth of six inches and for a distance of four feet beyond the back edge of curbs where Miami or environmental curbs are used. For raised curbs, refer to stabilization requirements as used in FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and FDOT Roadway and Traffic Design Standards. 
c.	Written test results, provided by a competent testing laboratory, shall be submitted giving Florida Bearing Value sufficient to obtain uniform results for each and every type of soil appearing in the roadbed at or random locations designated by the City. 
d.	After the subgrade is mixed, brought to grade, and ready for base course construction, it shall be showing not less than 98 percent modified maximum density for samples taken not more than every 250 feet apart, alternating from side to center, thence to opposite side and back to center, etc., or, in addition, whenever the City may require, prior to commencing. Separate test results will be required if stabilization is performed under curb areas separately from stabilization of the roadbed, showing not less than 98 percent modified maximum density for samples taken not more than every 250 feet apart, alternating from side to center, thence to the opposite side and back to the center, etc., or, in addition, whenever the City may require, prior to commencing. Separate test results will be required if stabilization is performed under curb areas separately from stabilization of the roadbed. 
(3)	Base courses. 
a.	Base course type and thickness shall be determined from table I. All base courses shall be constructed in accordance with FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and FDOT Roadway and Traffic Design Standards. 
_____
TABLE I. ROAD DESIGN STANDARDS 
			Arterial 
or over 
10,000 ADT* 
(inches) 	Collector or 
2,000 to 
10,000 ADT 
(inches) 	Local 1,000 
to 2,000 
ADT 
(inches) 	Local 0 to 
1,000 ADT 
(inches) 
I. 	Asphalt: 	
	A. 	Surface: 1 				
		1. Friction course 2 	1 	1 	— 	— 
		2. Structural course 3 	2 	1½ 	1½ 	1 4 
	B. 	Base: 				
		Limerock or 	10 	8 	6 4 	6 4 
		Soil cement or 	10 	8 	6 4 	6 4 
		Asphalt 	8 	6 	5 4 	5 4 
	C. 	Subbase stabilizing 	12 	10 	8 	6 
II. 	Concrete: 	
	A. 	Pavement 	9 	6 	6 	5 
	B. 	Subbase 	Florida Department of Transportation Embankment Standards to be used for all concrete road construction. Top 12 inch layer shall be A-1, A-3 or A-2-4 AASHTO Classification, stabilized to LBR 40 or FBV 75, as recommended by the City Development Engineer. 
 
*Average daily traffic. 
1 No recycled asphalt material shall be used in surface course asphalt. 
2 DOT Type FC1 or FC4 only shall be used for friction course. 
3 Type I asphaltic concrete or any current DOT structural course may be used. 
4 Minimum thickness. Standard DOT tolerance below dimension not acceptable. 
_____ 
b.	Following compaction for limerock base courses, written test results shall be submitted showing not less than 98 percent modified maximum density for samples taken not more than every 250 feet apart, alternating from side to center, etc., or wherever the City may require. 
c.	Tests shall be required for each layer if construction is in two layers. The contractor shall make borings in areas designated by the City inspector to enable measurement of thickness. 
d.	Finished lime rock base courses shall be primed without delay and continuously maintained free of damage until the wearing surface is applied. The wearing surface shall be applied immediately upon completion, but, in no case, later than 15 days. 
(4)	Wearing surface. 
a.	The material used for the wearing surface shall be a state DOT asphaltic concrete mix of Type S-1, S-3 or FC, or state DOT modifications. The surface shall have a compacted nominal thickness in accordance with table I. 
b.	On all streets in commercial or industrial subdivisions, the wearing surface shall be constructed no less than 1¾ inches thick in any place. 
c.	A certified copy of the design mix shall be approved by the City Development Engineer before being placed. Any deviation from this design requirement will be considered only after review and documentation of the special circumstances by the City. The maintenance of the completed road system shall be guaranteed for a period of one year. 
(5)	Concrete streets. Concrete streets may be permitted. Refer to table I for specifications. Construction shall be in accordance with FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and FDOT Roadway and Traffic Design Standards. 
(p)	Street name signs, regulatory signs, pavement markings, reflective pavement markers, traffic signals, and pedestrian crosswalks. 
(1)	General. Required signs must be in place prior to City acceptance of the street. All signing and pavement marking shall be in accordance with the USDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and shall be approved by the City Traffic Engineer. Traffic control signs shall be fabricated using 3M brand "Scotchlite" sheeting (high intensity grade) on minimum 0.080 gauge 5052-H38 aluminum blanks "U" channel posts, may be used for all signs smaller than 36 inches × 48 inches. All warning signs shall be 30 inches × 30 inches. If, at any time prior to final acceptance, an unforeseen need becomes apparent for signing or pavement markings that were not shown on the approved plans, the City reserves the right to require the additional signs or markings in the interest of public safety and as a condition of City acceptance. Alternative materials for sign mounting may be approved by the City Traffic Engineer. 
(2)	Street name signs. 
a.	Street name signs shall be a minimum of nine inches in height with lettering five inches in height on 3M brand "Scotchlite" sheeting (high intensity reflective grade) 0.063 gauge double blade 5052-H38 aluminum; silver/white reflective upper and lower case lettering with green Scotchlite reflective background sheeting or equivalent with a minimum 30-inch length. Street name sign poles shall include a two-inch by 12-foot galvanized-type round support set in concrete, or a 2½ × 12-inch, three lbs. per foot galvanized "U" channel post. Street name signs may be placed on the same pole above a "STOP" sign. Alternative materials for sign mounting may be approved by the City Traffic Engineer. 
b.	Arterial intersections shall be provided with at least two street name signs on diagonally opposite corners. 
(3)	Regulatory signs. Thirty-inch high intensity octagon "STOP" signs on 12-foot long, three pounds/foot "U" channel posts (rail steel only) or three-inch diameter 12-foot long round aluminum posts shall be provided at every street intersection as a condition for acceptance of development paving and drainage improvements and shall be in place prior to final inspection. All round posts shall be installed with anchor plates to prevent post rotation. The developer shall furnish and erect regulatory signs as required by the City Traffic Engineer. Regulatory signs must conform to the specifications in the USDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and locations of signs shall be subject to approval by the City Traffic Engineer. 
(4)	Pavement markings. All pavement markings and striping within public rights-of-way shall be thermoplastic and shall be installed in accordance with FDOT Standard Index #17346. 
(5)	Reflective pavement markers (RPM's). RPM's shall be provided for all construction within public rights-of-way of all arterials and shall be installed in accordance with FDOT Standard Index #17352. 
(6)	Traffic signals. Traffic signals and other control devices shall be installed at locations determined by the Development Review Committee, where warranted, pursuant to any submitted traffic studies in accordance with USDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Signal design plans prepared by a qualified traffic engineer shall be provided for all new and existing signal modifications. The plans shall include appropriate intersection details at a one inch equals 20 feet scale with signal head details, movement diagram, signal timing and system timing, pole calculations and a tabulation of quantities based on FDOT standard pay item numbers. Signals on state roads shall meet FDOT requirements and shall be approved by the FDOT Traffic Operations. 
(7)	Pedestrian crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalk signing and marking, where used, shall be in accordance with the USDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(q)	Alleys. 
(1)	One-way alleys may be provided to serve residential, business, commercial and industrial areas and shall be a minimum of 30 feet in right-of-way width with 12 feet of pavement. 
(2)	Changes in direction of the alignment of an alley shall be made on a centerline radius of not less than 50 feet. 
(3)	Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited. 
(r)	Bridges. Bridges shall be constructed to the width of the connecting roadway pavement, or such additional width as required by the City Development Engineer, with an additional allowance on each side for a pedestrian walk. Bridges extending over waterways shall have a center span and a vertical clearance as required by the City Development Engineer. Bridges shall be designed by a professional engineer and conform to AASHTO and ASTM specifications, which are incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, and any applicable federal and state requirements. 
_____
TABLE II. RURAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS 
	Arterial 	Collector 	Local Streets 
	Two or 
Four Lanes 	Four-Lane 
Collector 	Two-Lane 
Collector 	Local 	Local/ 
Cul-de-Sac 
Volume 	10,000—50,000 ADT 	5,000—10,000 ADT 	2,000—5,000 ADT 	300 (a) —2,000 ADT 	0—300 (a) ADT 
Access 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Minimum design speed 	50 mph (i) 	45 mph (i) 	40 mph (i) 	30 mph (g)(i) 	30 mph (g)(i) 
Intersection space minimum 	660 ft. (b) 	660 ft. (b) 	330 ft. (b) 	250 ft. (e) 	250 ft. (e) 
Lanes 	2—4 	4 	2 	2 	2 
Minimum pavement width 	24 or 48 ft. (j) 	48 ft. (j) 	24 ft. (j) 	24 ft. (j) 	24 ft. (j) /43 ft. 
Pavement radii 	40—50 ft. 	40—50 ft. 	40—50 ft. 	30—40 ft. 	30—40 ft. 
Pavement mark/signing 	Yes (d) 	Yes (d) 	Yes (d) 	Yes (d) 	Yes (d) 
Parking on street 	Prohibited 	Prohibited 	Prohibited 	Prohibited 	Prohibited 
Median 	Yes (c) 	Yes (c) 	No 	No 	No 
*Turn lanes 	As required (f) 	As required (f) 	As required (f) 	No 	No 
Traffic signal 	As warranted 	As warranted 	As warranted 	No 	No 
Pedestrian crossing 	At signalized crossings 	At signalized crossings 	Intersection only 	Yes (d) 	Yes (d) 
*Approach widening 
(Expand intersection) 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	No 	No 
*Right-of-way 	100 ft. 	80 ft. 	80 ft. 	70 ft. 	70 ft./68 ft. radius 
Design vehicle (geom) 	WB 60 & SU 	WB 60 & SU 	WB 60 & SU 	WB 40 & SU 	WB 40 & SU 
Corners of right-of-way 
  	30-ft. chord 	30-ft. chord 	30-ft. chord 	30 ft. chord or 
25 ft. radius (k) 	30 ft. chord or 
25 ft. radius (k) 
*Sidewalks 	As required (h) 	As required (h) 	As required (h) 	No 	No 
Streetlights 	No 	No 	No 	No 	No 
 
*Further explanation in provisions of this section. 
(a) 
Over 300 ADT may be allowed if an alternate emergency access is provided. 
(b) 
Or alternate approved by the Development Review Committee based upon land planning and traffic analysis. A minimum 1,320 feet spacing will be required between two signalized intersections. 
(c) 
Refer to section 4-82(c). 
(d) 
As delineated in the USDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(e) 
Or 150 feet for opposing offset T-type intersection. 
(f) 
Refer to section 4-89(e)(5). 
(g) 
Design speeds lower than 30 mph may be used for local, subdivision type roads and streets. Streets with a design speed less than 30 mph shall be posted with appropriate legal speed limit signs. 
(h) 
Refer to section 4-90(b). 
(i) 
See the Manual of Uniform Standards for Design Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways (Green Book). 
(j) 
See FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and table I for the structural section. 
(k) 
Refer to section 4-82(d)(3) and section 4-82(f)(4). 
N/A = Not Applicable 
TABLE III. URBAN DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS 
	Arterial 	Collector 	Local Streets 
	Two or 
Four Lanes 	Four-Lane 
Collector 	Two-Lane 
Collector 	Local 	Local/ 
Cul-de-Sac 
Volume 	10,000—36,000 ADT 	5,000—10,000 ADT 	2,000—5,000 ADT 	300 (a) —2,000 ADT 	0—300 (a) ADT 
Access 	Prohibited (b) 	Prohibited (b) 	Prohibited (b) 	Yes 	Yes 
Minimum design speed 	45 mph (m) 	45 mph (m) 	40 mph (m) 	20 mph (g)(m) 	20 mph (g)(m) 
Intersection space minimum 	660 ft. (c) 	600 ft. (c) 	330 ft. (c) 	250 ft. (h) 	250 ft. (h) 
Lanes 	2 or 4 	4 	2 	2 	2 
Minimum pavement width 	24 or 48 ft. (n) 	48 ft. (n) 	24 ft. (n) 	20 ft. (n) 	20 ft. (n) /43 ft. radius 
Pavement radii 	40—50 ft. 	40—50 ft. 	40—50 ft. 	30—40 ft. 	30—40 ft. 
Pavement mark/signing 	Yes (e) 	Yes (e) 	Yes (e) 	Yes (e) 	Yes (e) 
Parking on street 	Prohibited 	Prohibited 	Prohibited 	Prohibited 	Prohibited 
Median 	Yes (d) 	Yes (d) 	No 	No 	No 
Turn lanes 	As required (f) 	As required (f) 	As required (f) 	No 	No 
Traffic signal 	As warranted 	As warranted 	As warranted 	No 	No 
Pedestrian crossing markings 	At signalized crossings 	At signalized crossings 	Intersections only 	As required by City Traffic Engineer 	As required by City Traffic Engineer 
Approach widening (expand intersection) 	Yes 	Yes 	No 	No 	No 
Right-of-way 	100 	80 ft. 	80 ft. (p) 	50 ft. (i) 	50 ft. (i) /54 ft. radius 
Design vehicle (geom) 	WB 60 & SU 	WB 60 & SU 	WB 60 & SU 	WB 40 & SU 	WB 40 & SU 
Corners 
  	30-ft. chord 	30-ft. chord 	30-ft. chord 	30 ft. chord or 
25 ft. radius (o) 	30 ft. chord or 
25-ft. radius (o) 
Sidewalks 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	As required (j) 
Streetlights 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	As required (k) 
 
(a) 
Over 300 ADT may be allowed if an alternate emergency access is provided. 
(b) 
Unless the spacing requirements of table V-B in section 4-89 are met. 
(c) 
Or approved alternate by the Development Review Committee based upon land planning and traffic analysis. A minimum 1,320 feet spacing will be required between two signalized intersections. 
(d) 
Refer to section 4-82(c). 
(e) 
As delineated in the USDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and as required by the City Traffic Engineer. 
(f) 
Refer to section 4-89(e)(5). 
(g) 
Design speeds lower than 30 mph may be used for local, subdivision type roads and streets. Streets with a design speed less than 30 mph shall be posted with appropriate legal speed limit signs. 
(h) 
Or 150 feet for opposing offset T-type intersection. 
(i) 
A 40-foot right-of-way width may be approved by the Development Review Committee provided a six-inch minimum vertical curb is used and upon a showing that all required improvements can be contained within the proposed 40-foot right-of-way or adjacent easements. Setbacks for structures shall be sufficient to permit a minimum of 25 feet of driveway depth from the closest side of the sidewalk to the structure. 
(j) 
Refer to section 4-90(b). 
(k) 
Refer to section 4-82(m). 
(l) 
Reserved. 
(m) 
See the Manual of Uniform Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways (Green Book). 
(n) 
See FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and table I for the structural section. 
(o) 
Refer to section 4-82(d)(3) and section 4-82(f)(4). 
;rn0;9;;adv=6q;;il=10q;(p);l;;lz;;il=30q;An internal subdivision functional collector may have a 60-foot right-of-way. 
(s)	Typical roadway sections. Following are the typical roadway section patterns of the city: 
 
 
 
(Ord. No. 21-07, § 2, 9-5-2007)  
Sec. 4-83. - Blocks. 
The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with regard to: 
(1)	Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(2)	Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street and pedestrian traffic, and fire protection; 
(3)	Blocks may be permitted in accordance with F.S. ch. 177.  
Sec. 4-84. - Lots. 
(a)	General. All lots shall be consistent with the requirements of the zoning regulations. In addition, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)	Width. All lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum width at the right-of-way line of not less than 35 feet, measured at the chord. 
(2)	Orientation. Every lot shall abut on a street which has a minimum right-of-way as set forth in Tables II and III. 
(b)	Dimensions. Lots shall meet the minimum dimensional requirements of the zoning regulations and shall be determined by the particular land use and building size proposed provided that minimum dimensions for lots utilizing individual wells and/or septic tanks shall be in accordance with section 4-87. 
(1)	Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a 15 percent greater width and area than that required by the applicable zoning classification to accommodate setbacks from both streets, except where all lots have an area of one-half acre or larger. 
(2)	Street access. The development of land shall provide, by means of a street or accessway, each lot with satisfactory and permanent access to an existing paved street. Backing onto streets shall not be permitted except on single-family and duplex lots. In addition, where automobiles backing onto adjacent streets from single-family or duplex driveways are anticipated to present a potential traffic flow or safety problem, the Development Review Committee may require provisions, such as turnaround areas or horseshoe driveways, or other access control measures as deemed necessary. 
(c)	Double-frontage lots. Double-frontage lots shall be permitted only where necessary to separate a development from arterials, to overcome disadvantage of topography and orientation, or to limit individual driveway access where necessary to preserve the carrying capacity of streets. Where double-frontage lots are created, they shall all front in the same direction. The rear of the lots shall be screened from the abutting street by a wall of brick or masonry construction, erected on site, six feet in height. The Development Review Committee may require landscaping of suitable height or permit a fence other than masonry. Access rights along the portion of the lots abutting an arterial shall be dedicated to the City by means of a note stating, "Vehicular Access Rights Dedicated to City of DeBary as a Nonvehicular Easement," lettered on the final plat along the right-of-way line adjacent to the lots affected.  
Sec. 4-85. - Easements. 
(a)	Utility easements. 
(1)	Utility easements shall be granted where necessary to accommodate all required utilities. Easements shall be centered on rear or side lot lines, unless otherwise approved by the Development Review Committee. Where required, rear lot line easements shall have a minimum width of 7½ feet per lot (15 feet total) and side lot line easements shall have a minimum width of five feet per lot (ten feet total). A minimum total width of 15 feet must be provided, where necessary, for storm or sanitary sewers. In all cases, easements shall be granted to the perpetual use of the public for the purpose shown therein. 
(2)	The term "utility easement" shall allow, but not be limited to, the installation of sanitary and storm sewers, water lines, gas lines, electrical lines, telephone and telegraph lines, and cable television lines. 
(b)	Water and wastewater easements. Water and wastewater lines shall be installed within a granted easement or a dedicated right-of-way, which meets the following standards: 
(1)	A lot line easement shall be a minimum of 15 feet in total width. 
(2)	A maintenance easement in which both water and wastewater lines are to be installed shall be wide enough to allow for a ten-foot separation between lines, unless the wastewater lines are entirely encased in concrete. 
(3)	The width of an easement immediately adjacent to a building or structure shall be determined by the following factors: type of pipeline (water, wastewater, or force main), size and elevation of line, damage to buildings or structures in the case of failure, and accessibility to utility maintenance equipment. 
(c)	Drainage and maintenance easements. Drainage easements of a width required for handling and maintaining an adequate storm drainage system shall be provided. In addition, drainage and maintenance easements shall be a minimum of ten feet wide on a 10:1 or flatter slope surrounding all retention areas, and 20 feet wide to and along drainage pipes and structures to permit periodic access and maintenance by machinery, unless otherwise approved by the City Development Engineer. 
(d)	Pedestrian and bicycle easements. Pedestrian and bicycle easements or walkways may be provided on site. Pedestrian and bicycle easements shall be at least two feet beyond the edge of the facility. 
(e)	No City expense. All easements shall be granted at no expense to the City.  
Sec. 4-86. - Phased development. 
Each phase of any development shall be capable of standing on its own, in the event that subsequent phases are not developed. Subdivision or Planned Unit Developments shall be limited to no more than six plats or phases.  
Sec. 4-87. - Water and sewer. 
(a)	General. Water and sewer facilities shall be designed in compliance with all applicable regulations by a state registered engineer. All water and sewer facilities shall be approved by the utilities, the City Development Engineer, as appropriate, the county health department, the state department of environmental regulation, and the St. Johns River Water Management District, as appropriate. The cost of designing and installing water and sewer systems shall be borne by the developer. 
(b)	Water facilities. 
(1)	All proposed urban developments shall provide potable water production, treatment and distribution facilities. 
(2)	Developments with lot sizes equal to or greater than one acre may utilize individual wells provided that provisions are made to meet fire flow requirements in accordance with section 4-92. 
(3)	Development of water facilities shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(4)	All proposed urban development located within one-quarter mile of an existing potable water facility with available capacity to serve the proposed development shall connect to said existing facility or alternate facility approved by the City. The proposed development shall be designed to provide adequate areas and easements necessary for the installation and maintenance of a potable water distribution system which meets the requirements of the Potable Water Subelement of the Comprehensive Plan and F.A.C. ch. 64E-8, and the most current ANSI/ASTM standards. 
(5)	All proposed urban development within one-quarter mile of an existing potable water facility, which lacks capacity to serve the proposed development, shall be approved subject to the existing or approved alternate potable water facility being made available. 
(6)	Developments that construct or guarantee construction of their own potable water facilities shall convey such potable water facilities to the City at no expense to the City. 
(c)	Sewer facilities. 
(1)	All proposed urban development shall provide for central sewer collection, treatment and disposal facilities. 
(2)	Where approved for use, all septic tanks shall be located in yards abutting sewer facility easements. Where connection to a central wastewater system is not required, individual wastewater disposal treatment and discharge systems which include septic tanks shall be provided. 
(3)	Developments that construct or guarantee construction of their own sewer collection, treatment and disposal facilities shall convey the sewer facilities to the City at no expense to the City. 
(4)	Development of sewer facilities shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. A finding that wastewater collection, treatment and disposal services is available must be based upon a demonstration that the existing facilities have sufficient capacity to provide for the needs of the proposed development and for all other developments in the service area which are occupied, available for occupancy, for which building permits are in effect, or for which wastewater treatment or disposal capacity has been reserved. If existing wastewater services are unavailable, but will be made available, any development order shall be conditioned upon such availability. A finding that wastewater services will be made available must be based upon a demonstration that there is a feasible plan to construct or expand a wastewater system which will have sufficient capacity to provide for the collection, treatment and disposal needs of the proposed development and for all other developments in the service area which are occupied, available for occupancy, for which building permits are in effect, or for which wastewater collection, treatment or disposal capacity has been reserved. The granting of a development order shall not be construed to effect a reservation of wastewater capacity. 
(5)	Whenever any pressure or force mains are located underneath pavement or curbs with cover of less than 36 inches, the mains shall be encased or shall be constructed of ductile iron for pipe diameter of four inches or more, and galvanized iron for pipe diameter under four inches or shall be made of appropriate material. 
(6)	Where central sanitary sewer facilities are provided, all new development approved pursuant to division 2 of this article shall install facilities where feasible for connection and use of recovered wastewater for irrigation and other nonpotable water uses. Upon being made available, such development shall connect to and use recovered wastewater.  
Sec. 4-88. - Off-street circulation, parking and loading facilities. 
(a)	Functional elements of off-street circulation system. Parking spaces, drive aisles, driveways and reservoir areas are the basic functional elements of the off-street circulation system. Additional elements, including but not limited to service roads, loading areas, bicycle parking areas, and mass transit loading (bus stop) areas within the proposed development, and left-turn lanes, right-turn lanes, traffic signals and marginal-access roads immediately adjacent to the proposed development, may also be required. 
(1)	Vehicular circulation must be completely contained within the property, and vehicles located within one portion of the development must have access to all other portions without using the adjacent street system. 
(2)	Parking stalls and aisles. 
a.	The minimum size (in feet) of a parking space shall be as follows: 
10 × 19 standard space 
10 × 19 parallel space 
12 × 20 with a five-foot-wide adjacent ingress/egress aisle - handicap space 
Parking and maneuvering areas shall be designed in accordance with the diagram and table contained in this division. A maximum of two feet of the length of any parking space may be grassed with use of raised curb or wheel stops. 
b.	All required parking stalls shall have direct and unobstructed access from a parking aisle. 
c.	No parking stall shall directly abut a driveway. 
d.	Access for emergency fire vehicles shall be in accordance with NFPA standards. 
e.	All off-street parking areas shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for orderly safe loading, unloading, parking and storage of vehicles with individual parking stalls clearly defined, and with directional arrows and traffic signs provided as necessary for traffic control. All signs and pavement markings shall be in accordance with the USDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
f.	Acceptable plans must illustrate that proper consideration has been given to the surrounding street plan, traffic volumes, proposed street improvements, vehicular street capacities, pedestrian movements and safety. 
(3)	Driveways. 
a.	All parking aisles shall connect to a driveway. 
b.	A parking lot which exceeds 60 parking stalls shall be designed with at least one two-way directional driveway loop system connecting the point of entry of the parking lot to the parking stalls and the principal building. 
c.	The minimum distance from a driveway to a structure or parking stall shall be five feet. 
d.	Single-lane driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet wide. Two-lane driveways shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide. Required widths shall be increased according to vehicle type or if the number of parking stalls connected or the number of trips generated justifies such increase. 
e.	Any off-street parking facility shall have either driveway approaches of sufficient width to allow for two-way traffic, or one-way driveways connected to aisles, parking areas or maneuvering areas in such a manner as to permit traffic to simultaneously enter and leave the property, facing forward at the same time. A driveway which is only wide enough for one-way traffic shall be signed for one-way operation. 
f.	On sites that are being renovated, existing nonconforming driveway widths shall be rebuilt to meet current standards. Curb cuts and driveway aprons in the adjacent right-of-way which are to be abandoned as part of the redevelopment of the property shall be removed and replaced with standard curbing and sod. 
(4)	Parking and loading areas are to be curbed. Except for one- and two-family dwellings, all parking and loading areas shall be constructed with a six-inch raised curb or wheel stops located a minimum distance of seven feet behind the street right-of-way line and other property lines along sidewalks, safety islands, driveways, sight distance triangles, and other places as determined by the City Traffic Engineer. The raised curb shall be constructed in such a manner as to prevent vehicles from crossing sidewalks or other pedestrian walkways, other than by means of an approved driveway approach. 
PARKING STANDARDS 
 
A 	- 	Reservoir Area - Refer to subsections 4-89(b) and 4-89(e). 
B 	- 	Driveway Width - Refer to subsections 4-89(b) and 4-89(e). 
All dimensions set out in C through H below are minimum dimensions. 
Dimensions of aisles and spaces for the following parking space angles are as follows: 
Parking Space Angles - (degrees)       45  50  55  60  90  180          
C 	- 	Drive Aisle -       13' 15' 16' 18' 24'  15'         
D 	- 	Parking Space Depth -       19' 19' 19' 19' 19'  22'         
E 	- 	Parking Space Width (Measured perpendicularly 
to the striping) -       10' 10' 10' 10' 10'  10'         
F 	- 	Row End Backup Area Depth - 15' 
G 	- 	Row End Backup Area Radius - 15' 
H 	- 	Distance to Property Line or Building - 5' or as required by article I of chapter 5. 
I 	- 	Landscaped Buffer Area - As required by article I of chapter 5. 
J 	- 	Landscaped Island/Row End - As required by article I of chapter 5. 
K 	- 	30' Radius Minimum. 
 
(b)	Additional functional elements. 
(1)	Off-street loading spaces. 
a.	Off-street loading spaces shall be designed to accommodate both the parking of and maneuvering of the design vehicle exclusive of those areas designated for aisles, driveways or parking stalls. Backing from or onto public right-of-way shall not be permitted. Off-street loading spaces shall be directly accessible from a street without crossing or entering any other loading space and may not extend into any street. 
b.	Off-street loading space dimensional requirements. Each required off-street loading space shall have a minimum dimension of 12 feet by 40 feet and a minimum overhead clearance of 14 feet above the paving grade. 
(2)	Handicapped parking spaces. 
a.	All handicapped parking spaces shall be accessible by a curb cut or curb ramp. Handicapped spaces and access aisles shall be paved and located at the closest practical point to the use or structure on the premises and so that it will not be necessary for individuals to access the space from behind other nonhandicapped spaces. 
b.	Each handicapped parking space, regardless of the angle of design, shall have a minimum width of 12 feet, a minimum 20 feet in length with an adjacent five feet and parallel five-foot-wide access aisle and shall comply with the standards specified in the Florida Accessibility Code for Building Construction, latest edition, published by the state department of community affairs and F.S. § 316.1955. 
c.	Each handicapped space shall be prominently posted with a permanent sign of a design specified in Roadway and Traffic Design Standards, latest edition, published by the state department of transportation. 
(3)	Off-street truck maneuvering. Where a proposed development includes a truck loading operation and has access to an arterial, adequate space shall be provided such that all truck maneuvering is performed off-street. 
(c)	Vehicular reservoir areas. Adequate reservoir capacity shall be required for both inbound and outbound vehicles to facilitate the safe and efficient movement between the public right-of-way and the development. An inbound reservoir shall be of sufficient size to ensure that vehicles will not obstruct the adjacent roadway, the sidewalk, and the circulation within the facility. An outbound reservoir shall be required to eliminate backup and delay of vehicles within the development. 
(1)	Design. A reservoir area shall be designed to include a space of 12 feet wide by 25 feet long for each vehicle to be accommodated within the reservoir area and so that vehicles within the reservoir area do not block parking stalls, parking aisles or driveways of off-street parking facilities. 
(2)	Adjacent to arterial. The minimum number of vehicles required to be accommodated within a reservoir area of a parking lot adjacent to an arterial shall be in conformance with table IV. 
(3)	Adjacent to nonarterial street. The minimum number of vehicles required to be accommodated within a reservoir area adjacent to a nonarterial shall accommodate at least one percent of the number of parking stalls served by the driveway. For parking lots with fewer than 100 cars, the reservoir area shall be able to accommodate at least one car. 
_____
TABLE IV. VEHICLE RESERVOIR AREA REQUIREMENTS 
Adjacent to Arterial 
	Reservoir Area 
Type of Facility 	Inbound Vehicles 	Outbound Vehicles 
Vehicle-oriented services: 		
Drive-in bank 	3 spaces per service position 	1 space per service position 
Drive-in beverage, food sales, and laundry pickup 	3 spaces per service position 	1 space per service position 
Drive-thru restaurant service 	8 spaces per service position 	1 space per service position 
Automatic car wash 	3 spaces on approach to wash line 	1 space between end of wash line and right-of-way of street 
Self-service car wash 	3 spaces on approach to wash line 	1 space between end of wash line and right-of-way of street 
Hospital 	2 spaces to the first drive aisle or parking stall 	None 
Service station 	4 spaces per service position 	1 space per service position 
Residential: 		
Gatehouse 	5 spaces 	1 space 
Nonresidential: 		
Attendant parking 	10% of the total parking capacity of the facility 	None 
Self-parking 	5 spaces or 1% of the total parking capacity (use the greater figure) 	None 
Ticket gate (ticket-dispensing machine) 	4 spaces minimum 	1 space 
Cashier booth (tickets dispensed manually) 	6 spaces minimum 	1 space 
Gatehouse (commercial) 	5 spaces or 1% of the total parking capacity (use the greater figure) 	2 spaces 
 
Note: 1 reservoir space is 12 feet × 25 feet. 
_____
(d)	Accessibility to structures for vehicles other than automobiles. 
(1)	Structures intended for principal uses shall be made accessible to the following type of vehicles: 
a.	Residential uses, other than single-family or duplex: single-unit truck (SU); 
b.	Commercial and institutional uses: single-unit truck and semitrailer (WB-40) combination, intermediate; 
c.	Industrial use: single-unit truck (SU) and semitrailer-full trailer combination (WB-60). 
Definitions of, as well as required specifications for the above vehicle types, shall be those found in the AASHTO Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 
(2)	All buildings other than single-family or duplex residences shall be accessible to fire apparatus from two sides. Fire engines shall be considered as a WB-40 as defined by the AASHTO Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. The area required to meet the AASHTO design standards shall be paved or treated to ensure support to a 16-ton weight vehicle. This area shall be maintained free of trees and bushes and shall be clearly designated for this purpose. Access from one side may be accepted by the Development Review Committee where access from two sides is not possible. 
(3)	Fire lanes shall be provided for all buildings which are set back more than 150 feet from a public road, or which exceed 30 feet in height and are set back more than 50 feet from a public road, and may be required for other buildings. Fire lanes shall be at least 20 feet in width with a minimum of five feet provided between the fire lane and any adjacent building. No parking shall be permitted between the fire lane and the building. 
(4)	Required parking spaces, parking aisles and driveways shall not be used as loading or parking areas for any type of vehicle including emergency vehicles other than automobiles.  
Sec. 4-89. - Commercial, industrial and multifamily residential driveways. 
(a)	Generally. In order to provide the maximum safety with the least interference to the traffic flow on public streets, and to provide ease and convenience and ingress and egress to private property, the number and location of the types of driveways regulated pursuant to this section shall be designed relative to the intensity of use or size of the property served and the nature of the adjacent roadway. Such existing driveway approaches shall not be relocated, altered or reconstructed without prior approval. When the use of any driveway approach is changed by the owner/developer, making any portion or all of the driveway approach unnecessary, the developer of the property shall obtain a permit to abandon the driveway approach and shall, at his expense, replace all necessary curbs, gutters and sidewalks. Access shall be provided as follows: 
(1)	There shall be the minimum number of access points to adequately serve the development. 
(2)	In order to provide ease and convenience in ingress and egress to private property and the maximum safety with the least interference to the traffic flow on arterials, the number and location of driveways shall be regulated by the dedication of access rights to the City, and in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section and table V of this division. 
(3)	On sites that are being renovated, existing nonconforming driveway widths shall be rebuilt to meet current standards. Curb cuts and driveway aprons in the adjacent right-of-way which are to be abandoned as part of the redevelopment of the property shall be removed and replaced with standard curbing and sod. 
(b)	Commercial, industrial and multifamily residential driveway design on a nonarterial street. The following requirements apply to driveways connecting development to a nonarterial street: 
(1)	General. 
a.	The driveway entrance shall be sufficient to allow access to the parking area without interference among vehicles entering and/or leaving and vehicles circulating in the parking lot. 
b.	No driveway shall be constructed in the radius return of an intersection or within 50 feet of the tangent point of the radius return for an unsignalized intersection. 
c.	If the closest intersection is or is likely to be signalized, then traffic movements to and from any driveway within 370 feet of an intersection with a collector or an arterial shall be limited to right turns only. 
d.	The driveway design shall be in accordance with subsection (e)(2) of this section. 
(2)	Number and location of driveway entrances. In order to provide the maximum safety with the least interference to the traffic flow on public streets, and to provide ease and convenience in ingress and egress to private property, the number and location of driveways shall be regulated relative to the intensity of use or size of the property served and the amount of frontage which that property has on a given street, as follows: 
a.	One driveway shall be permitted for ingress and egress purposes to a single property or development. 
b.	Two driveways entering on a particular street from a single property or development may be permitted if all other requirements of this section are met and if the minimum distance between the two driveways equals or exceeds 100 feet. 
c.	Three driveways entering on a particular street from a single property or development may be permitted if all other requirements of this section are met and if the minimum distance between adjacent driveways equals or exceeds 150 feet. 
d.	Not more than three driveways will be permitted from a single property or development. However, in the case of extensive property development (property exceeding ten acres in total land area) and/or containing more than 1,000 parking stalls, additional driveways may be permitted provided all other requirements of this section are met and the minimum distance between adjacent driveways equals or exceeds 300 feet. 
(c)	Sight distance. 
(1)	Cross-visibility requirements at the intersection of driveways and public rights-of-way. If a driveway intersects a public right-of-way, there shall be no sight obstruction within a triangular area of property on both sides of a driveway formed by the intersection of each side of the driveway and the public right-of-way line with two sides of each triangle being 15 feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two other sides. 
(2)	Cross-visibility requirements at pedestrian crosswalks and other areas of pedestrian concentration. If a crosswalk intersects a vehicular access aisle, driveway or public right-of-way, there shall be no sight obstruction within a triangular area of property on both sides of a crosswalk or walkway formed by the intersection of each side of the walkway and the public right-of-way or aisle with two sides of each triangle being 15 feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two sides. 
(3)	Sight triangles. 
a.	Within the triangular areas described in subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section, it shall not be permissible to install, set out or maintain, or to allow the installation, setting out or maintenance of, either temporarily or permanently, any vehicular parking space, sign, wall, hedge, shrubbery, tree, earth mound, natural growth or other obstruction of any kind which obstructs cross-visibility at a level between 30 inches and ten feet above the level of the driveway. Any wall or fence within the sight triangle must be constructed in such a manner as to provide adequate cross-visibility over or through the structure between 30 inches and ten feet in height above the driving surface. 
b.	The following will be permitted within the triangular area described above: 
1.	Limbs of trees and foliage trimmed in such a manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the area between 30 inches and ten feet above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection. Landscaping, except required grass or ground cover, shall not be located closer than five feet from the edge of any roadway pavement, and three feet from the edge of any alley or driveway pavement. 
2.	Fire hydrants and street signs. 
3.	If there is no public right-of-way, the sight distance requirement shall be determined by the Development Review Committee. 
(d)	Access limitations to arterials. 
(1)	There shall be no access to an arterial from an existing lot with less than 300 feet of width, unless one of the following conditions is met: 
a.	Access to the lot is not available from streets (exclusive of alleys) other than that arterial; provided, however, that commercial developments shall not be given access on local streets in residential areas, except where deemed necessary to reduce the number of driveway connections on an arterial. 
b.	Access to the lot is not provided jointly with other lots of an adjoining development such that minimum driveway spacing and corner clearance requirements of subsection (e)(3) of this section are satisfied by the combination of lots served by the existing or relocated joint access driveway. 
(2)	No new single-family or duplex residential lot which is less than one acre in size and which has less than 300 feet of frontage shall front on an arterial unless access to such lot is provided from a street other than that arterial. Such lot shall have access to a local street or service drive. Service drives outside the required public right-of-way may be granted by easements. 
(e)	Vehicular access to an arterial. Vehicular access to an arterial shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)	General. The area within the development to which the driveway provides access shall be of sufficient size to allow all necessary functions for loading, unloading and parking maneuvers to be carried out on private property and completely off the street right-of-way. 
(2)	Type of driveway required. 
a	Minor driveway entrance. This driveway type shall be provided for a maximum daily trip end volume of 500 vehicles and/or a maximum average peak hour volume of 50 vehicles. The minimum distance from the street right-of-way line at any ingress or egress minor driveway to the outer edge of any interior service drive or parking space with direct access to such driveway shall be 25 feet, measured perpendicularly from the street. A minor driveway entrance radii shall be 30 feet, and a minimum width shall be 24 feet. A 100-foot-long, 12-foot-wide right turn taper shall be required for a driveway adjacent to an arterial with a 40 mph posted speed limit. A right turn taper will not be required for a driveway abutting an arterial with four or more through lanes. 
b.	Intermediate driveway entrance. This driveway type shall provide for a maximum average daily trip end volume of 1,500 vehicles and/or a maximum average peak hour volume of 150 vehicles. The minimum distance from the street right-of-way line at any ingress or egress intermediate driveway to the outer edge of an interior service drive or parking space with direct access to such driveway shall be 50 feet, measured perpendicularly from the street. A right turn lane will not be required for a driveway abutting an arterial with four or more lanes. Refer to subsection (e)(5) of this section for turn lane requirements. A minimum of two egress lanes 12 feet in width each with one 14-foot-wide ingress lane shall be provided. An intermediate driveway radii shall be 35 feet. 
c.	Major driveway entrance. This driveway type shall provide for a maximum average daily trip end volume of 5,000 vehicles and/or maximum average peak hour volume of 500 vehicles. The minimum distance from the street right-of-way line at any ingress or egress major driveway to the outer edge of any interior service drive or parking space with direct access to such driveway shall be 100 feet, measured perpendicularly from the street. Refer to subsection (e)(5) of this section for turn lane requirements. A minimum of two egress lanes 12 feet each in width and one 14-foot-wide ingress lane shall be provided. A major driveway radii shall be 40 feet. 
d.	Major driveway—signalized. Any major driveway requiring a traffic signal shall conform to those warrants specified in the USDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices in addition to the following minimum requirements: 
1.	The installation of any traffic signal shall be subject to the approval of the City Traffic Engineer. 
2.	Refer to subsection (e)(5) of this section for turn lane requirements. 
(3)	Number and location of driveways. The number and location of driveways shall be determined as follows: 
a.	Spacing of driveways. 
1.	The minimum distance for a driveway from an unsignalized intersection shall be in accordance with the spacing criteria of table V-A or V-B. Driveways that do not meet the spacing criteria of table V-A or V-B shall be limited to right turns only. 
2.	If the closest intersection is or is likely to be signalized, then traffic movements to and from any driveway within 370 feet of an intersection with a collector or an arterial shall be limited to right turns only. 
3.	Only one driveway shall be permitted for ingress and egress purposes to a single property or development, provided: 
i.	Two driveways entering a particular arterial from a single property or development may be permitted if all other requirements of this section are met and if the minimum distance between the adjacent driveways conforms to the minimum spacing requirements of table V-A or V-B. 
ii.	Three driveways entering a particular arterial from a single property or development may be permitted if all other requirements of these regulations are met and if the minimum distance between adjacent driveways conforms to the minimum spacing requirements of table V-A or V-B. 
iii.	A joint access driveway will be considered as adequate access for any two adjacent developments. For a development where additional driveways are being requested and where those driveways do not meet the spacing requirements, the applicant shall be required to submit a brief traffic report justifying the need, describing the internal circulation and parking system, and identifying the impact of the development and its proposed access facilities on the operation of the arterial. 
TABLE V. DRIVEWAY 
CENTERLINE 
SPACING REQUIREMENTS 
ON AN ARTERIAL 
The minimum distance between centerlines of two-way driveways shall conform to table V-A. For those driveways with left turn movements, median opening spacing requirements shall have precedence. 
TABLE V-A 
Speed Limit 
(mph) 	Minimum 
Centerline 
Distance 
(feet) 
25 	155 
30 	175 
 
If the speed limit of the arterial is 35 miles per hour or greater, or the volume of right turn movements requires the construction of a right-turn lane, the minimum distance between centerlines of two-way driveways shall conform to table V-B. 
TABLE V-B 
(Centerline Spacing in Feet) 
	Minor 
DW 	Intermediate 
DW 	Major 
DW 	Major DW 
Signalized, 4 
Lanes or More 
Minor DW* 	335 	350 	355 	370 
Intermediate 
DW 	350 	360 	365 	380 
Major DW 	355 	365 	370 	385 
Signalized, 4 
lanes or 
more 	370 	380 	385 	1,320* 
 
DW = Driveway 
Minor DW = Maximum ADT of 500 or a maximum peak hour volume of 50 
Intermediate DW = Maximum ADT of 1,500 or maximum peak hour volume of 150 
Major DW = Maximum ADT of 5,000 or maximum peak hour volume of 500 
*Desirable spacing. 
Driveway centerline spacing may be increased if the required turn lane storage or transition is increased by any governmental agency. Minimum driveway centerline spacing may be decreased if one-way driveways are utilized and accepted by the Development Review Committee. 
(4)	Special driveway requirements. In the case of a land use with special driveway needs, an applicant may submit a traffic engineering study requesting deviations from the requirements of this section. If deviations from driveway requirements are permitted, substitute requirements which deviate no more than necessary to serve the special land use needs may be applied to the development in order to minimize the impact on the adjacent street. 
(5)	Turn lanes requirements. 
a.	Turn lane requirements immediately adjacent to the development. 
1.	A left-turn lane of 12 feet in width, conforming to table VI, shall be provided at each driveway when the average daily trip ends of the driveway is 1,000 vehicles or more and/or the average peak hour inbound left-turn volume is 25 vehicles or more. Increased queue lengths (waiting vehicle storage) may be required by the City Traffic Engineer to provide for additional storage, based upon a peak hour entering volume greater than 75 vehicles in the peak hour. No queue length is required if the peak hour entering volume is 75 vehicles in the peak hour or less. 
2.	A right-turn lane of 12 feet in width, conforming to table VI, shall be provided at each driveway when the speed limit equals or exceeds 35 miles per hour or if the development will generate 100 or more right-turn movements during the peak hour. Increased storage and transition queue lengths (waiting vehicle storage) may be required by the City Traffic Engineer to provide for additional storage, based upon a peak hour entering volume greater than 150 vehicles in the peak hour. No queue length is required if the peak hour entering volume is 150 vehicles in the peak hour or less. 
b.	Additional improvements immediately adjacent to the development. At intersections, with an arterial which abuts the development, the following improvements shall be provided: 
1.	A right-turn lane of 12 feet in width, conforming to section 4-89(e)(5) and table VI, shall be provided if the development will generate 100 or more right turns during the peak hour. 
2.	A left-turn lane of 12 feet in width, conforming to this subsection (e)(5) and table VI, shall be provided if the street's speed limit is 35 miles per hour or greater and if the development will generate 25 or more left turns during the peak hour. 
c.	Through lane pavement transition tapers. A through lane pavement transition taper shall be provided on all streets and roadways where the through lane is offset to provide for right turn lanes, left turn lanes, lane width changes and an increase or reduction in the number of through lanes. The through lane pavement transition taper length shall be based upon FDOT Standard Index #526 & 17346 and calculated using the following formulas: 
1.	For design speeds less than or equal to 40 mph use: 
L =  WS 2 
60 
2.	For design speeds greater than or equal to 45 mph use: 
L = WS 
L =  The pavement transition taper length in feet. 
W =  The width of the through lane lateral transition in feet (offset). 
S =  The design speed (must be at least 5 mph greater than the posted speed limit). 
TABLE VI. TURN LANE DIMENSIONAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
Speed 
Limit 
(mph) 	Urban Section 
Deceleration 
Length 
(feet)* 	Rural Section 
Deceleration 
Length 
(feet)* 
30 	145 	145 
35 	155 	155 
40 	185 	185 
45 	240 	320 
50 	N/A** 	385 
55 	N/A** 	455 
 
*Includes minimum 50 feet bay taper in accordance with FDOT Standard Index #301 and 526. 
**Curbing is not permitted for these speed limits, use rural section. 
d.	Modifications. Required storage and transition lengths may be modified where conditions warrant and such modifications are acceptable to the Development Review Committee.  
Sec. 4-90. - Sidewalks. 
(a)	Pedestrian access. Neighborhood and community commercial facilities shall have an efficient and direct pedestrian way connection to the residential areas the facilities are intended to serve. The design of local commercial facilities shall allow pedestrians direct access from adjacent neighborhood areas, with due consideration to the elimination of points of conflict between pedestrians and vehicles. 
(b)	Sidewalks. 
(1)	General. Paved sidewalks, a minimum of five feet in width, shall be installed on both sides of all local streets within a new development, except in a subdivision classified single-family or duplex where the minimum lot sizes are one acre or larger, in which case sidewalks shall not be required; provided, however, said sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets within a new development that intersect with an arterial. Alternative path systems within a new development may be approved by the Development Review Committee instead of sidewalks. Specifications for materials and design of sidewalks or alternative path systems shall be approved by the City Development Engineer. Maintenance and replacement of the sidewalks or alternative path systems within a development will be the responsibility of the abutting property owner. 
(2)	Sidewalks along arterials. Paved sidewalks a minimum of five feet in width shall be installed along any abutting side of all existing and proposed arterials which border or transverse a new development and along both sides of all arterials which are required to be constructed within a new development; provided, however, that if the development is within two miles of an existing or proposed school site, then a sidewalk will be required on one side of the roadway. Except when the Development Review Committee waives the sidewalk requirement on one or both sides of the street for one or more of the following reasons: 
a.	A single-family or duplex subdivision with a density of less than three units per acre will require a sidewalk on only one side of the arterial; provided, however, that within one mile of existing or planned schools, commercial centers or community centers, sidewalks shall be installed along both sides of the arterial. 
b.	A single-family or duplex subdivision with a density one unit or less per acre shall not require a sidewalk on either side of the arterial; provided, however, that within one mile of existing or planned schools, commercial centers or community centers, sidewalks shall be installed along both sides of the arterial. 
(3)	Location. Sidewalks shall be located in the rights-of-way or adjacent easements of said streets within and abutting the development. Sidewalks shall typically be located one foot from the abutting easement or right-of-way line. Sufficient distance from obstacles such as fire hydrants, drainage inlets, manholes, utility structures and trees shall be maintained for the safety of the sidewalk users. No sidewalk shall be located within the appropriate recovery area of the traveled way of said street. Where the sidewalk is curved, there shall be no unsafe curves or sudden elevation changes in the sidewalk which would present a hazard to the users. 
(4)	Pedestrian barriers. The Development Review Committee may require fences, hedges, berms, other landscaping, or other barriers in order to discourage pedestrians from crossing hazardous streets at unsafe points or at numerous points. When possible, developments shall be designed so as to promote pedestrian streets crossings only at traffic control signals, crosswalks or intersections. 
(5)	Payment to the sidewalk trust fund. See section 4-26(1). 
(6)	Sidewalks; subdivision improvements. Sidewalks which are required to be constructed in subdivisions may be guaranteed, as provided in this section, for a period not to exceed two years; provided that all of the sidewalks shall be required to be constructed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for 80 percent of the lots. However, any sidewalk required to be constructed on the perimeter of a subdivision or along any tract, common area or other parcel not to be used for residential purposes must be constructed with the initial subdivision improvements.  
Sec. 4-91. - Erosion control. 
(a)	General provisions. 
(1)	Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provision shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the requirements of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection Best Management Practices for Erosion and Sediment Control, as amended, or as required by the City Engineer. 
(2)	The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(3)	The City Engineer may require reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity of the receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(4)	Best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sediment, which are consistent with and no less stringent than those practices, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection Best Management Practices for Erosion and Sediment Control, as amended, or as required by the City Engineer. 
(5)	The following may also be required: 
a.	Stripping of vegetation, regarding any other development activities, shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
b.	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
c.	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
d.	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
e.	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
f.	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
g.	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
h.	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measure shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
i.	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures or until the disturbed area is stabilized; 
j.	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills; 
k.	Cuts and fill may not endanger adjoining property; 
l.	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
m.	Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sediment control plans shall include provision for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters. 
(b)	Seeding, mulching, sodding, etc. Seeding, mulching, sodding and/or other acceptable methods shall be performed as required to prevent undue erosion during all construction activities. During construction and through the developer maintenance period, the developer shall be required to keep accumulations of sand and earth out of the curb and gutter. Temporary siltation basins may be required during construction. Maintenance shall be provided by the developer for the one-year period of the road guarantee and for each lot, until final inspection is passed.  
Sec. 4-92. - Fire protection systems. 
The fire protection system of the proposed development shall be based upon the following requirements: 
(1)	Water supply. The fire protection water supply for the proposed development shall meet the following fire flow requirements: 
a.	In the case of a single-family or duplex residential development of less than ten dwelling units with lot sizes of less than one acre, or in the case of a single-family or duplex residential development of ten or more dwelling units, but less than 200 dwelling units, with lot sizes of one acre or more, fire wells may be utilized. 
b.	In the case of a single-family or duplex residential development with lot sizes of one acre or more totaling 200 or more units, a central water system shall be utilized for the fire protection water supply which meets the water flow requirements of fire services. (Refer to table VII as a reference.) 
c.	In the case of a single-family or duplex residential development with lot sizes of less than one acre, the fire protection water supply shall be provided by a central potable or nonpotable water supply or a combination of central water supply, auxiliary supply of fire wells, which will produce the water flows contained in table VII. In no case shall the central water supply for fire protection be less than 50 percent of the required fire flow. Auxiliary water supply may be provided by a combination of tank trucks, ground tanks, cisterns, elevated storage, drafting stations on canals or reservoirs, or other methods subject to approval by the department of fire services. 
d.	In the case of a multifamily residential development; a business or industrial development; or a place of assembly, the fire protection water supply shall be as defined in the most current edition of NFPA 1231—Standard on Water Supplies for Suburban and Rural Fire Fighting. In all cases the minimum fire flows shall not be less than the required for dwellings in table VII. 
e.	A single water supply system may be used for both potable and fire protection supply; provided the requirements of table VII and/or NFPA 1231 are maintained, as applicable. 
f.	The minimum time duration for required fire flows shall be in accordance with table VIII. 
TABLE VII. FIRE FLOWS FOR 
GROUPS OF DWELLINGS 
Exposure 
Distances 
(feet) 	Required Fire Flow* 
(gallons per minute) 
Over 100 	500 
31 to 100 	750—1,000 
11 to 30 	1,000—1,500 
10 or less 	1,500—2,000† 
 
* Add 500 GPM where wood shingles would contribute to fire spread. 
† Use 2,500 GPM minimum if buildings are continuous. 
TABLE VIII 
Minimum Flow at 
Source of Supply 
(GPM) 	Minimum 
Duration 
(hours) 
1,000 or less 	2 
1,250 	2 
1,500 	2 
1,750 	2 
2,000 	2 
2,250 	2 
2,500 	2 
3,000 	3 
3,500 	3 
4,000 	4 
4,500 	4 
5,000 	5 
5,500 	5 
6,000 	6 
7,000 	7 
8,000 	8 
9,000 	9 
10,000 	10 
11,000 	10 
13,000 	10 
 
The calculations of required fire flows in gallons per minute (GPM) considers the construction, occupancy, exposure and communication as outlined in the NFPA Fire Protection Handbook (latest edition). 
(2)	Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed according to the following requirements, with distances measured along street rights-of-way. No distance shall be measured across arterials. 
a.	In the case of a single-family or duplex residential development; sprinklered one- or two-story motels, sprinklered hotels, or sprinklered multifamily dwellings; or mobile home parks, hydrants shall be installed at intervals not to exceed 500 feet with a minimum main size of six inches. 
b.	In the case of a multifamily business or industrial development, excluding developments in subsection (2)a. of this section, hydrants shall be installed at intervals not to exceed 300 feet with a minimum main size of eight inches. 
c.	In the case of a building which will provide standpipe and/or sprinkler systems, a fire hydrant shall be installed within 100 feet of the exterior fire department connection with a minimum main size of eight inches. 
d.	In the case of the development of a high-hazard area including, without limitations, a large shopping center, a storage facility for flammable chemical or compressed gases or a manufacturing plant, the spacing and main sizes of hydrants shall be determined after computing the required fire flow, subject to review and approval by the Department of Fire Services. 
e.	All fire hydrants shall deliver the required gallonage with a residual pressure of 20 psi. It is the developers' responsibility to have the appropriate utility provider flow test the hydrants. 
f.	Uniform marking of fire hydrants. Color coding of fire hydrants is of substantial value to water and fire departments and is based on water flow available from them. Fire hydrant bonnets and nozzle caps shall be painted according to the following chart which shall be used to classify fire hydrants according to flow: 
Class 	Flow 	Color of 
Bonnets and 
Nozzle Caps 
A 	1,500 GPM or greater 	Blue 
B 	1,001 GPM or 1,499 	Green 
C 	500 GPM to 1,000 GPM 	Orange 
D 	Less than 500 GPM 	Red 
 
g.	Fire hydrant installation requirements. 
1.	All fire hydrants shall be installed so that there are no obstructions within 7½ feet of the front and sides and four feet from the rear of the fire hydrant. 
2.	The center of the hydrant outlet shall be a minimum of 18 inches to 24 inches from the finished final grade for proper operation. 
3.	The developer shall provide and install all required pavement markings at each fire hydrant. 
(3)	Fire wells. 
a.	Fire wells may be utilized where permitted by subsection (1) of this section; providing they have a separate power source and meet one of the following criteria: 
1.	The minimum size of a designated fire well shall not be less than six inches in diameter. A pump shall be attached capable of providing a minimum fire flow of 250 GPM; or 
2.	A fire well four inches in diameter may be utilized; provided that it has been tested and certified by an engineer that the fire well can produce a minimum fire flow of 250 GPM. 
b.	Fire wells shall be located adjacent to rights-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the department of fire services and the Development Review Committee. 
c.	Fire wells of sufficient capacity to serve adjacent development may be provided and, when so provided, may be included in a public services and facilities agreement pursuant to section 4-23(f). 
d.	Fire wells shall be considered as public improvements subject to all provisions of division 5 of this article.  
Secs. 4-93—4-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - INSTALLATION, GUARANTEE AND INSPECTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 4-111. - Developer's guarantee. 
(a)	Required or guaranteed improvements. Neither a final plat development order nor a certificate of occupancy for building development shall be issued until the developer has installed the improvements required by this Code or has guaranteed that such improvements will be installed. 
(1)	The developer's guarantee, in lieu of installation of improvements, shall be in an amount that is 115 percent of the construction costs of all improvements, including landfill, as estimated by the developer's professional engineer or architect and verified by the City Development Engineer or City Manager as appropriate. Such guarantee shall be in the form of one or more of the following: certified check; bond; cash deposited in an escrow account; a first mortgage on his property; letter of credit; or such other guarantee approved by the City Attorney. Such guarantee may be reduced from the original guarantee on a pro rata basis according to the value of any improvements installed as verified by the City Development Engineer or City Manager, as appropriate. 
(2)	In the case of building development pursuant to a granted development order, only landscaping and/or tree replacement improvements may be guaranteed by the developer prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. All other required improvements shall be installed and approved prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)	Installation of improvements. A state registered professional engineer or architect, as appropriate, shall be employed by the developer to design all required improvements and to inspect and certify that the installation of all required improvements is in conformity with the requirements and standards set forth in this Code and all other specifications or requirements of the City. 
(c)	Required improvements. The following improvements are considered required for the purposes of this division: 
(1)	Survey reference markers and monuments; 
(2)	Streets, driveways and off-street parking and loading areas; 
(3)	Storm drainage system; 
(4)	Sidewalks, walkways and bicycle facilities; 
(5)	Sanitary sewage disposal system; 
(6)	Water supply systems; 
(7)	Street name signs, pavement markings, regulatory signs, and other traffic control devices; 
(8)	Bridges; 
(9)	Bulkheads; 
(10)	Erosion control; 
(11)	Utility lines; 
(12)	Curb and gutter; 
(13)	Landscaping, screening, buffers; 
(14)	Tree removal, relocation and replanting; 
(15)	Any other required improvements.  
Sec. 4-112. - Inspections and tests. 
(a)	General. Appropriately staged inspections during construction shall be called for. It shall be the responsibility of the developer or the developer's contractor to notify the City Development Engineer or City Manager and arrange for these inspections. Tests called for under this section shall be performed by the City or by a competent engineering testing firm, which shall have an engineer registered in the state as one of the responsible officials of the firm. 
(b)	Inspections. 
(1)	The developer shall provide written authorization which will enable City staff personnel to enter upon the property to be developed and make periodic inspections at each stage of construction. During construction the developer shall notify the City Development Engineer or City Manager, where appropriate, that a City inspector can be sent to make an inspection. The City shall furnish an inspector at the site within a reasonable length of time, during normal working days and hours. 
(2)	The purpose of these inspections is to ensure that construction is in compliance with the granted development order. The City accepts no responsibility or liability for the work, or for any contractual conditions involving acceptance, payment or guarantees between any contractor and the developer, by virtue of these inspections. The City assumes no responsibility or commitment guaranteeing acceptance of the work, or for subsequent failure, by virtue of these inspections. 
(3)	Upon completion of the improvements and receipt by the City Engineer of the documents required in subsection (c) of this section, the developer may request, and the City Manager will schedule, a final on-site inspection of the improvements by all applicable department representatives collectively on a date specified by the developer. The documents required in subsection (c) of this section shall be submitted by the developer at least five days prior to the inspection date. The developer shall be represented at the inspection as well as the developer's engineer and contractor. 
(4)	However, if any aspect of the work being performed does not comply with acceptable standards, corrections shall be required by the City inspector as a condition for City acceptance. All improvements shall be installed, and have the approval of the City Development Engineer and/or other City agencies prior to acceptance by the City Council, where required, or issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)	Completion of installation of required improvements. Upon completion of the above inspections or prior thereto, the following, where required, shall be provided to the City Development Engineer and/other appropriate City agencies: 
(1)	Test results. 
(2)	Maintenance guarantees, in accordance with provisions of this Code, for facilities to be dedicated or conveyed to the City or a property owners' association. 
(3)	As-built drawings for utilities and drainage systems, both on and off site. 
(4)	Certification by the developer's engineers that all improvements were installed in accordance with the granted development order. 
(5)	Copy of the surveyor's certificate filed with the clerk or recording office in accordance with the state statutes. 
(d)	Responsibility during maintenance period for improvements to be dedicated or conveyed to the City or to a property owners' association. 
(1)	Following approval by the City of the construction of improvements to be dedicated or conveyed to the City or a property owners' association, the developer shall be required to maintain the improvements within the development in first-class condition until the City Council accepts the improvements for City maintenance, or they are turned over to a property owners' association for maintenance. Such association shall have all duties and powers necessary to provide for the perpetual maintenance of the improvements. The developer's maintenance period shall be a minimum of one year. During that maintenance period, the developer will be expected to provide any maintenance required, including, but not limited to: 
a.	Repair and replacement of any system component, or failed section of pavement, etc. 
b.	Correction of design faults. 
c.	Control of erosion, replacement of sod, removal of soil washed onto pavement or into drainage system. 
d.	Lost, destroyed or disturbed survey improvements. 
(2)	The developer may request the City Council to accept the improvements for maintenance at the time of or after the acceptance of the construction, or during the developer's one-year maintenance period. When this occurs, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to sod all areas of the constructed improvements, where the potential for erosion exists. Such areas which may require sodding shall include but not be limited to shoulders, swales, drainage systems and retention areas. When such sodding is completed in a manner which is satisfactory to the City Development Engineer, the City Council may accept the improvements for City maintenance; provided that all other improvements are in a first-class condition. However, the cash guarantee required by subsection (d)(3) of this section will be retained for the balance of the developer's one-year maintenance period to guarantee all improvements against defects in design, materials and workmanship. The City Council shall not accept the improvements for City maintenance nor release the cash guarantee until it has determined that all improvements are in a first-class and acceptable condition. 
(3)	All improvements to be dedicated or conveyed to the City or a property owners' association shall be covered by a cash maintenance guarantee which shall be provided by the developer, and shall be in the amount of 15 percent of the construction costs of all improvements, including landfill. The form of the guarantee shall be as prescribed in section 4-111(a)(1) and approved by the City attorney. The developer shall guarantee all improvements against defects in design, material and workmanship, in addition to guaranteeing maintenance for the required period of time. 
(4)	Approximately 60 days prior to the expiration of the maintenance period, the developer shall request the City Manager to schedule an inspection by the City Development Engineer and/or other appropriate City personnel. All deficiencies of design, materials, workmanship and/or maintenance identified during the final inspection shall be corrected by the developer. 
(5)	Upon evidence of correction of all deficiencies by the City Development Engineer and other appropriate City agencies, the City Manager shall recommend, and the City Council may accept those improvements dedicated or conveyed to the City for City maintenance. Those improvements to be conveyed to a property owners' association shall be accepted by the property owners' association pursuant to agreements between the developer and the property owners' association. 
(6)	Upon acceptance of the improvements by the City Council or property owners' association, the maintenance guarantee shall be released to the developer, less any charges for maintenance or corrections incurred by the City during the maintenance period. 
(e)	Responsibility for maintenance of privately owned improvements. Any improvements made to private property pursuant to a development permit issued under this Code shall thereafter be maintained by the private property owner and/or lessee or renter to the minimum standards of this Code and the improved plans at his expense. Failure to maintain such improvements shall constitute a violation of this Code.  
Secs. 4-113—4-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - USE PERMIT 
 
Sec. 4-131. - Regulations. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this division is to regulate the location, installation or adjustment of any facility on or under City rights-of-way, traveled ways or easements or other City-owned property (City property), including canals and drainage easements or ditches, by any person. 
(b)	Permit required. Any person placing, installing or adjusting any facility on City property shall have been issued a use permit prior to the commencement of construction. A facility includes driveway connection to a City road, and overhead, on and underground utilities. 
(c)	Jurisdiction. This division shall apply to and be enforced on all City property. 
(d)	Application procedure. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, an application for a use permit shall be filed, processed and approved as follows: 
(1)	An application for a use permit shall be filed with the LDD and the required filing fee paid. 
(2)	Three copies of the required submittals shall be submitted with the application. The submittals shall meet the requirements of this Code and contain the following information: 
a.	A vicinity map showing the work area location at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet; 
b.	The offset from the centerline of the right-of-way or road to the proposed facility; 
c.	The road right-of-way and pavement width; 
d.	The distance from the edge of the travelled way to the facility and the location of all other utilities within the work area; 
e.	One or more typical cross sections as required by the City Development Engineer to adequately reflect the location and construction details of the proposed facility; 
f.	The minimum vertical clearance above or below the road, ground or pavement; 
g.	All proposed fire hydrants; 
h.	Any other information required by the City Development Engineer. 
(3)	The LDM shall determine the completeness of the application within three days of filing. If the application is determined to be incomplete, it shall be returned to the applicant. If the application is determined to be complete, the LDM shall transmit it to the City Development Engineer. 
(4)	Upon receipt, the City Development Engineer shall review the application. If the application meets all of the requirements of this Code, it shall be approved within seven working days of receipt. Upon such approval, the City Development Engineer shall return the application to the LDM with approval noted by the City Development Engineer or his authorized representative. If the application is denied it shall be returned to the LDM, with the reasons for denial noted thereon, within seven working days of receipt. 
(5)	If the application has been approved, the LDM shall issue the use permit immediately. If the application has been denied, the LDM shall immediately notify the applicant. If denied, the applicant or any aggrieved person may refile in accordance with the provisions of this subsection, as for a new application, or the applicant or any aggrieved person may appeal the denial to the City Council, as provided in section 1-7. 
(6)	A guarantee of completion of the permitted construction may be required by the City Development Engineer if in his opinion the proposed construction would constitute a significant traffic hazard if not completed as proposed. Such guarantee shall be the same as established in section 4-111(a)(1) and shall be returned to the permittee upon satisfactory completion of construction or shall be used to ensure completion of construction by the City where construction is not satisfactorily completed. 
(7)	The use permit may be revoked by the City Development Engineer for reasons of public safety.  
Sec. 4-132. - Stipulations. 
(a)	Permissive use. A use permit is a license for a permissive use only, and the placing of facilities upon City property pursuant to the permit shall not operate to create or to vest any property right in the holder thereof, and the issuance of a use permit does not relieve the permittee of the need for obtaining any other permits that may be required by the appropriate authorities. The permittee shall be responsible for maintenance of all such facilities permitted except for those conveyed to the public and accepted for maintenance by the City. 
(b)	Assumption of risk. The rights and privileges herein set out are granted only to the extent of the City's right, title and interest in the land to be entered upon and used by the applicant; and the applicant shall at all times assume all risk of and defend the City from and against any and all loss, damage, cost or expense arising in any manner on account of the exercise or attempted exercise by the applicant of the aforesaid rights and privileges. 
(c)	Encroachment or interference. The construction and/or maintenance of a utility or facility shall not interfere or encroach upon the property and rights of a prior occupant. 
(d)	Relocation or protection of facilities. In the event of widening, repair, reconstruction or improvement of City property, including but not limited to installation of pavement, drainage structures or sidewalks, the permittee shall, upon notice by the City Development Engineer, relocate or protect existing facilities to clear such construction at no cost to the City.  
Sec. 4-133. - Supporting regulations. 
(a)	City, county, state and federal regulations and specifications. When applicable, the provisions of the latest editions of the following references shall apply: 
(1)	City of DeBary Land Development Code; 
(2)	FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction; 
(3)	Regulations for the Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipelines (parts 191 and 192, title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations); 
(4)	USDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; 
(5)	FDOT Utility Accommodation Guide; 
(6)	FDOT Minimum Standards for Streets and Highways; 
(7)	FDOT Roadway and Traffic Design Standards. 
(b)	Conflict of regulations. In the event of a conflict between the regulations and specifications referred to in subsection (a) of this section, and the provisions of this Code, the most restrictive shall apply.  
Sec. 4-134. - Qualifications of permittee. 
Subject to satisfaction of and compliance with requirements contained herein, a use permit may be issued to the following: 
(1)	Utility companies. Utility corporations or companies (including county and municipal utilities) that will be servicing the installed facility. 
(2)	Contractors. Contractors responsible for the installation of any utility facility or structure subject to these regulations. 
(3)	Private citizens. Private citizens, corporations or organizations with a reasonable and legitimate purpose in using the right-of-way, which purpose poses no threat or danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(4)	Underground utility contractors. Underground utility contractors must hold a current county or state general contractor's certificate, or a current county or state plumbing contractor's certificate. The City may require prequalification of the contractor for the type of work to be performed.  
Sec. 4-135. - Exceptions. 
(a)	Service connections without pavement cuts. Scheduled short side service connections, including but not limited to water and sewer hookups with no pavement cut or road crossings and all scheduled maintenance repair (i.e., pole replacement with no change in location or alignment, splice pits, etc.) in the right-of-way where limits of excavation are not in or within six feet of the edge of the traveled way, will not require a use permit; however, prior notification of the commencement of such work shall be given to the City Development Engineer before starting work. Failure to notify may result in a penalty fee as determined by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)	Relocations requested by the City. On any City construction project where facilities on City property are requested by the City to be relocated, a use permit may be required. An application shall be submitted by the person responsible for the relocation as required by section 4-131(b), but no fee will be charged, providing there is no expansion of the facilities involved. 
(c)	Emergency repair. 
(1)	Emergency repairs may be performed without obtaining a use permit prior to such repair. Emergency repair work shall be completed in accordance with applicable directives from the City or other authority as expeditiously as possible. During normal City working times, verbal approval for the emergency work shall be obtained from the City Development Engineer. If emergency work is required at night, on weekends or holidays, the City Development Engineer shall be notified of all emergency repair work by 10:00 a.m. the first workday following beginning of such repair work. An application for a use permit shall be submitted within two working days following commencement of emergency repair work. The person, company or utility performing the emergency repair work shall be exempt from the requirements of section 4-136 for prior notification to other agencies, with exception of gas utility companies, but shall notify those agencies by 10:00 a.m. the day following the commencement of the emergency repair work. 
(2)	Notification to gas utility companies. Notification to gas utility companies shall be accomplished prior to commencement of any emergency work. This may be accomplished by telephone or other expeditious method. 
(d)	Performance criteria. For those situations described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section, all work must be performed in compliance with the other provisions of this Code and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(e)	City Council approved construction projects. City construction projects on City property which have been approved by the City Council may comply with the permitting provisions of this Code.  
Sec. 4-136. - Notification to other agencies. 
(a)	Notification required by City Development Engineer. Notification to gas utility companies shall be accomplished prior to commencement of the permitted work. If required by the City Development Engineer, the applicant shall notify in writing all other users of City property in the immediate vicinity of the permitted work, stating the work proposed by the applicant and enclosing a plan of the permitted work in order to determine if there are any objections to it. Any objections to the permitted work by affected right-of-way users or municipalities must be forwarded in writing to the applicant and to the City Development Engineer within seven days of said letter. Except as herein provided, the City Development Engineer may hold a permit application for a period not to exceed seven days, to allow time for the receipt of objections to the permitted work. The seven-day period may be waived if the applicant includes proof that other affected right-of-way users have been notified and that said users have no objections to the issuance of the use permit. 
(b)	Verification of notification. The applicant shall verify the notification to other users by submitting the proof called for in subsection (a) of this section and completing the section provided in the application for such verification. It is the full and complete responsibility of the applicant to determine that all other users are notified of the proposed work. Any work performed without such notification, shall be at the sole risk of the applicant. 
(c)	Gas notification number. Pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 553.851, as amended, all applicants will indicate on the permit application, if required, the gas notification number immediately following the gas company's name. No permit for excavation of the right-of-way will be issued until the applicant has certified his compliance with F.S. § 553.851(2)(a) and (c), as amended.  
Sec. 4-137. - Responsibility for compliance. 
The applicant assumes full and total responsibility for compliance with this Code, supporting regulations, additional requirements of the City Council, and any municipal, county, state or federal laws, ordinances or other directives which may apply to the proposed work.  
Sec. 4-138. - Utility location standards. 
(a)	Protection of right-of-way. The primary concern in the design and location of utility installations is protection of the right-of-way and the safety of the road user, and in all cases full consideration shall be given to sound engineering principles and economic factors. 
(b)	Underground facilities. Where possible, all longitudinal underground utility facilities shall be placed outside of four feet of the traveled way. 
(c)	Location to consider future road widening and other facilities. Proposed location of poles, fire hydrants, water meters, etc., should take into consideration future road widening, sidewalk, storm drainage or other construction. Minimum guidelines for roadside recovery area shall be as shown in the latest edition of the FDOT Minimum Standards for Streets and Highways. Deviations require approval by the City Development Engineer. 
(d)	Water meter boxes. Water meter boxes shall not be placed within the limits of a proposed or existing sidewalk. 
(e)	Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be located no closer to the road travel way than that required for recovery areas by the Green Book. If no sidewalks exist, the hydrant should be located approximately one foot inside the right-of-way line. Where sidewalks are required, the desired location of the fire hydrant shall be between the sidewalk and the street with said location dependent on street design speeds and rights-of-way. Deviations shall require approval by the City Development Engineer. 
(f)	Prohibited structures, signs, signals. 
(1)	Pursuant to F.S. § 316.077, no person shall place, maintain or display upon any City property any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(2)	No person shall place or maintain upon any City property any sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(3)	Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of this Code, and the City Manager is empowered to remove the sign or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(4)	Fences and gates shall not be installed within any City property. 
(g)	Mailboxes and newspaper delivery boxes. The locations and construction of mailboxes, newspaper delivery boxes and similar structures shall be in accordance with the latest edition of "A Guide for Erecting Mail Boxes on Highways" by the AASHTO. Any such existing structure not in conformance with this section may be required to be made to conform with this section if the City Traffic Engineer determines such existing structure to be a traffic hazard. 
(h)	Headwalls and drainage inlets. Headwalls and drainage inlets shall not constitute a hazard to traffic and shall be designed in accordance with FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and FDOT Roadway and Traffic Design Standards.  
Sec. 4-139. - Permits and inspections. 
(a)	Copy to applicant. Upon approval of the application, one copy of the approved plans and the use permit will be returned to the applicant. 
(b)	Permit available on site. The use permit must be available at all times at the work site while work is being performed. Any work in progress on, or use of, City property without a valid use permit available at the site shall be suspended until such time as a valid use permit is produced on the site. 
(c)	Permit valid for one year. The permit is valid for a period not to exceed one year. The expiration date will appear on the permit. No work will be performed under an expired permit. Prior to expiration, a request for an extension may be submitted to the City Manager. Extension requests shall be submitted a minimum of 30 days prior to the expiration date of the permit. Only one 90-day extension may be granted. 
(d)	Modification of permits. Letter requests for modification of permits will be processed in accordance with provisions of sections 4-136—4-138, this section and section 4-140. The letter requesting modification must contain the appropriate gas company name, the gas notification identification number, and to expedite processing, a statement that the other right-of-way users have no objection to the requested modification. 
(e)	Inspection and approval of materials and work. The City Engineer shall have the right to inspect and approve materials and/or phases of permitted work at any time. Final inspection and acceptance of the permitted work by the City Engineer must be obtained prior to completion of the work. Work will be considered incomplete until that portion of the permit indicating final inspection and approval has been signed and dated by the City Engineer. 
(f)	Notice to City for subterranean road crossing. The permittee shall notify the City Manager at least 24 hours prior to beginning work, and prior to commencing any subterranean road crossing, whether by open cutting, boring, jacking, pushing, pulling, driving, or some combination of these. The date, time and location regarding these scheduled subterranean crossings must be given at the time of this notification. 
(g)	Underground facilities. Underground facilities (buried cable, water lines, etc.) will not be covered until approved by the City Engineer, either through on-site inspection or prior authorization. 
(h)	Failure to obtain inspections. Failure of the permittee to obtain the appropriate inspections prior to proceeding with work shall not relieve the permittee from reexcavation or other measures necessary for the inspection of the work. 
(i)	Correction of noncompliance. Any and/or all items found not to be in compliance with these regulations will be immediately corrected by the permittee. 
(j)	Permit termination. The City Engineer's signature on the completion line on the permit terminates that permit, and no further work may be done under the permit except repairs as directed by the City Manager.  
Sec. 4-140. - Crossings. 
(a)	General considerations. The normal crossing under paved surfaces will be made without cutting the pavement. Pavement cuts will be allowed on roads with a surface that has been in place for ten years or longer, and has a traffic count of 3,000 vehicles or less per lane per day. Requests for open street cuts on roads which do not meet these criteria will be considered. The primary consideration in evaluating requests for any open street cuts will be the safety and convenience of the public. 
(1)	All subterranean crossings of a traveled way, 40 feet or more in length, shall require a tracked type bore and jack, with encased augur. Crossings less than 40 feet may be made by boring, jacking, pushing, pulling, driving or some combination of these. 
(2)	Closed end jacking may be permitted for pipe with a maximum outside diameter of three inches. The pipe shall extend six feet from the edge of pavement. 
(3)	All other pipe must be jacked with the end open or bore and jacked and extend a minimum of six feet beyond the edge of pavement or as directed by the City Engineer. 
(4)	If mechanical boring is used, the tip of the drill head shall not precede the end of the pipe by more than two inches. 
(5)	The minimum depth of cover shall be 36 inches from the top of the pipe to the existing and proposed surface. 
(6)	All such crossings shall be a continuous operation and be completed and the pits backfilled prior to ceasing the operation. 
(7)	Any deviation from approved materials, location or operation shall be grounds for stopping work, directing the plugging of the line with concrete, and restoring the area. 
(b)	Open street cuts. 
(1)	Traffic maintenance. 
a.	As a general rule, a minimum of one lane of traffic must be maintained at all times and adequate safety precautions taken. Any street closures will require a traffic plan submitted at least seven days in advance of the proposed closure and approved by the City Traffic Engineer. If a detour is contemplated, the complete detour route must be indicated. Inclusive dates of the proposed closure must be firm. 
b.	Prior to closing the street to traffic, the appropriate police and emergency (rescue, fire, etc.) agencies shall be notified. In addition, the City Traffic Engineer and the county school board transportation director shall be notified. Traffic-control devices in accordance with the USDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be installed, and approved by a City Engineer prior to starting work. 
(2)	Unpaved streets. The top 12 inches of the excavation shall be stabilized with suitable materials to a condition equal to or better than existing surface. Compaction density of this layer shall equal 98 percent of maximum density as determined by AASHTO Specification T-180. 
(3)	Paved streets. 
a.	Pavement or roadway surfaces cut or damaged shall be replaced by the permittee in equal or better condition than the original, including stabilization, base course, curb and gutter, or other appurtenances. 
b.	Where existing pavement is to be removed, the surfacing shall be mechanical saw cut prior to trench excavation, leaving a uniform and straight edge, with minimum disturbance to the remaining adjacent surfacing. The width of cut for this phase of existing pavement removal shall be minimal. 
c.	The base shall be replaced in accordance with City requirements. 
d.	Immediately following the specified backfilling and compaction, the final roadway surface restoration shall be commenced as approved on the permit. Type S-I or other asphalt, concrete or other material approved by the City Engineer shall be used. In advance of final restoration, the existing asphalt surface shall be mechanically sawed straight and clean to the stipulated dimensions.  
Sec. 4-141. - Construction standards. 
(a)	Street, curb, sidewalk, driveway. All street, curb, sidewalk, driveway curb, etc., construction shall be in accordance with this Code. 
(b)	Approved pipe. Drainage pipe used in City rights-of-way shall conform to FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. Pipes underneath traveled ways shall be reinforced concrete per FDOT standards, or equivalent alternative approved by the City Engineer. 
(c)	Sanitary sewer and water installation. All work shall be in accordance with this Code and current ANSI/AWWA and ASTM standards and specifications. All water main extensions and upgrades shall include fire hydrants at intervals and construction standards as set forth in this Code. 
(d)	Gas. The provisions of the National Standard Code for pressure piping as adopted by the state public service commission shall apply. 
(e)	Overhead installations. All overhead installation shall comply with the current standards established by the state department of transportation. 
(f)	Buried cable. 
(1)	Vertical clearance. Minimum vertical clearance for direct buried cable, conduit casings and duct systems is 36 inches below top of pavement and 30 inches below existing ground. 
(2)	Casings. 
a.	Casings will be required for crossing of underground utilities where the carried conduit is of insufficient strength due to composition or depth of cover. 
b.	Casings will be required for crossing under existing pavement where the carrier is of such composition that it cannot be installed in accordance with section 4-140(a). Any request for exception to the foregoing requirements must be fully justified in writing by the applicant. 
(g)	Storm drainage structures. Installation shall be in accordance with this Code. Backfill and testing requirements shall be in accordance with subsection (h) of this section. 
(h)	Backfill and compaction. 
(1)	All trenches shall be backfilled with suitable material approved by the City Engineer. 
(2)	Backfill shall be deposited in a minimum of two lifts. The first lift shall extend from the invert of the facility to one foot above the facility. The second lift shall extend from the top of the first lift to the top of surface or bottom of subbase as applicable. 
a.	The first lift shall be installed in six-inch layers and thoroughly compacted prior to placement of the second lift. Compaction shall equal 98 percent of maximum density, AASHTO Specification T-180. 
b.	The remainder of the excavation shall be backfilled and compacted in layers compatible with the type of material and compaction equipment used. The density requirements as determined by American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Specification T-180 shall equal 98 percent under the traveled way, and extending ten feet beyond the back of curb or curbed roadways, and on roadways with open drainage systems, extending ten feet beyond the edge of the traveled way. 
c.	Sub-grade and base density requirements are 95 percent of AASHTO Specification T-180 or T-134, as applicable. 
(i)	Traffic signals. Any permittee working at intersections where traffic signals are located shall contact the City Traffic Engineer for location of all underground signal wiring. Damages to signals or signal wiring will be the responsibility of the permittee. Repairs may be made by contract personnel, but must be made with the concurrence and under the requirements as set forth by the City Traffic Engineer. In some instances, repairs may be made by the City, with total costs paid by the permittee. 
(j)	Traffic signs. When traffic signs are located within the area of approved installation or construction, the permittee is required to notify the City Traffic Engineer to arrange for removal or relocation. Costs incurred by the City for removal and resetting or relocation of signs shall be paid by the permittee. 
(k)	Pavement markings. 
(1)	Permittees that disturb or destroy current pavement markings shall be required to replace said pavement markings with approved reflectorized paint or plastic marking material and to restore such markings to their original condition, or better. 
(2)	When new turn, bypass, deceleration and/or acceleration lanes are constructed, a striping plan shall be submitted for approval by the City Traffic Engineer. Striping shall be accomplished by the permittee in accordance with the approved plan. 
(l)	Jetting or tunneling prohibited. Jetting, except for hydraulic compaction, or tunneling within City rights-of-way is prohibited. 
(m)	Driveway connection to City road. 
(1)	A driveway connection on City property between an approved private driveway and a City-maintained road shall be constructed to the requirements of division 4 of this article, and specifications determined by the City Manager. 
(2)	A use permit shall be obtained prior to the commencement of construction of the connection, and a final inspection shall be approved pursuant to this division prior to the final approval of any development served by the connection. 
(3)	All one- and two-family residential home sites, agricultural and other undeveloped lands shall be served by driveways which meet the following standards: 
a.	Number of driveway entrances. Although a single driveway will typically serve each property, the following may be permitted: 
1.	One driveway may be permitted to serve an agricultural or vacant or undeveloped property. Such a driveway shall not effect location and configuration for future development uses (e.g., special exceptions, subdivisions, site plans, etc.) 
2.	Two driveways for a one- and two-family existing residential lot may be permitted if all of the requirements of this section are met and if the minimum distance between the two driveways equals or exceeds 30 feet. 
3.	Three driveways entering a one- and two-family existing residential lot may be permitted if all of the requirements of this section are met and if the minimum distance between adjacent driveways equals or exceeds 100 feet. 
4.	No more than three driveways will be permitted for a one- and two-family existing residential lot. 
b.	Driveway location limitations. 
1.	No driveway shall be constructed in the radius return of an intersection. 
2.	No driveway shall be constructed with a corner clearance of less than 50 feet measured along the edge of the traveled way between the return radius and the nearest point of the driveway on or adjacent to arterials. This distance may be reduced to 25 feet on local streets. 
3.	No driveway entrance shall include any public facility such as traffic signal standards, catch basins, crosswalks, loading zones, utility poles, fire alarm support, meter boxes, sewer cleanouts or other similar type structures. 
4.	No driveway shall be located closer than five feet from an adjacent property line. 
5.	No driveway shall be located less than five feet from objects such as utility poles, fire hydrants, streetlights, etc. 
6.	Existing driveway approaches shall not be relocated, altered, or reconstructed without prior approval. When the use of any driveway approach is changed making any portion or all of the driveway approach unnecessary, the developer of the abutting property shall obtain a permit to abandon the driveway approach and shall at their expense replace all necessary curbs, gutters and sidewalks. 
c.	Design requirements. Drainage elements: 
1.	All driveways shall be constructed so as to not impede roadside drainage. For typical mild roadside swales, the driveway must conform to the swale shape and provide for continued positive drainage. 
2.	For swales and ditches that cannot be conformed to, as referenced above, due to the depth, width, etc., a pipe is required under the driveway. The minimum pipe size is 15 inches in diameter; larger pipes may be required based upon field conditions. 
3.	FDOT standard mitered end sections with traffic bars are required for all pipes 24 inches in diameter and greater. 
(4)	Driveway width. 
a.	Residential minimum width is ten feet and the maximum width is 24 feet (widths to be measured at the street right-of-way line). 
b.	Additional stabilized widening is required on each side of the driveway when crossing ditch sections. 
c.	The width of a curb opening shall not exceed the driveway width by more than five feet on each side. 
d.	Driveway width shall flare an additional minimum five feet starting at a point a minimum eight feet from the edge of a traveled way. 
e.	A 25-foot paved radius or equivalent chord return are required on arterials with posted speeds of 45 mph or more on 3,000 ADT. 
(5)	Driveway materials. 
a.	Asphalt pavement structural section for residential driveway shall conform to the local street pavement requirements. 
b.	Concrete residential driveways shall be a minimum thickness of four inches with reinforcement steel mesh or wire and a minimum of six inches thickness without reinforcement. 
c.	Driveways are required to be paved within the public right-of-way along all existing paved roadways and on the subject parcels. 
d.	Unpaved driveways shall be a minimum of six inches of all-weather surface stabilized material. Stabilized material shall mean an aggregate material such as crushed stone that is mixed with a binder and mechanically compacted. 
e.	Architectural paver structural sections for commercial and residential driveways shall conform to the manufacturer's technical specifications including recommended specifications for compacted aggregate or stabilized base and shall be approved by the City. 
f.	Driveway extensions and widening of existing paved driveways are required to be paved. The extension shall be of the same material as the exiting driveway. The extension or widening shall not exceed the lot coverage maximum of the applicable zoning district. 
(n)	Restoration of sidewalks, curbs, driveways, etc. 
(1)	Repair of these items requires that a saw cut be made at a joint if within five feet of either side of work location and all concrete within the area be removed and replaced to a condition equal to or better than existing at the commencement of construction, with like material. 
(2)	Asphaltic concrete shall be repaired or replaced by saw cutting the asphalt and base for the entire width and replacing the base and asphalt in accordance with the open street cut requirements. In the event of longitudinal driveway cuts, it shall be replaced with a minimum width of 36 inches or as directed by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 4-142. - Density testing. 
(a)	Certified testing laboratory. Density tests for determination of the specified backfill, base, etc., compaction shall be made by a certified testing laboratory approved by the City Engineer and at the expense of the permittee. Test locations shall be at random locations and shall be spaced not more than 300 feet apart where the trench cut is continuous, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Tests shall be required for the first lift, second lift and the base. A copy of the laboratory report shall be submitted to the City Manager. 
(b)	Spacing of tests. 
(1)	For each test section, a minimum of one test is required for the first lift (up to one foot above the utility). Testing for the second lift backfill under the traveled way shall be a minimum of one test at two-foot vertical intervals for each crossing. 
(2)	Tests for second lift backfill in other areas will be at the discretion of the City Engineer. 
(3)	A minimum of one density test for the base course for each 300 continuous feet of each road crossing shall be required. 
(c)	Concrete compression. Concrete compressive strength tests may be required at the option of the City Engineer. 
(d)	Unsatisfactory test results. If any test results are unsatisfactory, the permittee shall reexcavate and recompact the backfill at his expense until the desired compaction is obtained. Additional compaction tests shall be made to each side of an unsatisfactory test, as directed by the City Engineer, to determine the extent of reexcavation and recompaction necessary.  
Sec. 4-143. - Working hours. 
Operations permitted by this regulation shall normally be conducted 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Any deviation from these hours requires prior approval from the City Manager. Emergency repairs are excluded from this time restriction.  
Sec. 4-144. - Maintenance of traffic. 
Unless otherwise provided, all roads within the limits of the permit shall be kept open to all traffic by the permittee. When approved by the City Traffic Engineer, traffic may be bypassed over an approved detour route. The permittee shall keep the portion of the project being used by the public traffic, whether it be through or local traffic, in such condition that traffic will be adequately accommodated. The permittee shall furnish, erect and maintain barricades, warning signs, delineators, flagmen or pilot cars in accordance with the USDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The permittee shall also provide and maintain in a safe condition, temporary approaches or crossings and intersections with trails, roads, streets, businesses, parking lots, residences, garages and farms. The permittee shall bear all expense of maintaining the traffic over the section of road undergoing construction and of constructing and maintaining such approaches, crossings, intersections and other features as may be necessary. Materials stored at the site of the work shall be so placed as to cause no obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. No roadway shall be closed or opened except by express permission of the City Manager or such other authorized public agency having jurisdiction.  
Sec. 4-145. - Restoration and cleanup. 
(a)	Protection of monuments, section corners. The permittee shall ensure that all monuments, section corners and property markers shall be protected and perpetuated during construction. 
(b)	Liability for damage. The permittee shall be liable for all damage, injury or loss to persons or property of any character arising from or resulting from any act of commission, omission, neglect or misconduct in the performance of work by the permittee, his employees or agents. The permittee shall be further liable for all damage, injury or loss to persons or property arising from or as a result of defective work or materials. 
(c)	Area outside roadway. 
(1)	Where any work disturbs the area outside the roadway, the permittee shall ensure that the area is completely restored in a manner acceptable to the City. Sod that is removed shall be replaced with the same type. Unsodded areas shall be graded and then seeded and mulched in accordance with this Code. The permittee is responsible for establishing a dense stand of permanent type grass within a reasonable time. Trees and shrubbery that are removed or destroyed shall be replaced with equal types and sizes. Grassing and mulching operations are to begin immediately after construction/installation has been completed. 
(2)	All trees and/or shrubbery damaged or disturbed during construction shall be replaced by the permittee at his expense, as directed by the City Manager. Any plantings by property owners shall be removed and replaced to the satisfaction of the City Manager and property owner. All debris including, but not limited to, tree stumps resulting from permitted work shall be removed by the permittee at no expense to the City or owner. 
(d)	Existing utilities. Existing utilities that are damaged, destroyed or temporarily removed by the permittee shall be replaced or repaired at the expense of the permittee by the permittee to the satisfaction of the City or owner with no expense to the City or owner. 
(e)	Debris and waste removal. The permittee shall ensure that work site cleanup and property restoration follows construction/installation operations without delay. In order to maintain an acceptable site, debris and waste material shall be removed from the site immediately and daily trenching shall be coordinated to provide a minimum overnight trench opening. Site maintenance, along with ongoing cleanup and final property restoration, shall be subject to the direction and approval of the City.  
Sec. 4-146. - Safety. 
(a)	The safety provisions of applicable laws, ordinances, building codes and construction codes shall be observed. Machinery, equipment and other hazards shall be guarded in accordance with the safety provisions of the Manual of Accident Prevention in Construction published by the Associated General Contractors of America, to the extent that such provisions are not in contradiction of applicable laws. 
(b)	The permittee will take all reasonable precautions for and be responsible for initiating, maintaining and supervising all programs relating to the safety of all persons and property affected by or involved in the performance of work under a use permit. The permittee will take all reasonable precautions to prevent damage, injury or loss to: 
(1)	All persons who may be affected by the performance of the work, including employees; 
(2)	All materials and equipment at the work site location; and 
(3)	All property at or surrounding the work site. 
(c)	In any emergency affecting the safety of person or property, the permittee will act with reasonable care and discretion to prevent any threatened damage, injury or loss.  
Sec. 4-147. - Warranty. 
(a)	One year from date of completion. The permittee shall guarantee, in accordance with section 4-112(d)(3), all work performed under the terms of the permit for a period of one year from the date of completion as certified on the permit by the City Engineer. 
(b)	Repair of failures within five days. Any failure shall be repaired by the permittee, at the direction of the City Manager, within five working days, unless the urgency of the problem requires a quicker reaction time.  
Secs. 4-148—4-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 4-181. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)	Statement of purpose. The City Council has determined that the management of stormwater runoff and the preservation of the water resources of the City is critical to the public health, safety and welfare. Uncontrolled stormwater runoff causes erosion, sedimentation and flooding and prevents recharge of the aquifer upon which the public depends for potable, fresh water. The City Council finds it is necessary to impose reasonable restrictions to control stormwater runoff and conserve the water resources of the City. 
(b)	Objectives. The requirements of this division will allow landowners reasonable use of their property while promoting the following objectives: 
(1)	Protect the quantity and quality of ground and surface waters; 
(2)	Prevent the lowering of existing water table elevations to the detriment of these other stated objectives; 
(3)	Perpetuate recharge into the groundwater system; 
(4)	Prevent and reduce salt water intrusion; 
(5)	Minimize the production of nuisance and disease vectoring mosquitoes; 
(6)	Discourage reliance on drainage systems which depend on the use of electrical energy or petroleum fuels to move water, remove pollutants or maintain the systems; 
(7)	Reduce wind- or water-caused erosion loss of valuable topsoils and subsequent sedimentation of surface water bodies and damage to adjacent properties; 
(8)	Alleviate downstream flood hazards; 
(9)	Prevent significant loss of life and property due to runoff from any foreseeable rainfall event; 
(10)	Reduce the capital expenditures associated with floodproofing and the installation and maintenance of storm drainage systems; 
(11)	Minimize the adverse impact of development on the water resources of the City; and 
(12)	Maximize protection of class II waters. 
(c)	Intent. This division is intended to allow landowners reasonable use of their property, provided stormwater runoff peak rates and volumes and the quality of stormwater retained after development shall approximate existing predevelopment conditions and precautions will be taken to prevent erosion, sedimentation and flooding.  
Sec. 4-182. - Prohibitions and exemptions. 
(a)	Prohibitions. No person may develop or make any change in the use of land or construct a structure or change the size of a structure, except as exempted in subsection (b) of this section, without first obtaining a stormwater management development permit as provided herein. For the purposes of this division, the following development may potentially alter or disrupt existing stormwater runoff patterns, and as such, will, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, require a permit prior to the commencement of construction: 
(1)	Clearing and/or drainage of land as an adjunct to construction. 
(2)	Clearing and/or draining of nonagricultural land for agricultural purposes. 
(3)	Converting agricultural lands to nonagricultural uses. 
(4)	Subdividing land. 
(5)	Replatting recorded subdivisions and the development of recorded and unrecorded subdivisions. 
(6)	Changing the use of land and/or the construction of a structure or a change in the size of one or more structures. 
(7)	Altering the shoreline or bank of any surface water body. 
(8)	The permanent (long period) lowering of the water table. 
(9)	Filling of depressional areas. 
(b)	Exemptions and concurrent review. 
(1)	Except as provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section, the following activities shall be exempt from this division: 
a.	Single-family and duplex residences in subdivisions platted after 1990, and accessory structures not proposed to be located in drainage easements; 
b.	Bona fide agricultural pursuits, including forestry, except where an artificial drainage system will be used to increase the flow of surface water from the applicant's land; 
c.	Maintenance work performed on existing mosquito control drainage canals for the purpose of public health and welfare; 
d.	Maintenance work on utility or transportation system; provided such maintenance work does not alter the purpose and intent of the drainage system as constructed; 
e.	Any maintenance, alteration, renewal, use or improvement to an existing structure not changing or affecting rate or volume of stormwater runoff and the one-time construction of any structure or addition not otherwise exempt not exceeding 1,000 square feet of impervious area on or parallel to the ground; 
f.	Publicly owned landfills permitted under state regulations. 
g.	Subdividing of lands into three lots or less (per F.S. ch. 177), each being one acre or larger in size where no new paved streets are proposed. 
(2)	Developments which are subject to subdivision and/or site plan approval, pursuant to division 2 or 3 of this article, shall not be required to submit a separate permit application for review pursuant to this division. Compliance herewith shall be included as a part of the review process pursuant to divisions 2 and 3 of this article. 
(3)	Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, there shall be no harmful erosion by water of any soil or fill onto any adjacent public or private property. 
(c)	Required review for subdivisions platted before 1990 and unrecorded subdivisions or unplatted lands. 
(1)	In order to achieve the benefits of stormwater management on infill development, the City may require the provision of onsite stormwater retention if construction is proposed at a base elevation which is less than 12 inches below the crown of all roads abutting the subject parcel. The stormwater management requirement for new development shall be the retention onsite of the first inch of runoff from all impervious surfaces. The stormwater retention requirements of this section shall be achieved through the retention of stormwater runoff in surface retention facilities, such as grassed swales and retention ponds. 
(2)	The stormwater management requirements for redevelopment, renovation or additions to existing buildings shall be the retention onsite of the first one-half inch of stormwater runoff from all impervious surfaces. 
(3)	In subdivisions platted before 1990, in which areas were not delineated and provided in the plat to store stormwater from the developed lots, and on unrecorded and/or unplatted land proposed for residential development where the proposed construction is less than 12 inches below the crown of the roadway abutting the parcel, the following requirements shall apply: 
a.	Stormwater management requirement. The stormwater management requirement for development or redevelopment on properties within single-family districts shall include some method or methods of on-site retention for the building, parking and driveway areas. These methods shall include, but not be limited to, the provision of swales or other retention areas; the sloping of parking areas and drives to landscaped areas versus directly to the street; the guttering of building runoff to landscaped areas where setback provisions limit the amount of pervious area available; and other such methods which provide opportunities for the percolation of stormwater. 
b.	Applicability. These performance standards shall apply to all single-family residential and duplex building projects on vacant land, or land made vacant after the demolition of existing structures. 
c.	Stormwater management technical standards. 
1.	It is the responsibility of the applicant to submit sufficient information to the building official or their designee to determine whether the requirements of this section are being met. 
2.	It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain and/or improve by rerouting of runoff, the existing flow of waters from adjacent properties. Sufficient information is to be provided by the applicant showing stormwater flow volumes from and to adjacent properties and proposed conveyance of flow on the property to maintain existing drainage patterns. The submittal information should detail proposed elevations or contours, grading or fill information, direction of flows and installation of improvements such as retaining walls, curbs, earth embankments, etc., to prevent premature escape of runoff to adjacent properties. Submittals should also detail the computations and calculations utilized to demonstrate satisfaction of the retention requirements. Submittals should also detail the type of soil conditions present and the depth of the water table. A soils report and/or survey may be required to verify the conditions represented on the plan. 
3.	It shall be the duty of the property owner to provide proper maintenance of the stormwater management system so that the system continues to meet the requirements of this section. The City shall have the power to inspect stormwater management systems and facilities as necessary. Necessary maintenance and repair shall be made by the property owner with a time period not to exceed 30 days after written notification by the City of the problem and the required corrective action. Failure to make the corrective actions within the required time frame specified shall result in either: 
i.	The corrective action being performed by the City and a lien placed on all property in the county owned by the property owner; and/or 
ii.	The property owner will be cited by the Code enforcement officer and the case taken before the City code enforcement board for action. 
d.	Surface stormwater system standards. 
1.	Surface stormwater systems utilized to accomplish the stormwater retention and percolation requirements shall be designed so as to be readily accessible from rights-of-way, parking areas and driveways, court yards, and other open areas so that maintenance and clean-out of these areas can be easily accomplished. 
2.	The side slopes and bottoms of all retention areas shall have a grass or other landscape material cover. The maximum depth of retention areas shall be four feet from the surrounding average grade. The maximum side slopes of retention areas shall not exceed three to one. 
3.	Spillways or other entrance channels to retention areas shall be designed to prevent the flushing of these areas by heavy rains. 
4.	Retention areas shall be designed and function such that all retained water is removed after the third day. If this is not accomplished by percolation or evaporation, the retention area must be improved to include an underdrain system or other bottom materials to accomplish this requirement. 
e.	Disposition of stormwater runoff. 
1.	All stormwater systems shall include a method for the disposition of excess stormwater runoff. This disposition is to be into the rights-of-way of the City, if there are storm drainage facilities in place. 
2.	In cases where the disposition of excess stormwater runoff is other than to public rights-of-way with storm drainage facilities, the approval of the City Engineer shall be required for the design and disposition of stormwater runoff in other areas such as lakes, ponds, streams, canals, wetlands, or rights-of-way without storm drainage facilities. 
f.	Variances. Until such time as a City-wide stormwater management system is installed throughout the City, variances from the provisions of these amendments will not be accepted or approved by the City Council. 
g.	Recorded notice. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the City, or its designated representative, the property owner shall record a notice in the public records of the county with the clerk of the court, and provide a copy of the recorded document to the City clerk. Such notice shall explicitly state, for the benefit of all future property owners, that the subject property does not meet the minimum elevation requirements of the City Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, §§ 1, 2, 7-6-2005; Ord. No. 03-06, § 1, 3-1-2006; Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 2-7-2007)  
Sec. 4-183. - Stormwater management permit review. 
An application for a stormwater management development permit shall be filed, processed and approved in the following manner: 
(1)	Preliminary application. In cases where it is not clear that a proposed development is exempt from this division, a preliminary application may be submitted. 
a.	The preliminary application shall be filed with the LDM. 
b.	The preliminary application shall contain two copies of the following information: 
1.	A statement signed by the owner/developer which certifies that the development will: 
i.	Not obstruct any existing flow of stormwater runoff; and 
ii.	Not drain stormwater onto adjacent lands not now receiving runoff from the proposed development area. 
2.	An application form containing the following information and exhibits: 
i.	Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
ii.	Location map, address and legal description of the proposed development; 
iii.	Statement expressing the scope of the proposed development; 
iv.	Schedule of proposed development; and 
v.	Sketch showing existing and proposed structures, paving and drainage patterns. 
3.	It is the responsibility of the applicant to include in the preliminary application sufficient information for the City to evaluate the application and the acceptability of those measures proposed. 
c.	Within three working days after filing, the LDM shall determine whether or not the preliminary application is complete. If it is determined that it is complete, the LDM shall transmit it to the City Development Engineer. If it is determined to be incomplete, it shall be returned to the applicant. 
d.	After receiving the preliminary application, the City Development Engineer, shall, within ten working days, determine and then notify the LDM that either the proposed development is exempt or that a permit shall be applied for. 
e.	Considerations for exemption from a permit. The City Development Engineer, in making a determination of exemption of the application from the permitting procedures, shall consider: 
1.	Whether or not the proposed project is exempt pursuant to 4-182(b); 
2.	Whether or not the proposed project will increase the rate or volume of runoff from the existing site; 
3.	Whether or not the proposed project will adversely affect water quality; 
4.	Whether or not there are other criteria which would require an application; and 
5.	Whether or not a St. Johns River Water Management District permit is required. 
f.	Upon receiving notification of the City Development Engineer's determination under subsection (1)e. of this section, the LDM will immediately notify the applicant. 
g.	Upon notification, the applicant may appeal the determination of the City Development Engineer that a permit shall be applied for by filing a request with the City Manager, within ten working days, that the City Manager make a final determination of exemption. A final determination shall be made by the City Manager within ten working days of the request. 
h.	If it is determined that the proposed development is exempt, the applicant is authorized to commence and complete construction of only the development described in the preliminary application. No construction shall commence until a St. Johns River Water Management District permit is approved, if required. 
(2)	Concurrent review. Where a standard application for stormwater review is required for a project undergoing subdivision or site plan review pursuant to divisions 2 and 3 of this article, all review shall be done concurrently. All performance standards and requirements of this article shall be met in addition to those required in other provisions of this Code during the concurrent review. Plans and exhibits required by this division may be combined with other plans and exhibits required for concurrent review. However, it is the responsibility of the applicant to include in the concurrent application submittals sufficient information for the City to evaluate the application and acceptability of those measures proposed pursuant to the requirements of this division. 
(3)	Stormwater management requirements. 
a.	For the purposes of this division, developments requiring a standard permit application shall be either a "lesser development" or a "standard development," defined as follows: 
1.	A lesser development is: 
i.	A proposed development that has a lot size less than one acre in area and consists of more than 1,000 but less than 5,000 square feet of impervious area, or the impervious area proposed is less than 25 percent of the total lot area; or 
ii.	A proposed lot division with a minimum lot size of one acre or larger with no new roadways or streets. 
2.	A standard development is a proposed development of any lot area that consists of 5,000 or more square feet of impervious area; or the impervious area is 25 percent or more of the total lot area; or the lot area of the proposed development is one acre or larger regardless of the impervious area. 
b.	An application for a stormwater management development permit and sufficient copies of the required plans and information shall be filed with the LDM and the proper fee paid. Sufficient copies shall be determined as follows: 
1.	For a lesser development, three copies are required. 
2.	For a standard development, nine copies are required. 
3.	The LDM may require additional sets of plans and information as deemed necessary for additional agency review. 
c.	The following plans and information, prepared by a state registered engineer, shall be submitted with the application: 
1.	A detailed site plan, including a general location map and the location of all existing and proposed pavement and structures; 
2.	Topographic maps of the site and all adjacent contributing areas before and after the proposed alterations; 
3.	Information regarding the types of soils and groundwater conditions existing on the site; 
4.	General vegetation maps of the site before development and a plan showing proposed ground cover after development; 
5.	Construction plans, specifications and computations necessary to indicate compliance with the requirements of this division; 
6.	Additional information necessary for determining compliance with this division as the City Development Engineer may require; and 
7.	Additionally, for a standard development, a hydrograph for the proposed development may be required, particularly in those areas where the cumulative impact of the outflows on downstream flows are of concern. 
d.	Within three working days of filing of the application the LDM will determine whether or not the application is complete. If the application is determined to be incomplete it will be returned to the applicant. 
e.	If the application is determined to be complete, the LDM will immediately distribute the application to the CDE. 
f.	Within 20 days of receipt of an application from the LDM to the City Development Engineer or within 20 days of any amendment thereto, the City Development Engineer shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. After the City Development Engineer has rendered his decision, the City Development Engineer will immediately notify the LDM of the decision rendered. 
g.	Within 30 days of receipt of an application for a standard development, the City Development Engineer shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The City Development Engineer shall state the reasons for denial in writing. After the City Development Engineer has rendered a decision, the City Development Engineer will immediately notify the LDM of the decision rendered. The City Development Engineer may issue an intent to approve or approve with conditions an application in the absence of any required St. Johns River Water Management District permit, but no development order shall be issued unless a St. Johns River Water Management District permit has been approved.  
Sec. 4-184. - Performance, review and design standards. 
(a)	Performance standards. 
(1)	For applications for a lesser or a standard development, the performance standards to be followed in the design of the project are as follows: 
a.	Stormwater runoff shall be subjected to best management practice prior to discharge into natural or artificial drainage systems. "Best management practice" shall mean a practice or combination of practices determined by the City Development Engineer to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing the amount of pollution generated by the project to a level compatible with state water quality standards found in F.A.C. ch. 17-3. 
b.	1.	No site alteration shall cause siltation of wetlands, pollution of downstream wetlands or reduce the natural retention or filtering capabilities of wetlands. 
2.	No site alteration shall allow water to become a health hazard or contribute to the production of mosquitoes. 
3.	All site alteration activities shall provide for such water retention and settling structures and flow attenuation devices as may be necessary to insure that the foregoing standards and requirements are met. 
c.	Design of water retention or detention structures and flow attenuation devices shall be subject to the approval of the City Development Engineer pursuant to the standards hereof. Detention structures shall be designed to release runoff to the downstream drainage system over a period of time so as not to exceed the capacity of the existing downstream system. Under no case shall open retention areas (ponds, etc.) have side slopes steeper than four horizontal to one vertical (4:1) to a depth of two feet of water at seasonal low pond elevation, at which point the side slope may be increased to two horizontal to one vertical (2:1). Retaining walls may be utilized to accommodate field conditions. In order to maintain good water quality in stormwater management detention ponds and maximize the provision of fish and wildlife habitat, stormwater management systems with permanently wet detention ponds should be designed, operated and maintained so as to resemble a natural pond to the greatest extent practical. A natural pond design should include a littoral zone comprised of native emergent and submersed aquatic macrophytic vegetation, a deep open water limnetic zone free of rooted emergent and submersed vegetation, and, where feasible, an upland buffer of native trees, shrubs and under story vegetation in accordance with St. Johns River Water Management District requirements. 
d.	A positive drainage system shall be provided which will not adversely impact downstream owners or adjacent lands. 
e.	Where possible, natural vegetation shall be used as a component of the drainage system. The water table should not be manipulated so as to endanger natural vegetation beneficial to water quality unless natural vegetation can be replanted and survive with a lowered water table condition. 
f.	Runoff from higher adjacent lands shall be considered and provisions for conveyance of such runoff shall be included in the drainage plan. 
g.	Runoff shall be treated to remove oil and floatable solids before discharge from the site in a manner approved by the City Development Engineer. 
h.	Erosion by wind or water shall be prevented by the developer throughout the construction process. 
i.	Direct discharge to class II waters is prohibited. A workable filter system must be provided prior to any discharge to class II waters. 
j.	For the purpose of this division, it is presumed that the lowering of the water table for the purpose of constructing detention/retention basins and for the purpose of permanently protecting road construction does not conflict with the stated objectives of this division if all of the following are met: 
1.	The development site is not in an area known to the City, based on data collected and interpreted by the U.S. Geological Survey, the St. Johns River Water Management District, the county and other professional investigators, as important to recharge or to prevention of discharge of the state aquifer. 
2.	The proposed lowering of the water table shall be over no more than 15 percent of the site to a depth of five feet below the surface of the existing undisturbed ground, or an equivalent volume, said area to be measured at the overflow elevation of the retention area. 
3.	If ditches, underdrains or similar devices are used to lower the water table, the lateral volumetric effect will be calculated, and the volume will be deducted from that allowed for retention areas. 
4.	The high-water table may be lowered up to two feet below the undisturbed ground in the vicinity of roads for the purpose of protecting the subbase and base of the roadway and/or for the purpose of preventing mosquito production in the roadside swales. 
5.	The lowering of the water table has no adverse affect on wetlands as defined herein. 
6.	The lowering of the water table does not increase flows to the detriment of neighboring lands. 
(2)	For application for a standard development, the following performance standards are to be followed in the design of the project: 
a.	Closed basin criteria. When a positive outfall is not available or discharge into a lake or other system without a positive outfall is proposed, the design shall retain the total volume or runoff from 100-year, 24-hour storm event (10.6 inches) for the post-developed site. Total recovery of the 100-year, 24-hour retention volume should occur within 14 days after the storm event. If infiltration credit during the storm even is included in the recovery analysis, seepage and infiltration rates will have to be certified by a geotechnical engineer licensed to practice law in the State of Florida. For those parcels two acres or less abutting U.S. Highway 17/92, between Dirksen Drive and Saxon Boulevard, the stormwater management design shall retain the difference in pre- and post-development runoff volume for the 100-year, 24-hour storm event. Note, that if the parcel discharges into the existing U.S. Highway 17/92 storm sewer system, an FDOT drainage connection permit will also be required to address the department's critical duration analysis. Total recovery of the retained volume must occur within 14 days after the storm event. 
b.	Retention standards. The discharge hydrograph produced for the developed or redeveloped site shall not exceed, in terms of peak flow and total volume, the hydrograph produced by conditions existing before development or redevelopment for a 24-hour, 100-year frequency storm, unless the intent of this recharge provision will be met through detention of the difference between said volumes, in which case said volume difference may be released over not less than a 24-hour nor greater than a 72-hour period of time. However, the design standards for wet retention areas, when approved by the City Development Engineer, shall prevail. This requirement may be waived by the City Development Engineer for sites consisting predominately of poorly drained soils having permanently and naturally impaired recharge potentials. In addition, the cumulative impact of the outflow hydrograph on downstream flow shall be considered. Runoff rates and volumes resulting from the project, in excess of existing amounts, shall be accommodated on site. Off-site retention may be permitted if, in the opinion of the City Development Engineer, the recharge requirements of this division are met. 
c.	Hydraulic design criteria. The design engineer must submit drainage computations for the hydraulic design of the proposed secondary drainage systems. Specifically, storm sewer systems shall be designed and analyzed to provide sufficient conveyance capacity for the ten-year storm event (Rational method) to prevent upstream surcharging even when the downstream outlet is experiencing tailwater submergence. Roadway spread of water should also be analyzed with inlet spacing based upon both allowable spread width and inlet capacity for the ten-year storm even (Rational method). 
d.	Runoff computations. Runoff computations shall be based on the most critical situation (rainfall duration, distribution and antecedent soil moisture condition) and conform to acceptable engineering practices using rainfall data and other local information applicable to the affected area. 
(b)	Review standards. The City Development Engineer in reviewing and/or approving the application shall consider, where appropriate, the following minimum standards: 
(1)	The characteristics and limitations of the soil at the proposed site with respect to percolation and infiltration; 
(2)	The existing topography of the sites and the extent of topographical changes after development; 
(3)	The existing vegetation of the site, the extent of vegetational changes after development and the threat posed to vegetation endangered or indigenous to wetlands; 
(4)	The plans and specifications of structures or devices the applicant intends to employ for on-site stormwater retention/detention with filtration, erosion control and flow attenuation; 
(5)	The effect the proposed stormwater management system will have upon mosquito breeding habitat; 
(6)	The adequacy of easements for drainage systems in terms of both runoff conveyance and maintenance; 
(7)	The method of handling upland flow which presently discharges through the site; 
(8)	The effectiveness of wind and water erosion control measures during construction; 
(9)	Standards and requirements of any other governmental jurisdiction; 
(10)	The maintenance entity responsible for upkeep of the system upon its completion; 
(11)	The continuity of phased projects; phased projects will require the submission of an overall plan for the applicant's total land holdings; 
(12)	The existing hydrologic cycle of the proposed site and the impact of the proposed alterations on the existing hydrologic cycle; 
(13)	The impact the proposed project will have on the natural recharge capabilities of the site; and 
(14)	The impact the proposed project will have on downstream water quantity and quality and specifically the potential for downstream flooding conditions. 
(c)	Design standards. 
(1)	Open swales, ditches or other waterways shall require complete engineering data showing the adequacy of design and the effect within the particular drainage area to the satisfaction of the City Development Engineer. The cost of designing and installing drainage systems shall be borne by the developer. 
(2)	Pipe shall be either Class 3 reinforced concrete with patented rubber gasketed joints, ADS, PVC, elliptical concrete pipe or other type approved by the City Development Engineer. In all locations, the minimum cover shall be equal to the diameter of the pipe, and shall depend upon location and type of pipe. 
(3)	Sizes of drainage culverts, ditch sizes and inlet spacings shall be derived from computations required and shall be submitted to the City Development Engineer for approval. 
(4)	In cases where there is a prevalence of soils that exhibit adverse water table characteristics, underdrains and/or fill or other acceptable alternative that will provide necessary measures to maintain the structural integrity of the road will be required. The determination of need shall be made by reference to applicable portions of the most recent edition of the Soil Survey and Supplement for Volusia County, Florida, as prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resource Conservation Service, or whatever subsequent authoritative soil survey may be published for the county after adoption of these regulations, or according to information generated by developers. 
(Ord. No. 06-14 . Exh. A, 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 4-185. - Issuance of development permit. 
(a)	Notice. Upon notification of the determination of the City Development Engineer, the LDM will immediately notify the applicant of that determination. 
(b)	Determination of approval. Where there has been a determination of approval of the application, the LDM shall issue the development permit; and thereafter the applicant may commence construction of the development, provided all other requirements of this Code are complied with. 
(c)	Determination of approval with conditions. Where there has been a determination of approval of the application with conditions, the LDM shall first ensure that those conditions are satisfied, and then shall issue the development permit; and thereafter the applicant may commence construction of the development, provided all other requirements of this Code are complied with. 
(d)	Determination of denial. Where there has been a determination of denial of the application, the LDM shall immediately notify the applicant, in writing, stating the reasons for denial.  
Sec. 4-186. - Plan adherence. 
The applicant shall be required to adhere strictly to the issued development permit. Any changes or amendments to the approved plans must be approved by the City Development Engineer. If the completed development appears to deviate from the approved plans, the City Manager may require the developer to submit as-built plans of the completed project. City Development Engineer shall be granted inspection rights and right-of-entry privileges in order to ensure compliance with the requirements of this division.  
Sec. 4-187. - Maintenance. 
(a)	The installed stormwater management system and facilities required by this division and/or the applicable water management district shall be maintained by the owner or other responsible legal entity except that the city may accept certain stormwater management systems or facilities for city operation and maintenance. The selection of critical areas and/or structures to be maintained by the city shall be recommended to the City Council by the City Manager. All areas and/or structures to be maintained by the city must be conveyed to the city by warranty deed, plat dedication or separate instrument in a form approved by the city and accepted by the City Council. Subsections (b) through (h) of this section 4-187 do not apply to stormwater management systems and facilities owned by the city. 
(b)	As part of the final plat or final site plan approval process, whichever occurs first, the stormwater management system and facilities to be maintained by the owner or other responsible legal entity shall have adequate easements granted to the city that permit the city to inspect and, if necessary, to take corrective action should the owner or other responsible legal entity fail to maintain the system. For new subdivisions/plats, the final plat and declaration of covenants of the subdivision shall contain the following or substantially similar language: "The City of DeBary shall have the right, but not the obligation, to access, maintain, repair, replace, and otherwise care for or cause to be cared for, any and all stormwater management systems and facilities, including without limitation, the retention/detention areas, ponds, berms, control structures, weirs, pipes, ditches, swales, gutters, inlets, manholes, outfalls, underdrains and other improvements and areas not dedicated to the public or the city, including, without limitation, Tracts _______ and ____ and the improvements thereon, which includes the right of reasonable ingress and egress over and through private roads, drainage tracts and drainage easements of the subdivision, and the right to make alterations to and utilize the stormwater management system and facilities during emergency conditions for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event any or all of the said systems, facilities, improvements, properties or areas: (i) are not maintained, repaired, or replaced in accordance with the standards of the City of DeBary Land Development Code, in accordance with good engineering practices, or in conformance with approved plans and specifications, (ii) become a nuisance or a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, or (iii) in the event the City of DeBary exercises its aforementioned right; each of the lot owners of the subdivision are hereby ultimately responsible for payment of the cost of maintenance, repair, replacement and care provided by the City of DeBary or its contractors and agents, plus administrative costs, engineering costs, and attorneys' fees and costs incurred by the City of DeBary. The charges against the lot owners of the subdivision for the aforesaid costs shall be in a pro-rata share based on a methodology to be determined by the city to be equitable. If said costs are not paid within 20 days of invoicing, then said costs shall constitute a lien on the property of the owners which fail to pay such costs and may be enforced, without limitation, by foreclosure, special assessments, monetary judgment, or as may otherwise be permitted by law or an action in equity. This right, and the City of DeBary's exercise of said right, shall not impose any obligation on the City of DeBary to maintain, repair, replace, or otherwise care for said stormwater management systems and facilities, including with respect to any systems, facilities or improvements previously maintained, repaired or replaced or otherwise cared for by the city." 
(c)	Prior to the issuance of a building permit concerning any development or subdivision, a written maintenance plan shall be submitted to the city which shall contain documentation sufficient to demonstrate that the maintenance entity is the legal entity empowered and obligated to perpetually maintain the stormwater management systems and facilities that benefit, accommodate stormwater from, or in any way relate to the property or improvements for which the building permit is sought. For developments or subdivision that have an existing stormwater management system and facilities prior to the adoption of this section 4-187, the "responsible legal entity" for purposes of this section, shall be the current owner of such stormwater management system and facilities and the homeowners' association or property owners' association required by the governing documents of the subdivision to maintain such stormwater management system and facilities. Regardless of when a stormwater management system or facility was constructed, the responsible legal entity shall comply with the provisions of this section 4-187. 
(d)	The developer or responsible legal entity shall execute and record in the public records of Volusia County, a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or other instrument acceptable to the city manager, which defines the responsible legal entity's authority and responsibility for maintenance of the stormwater management system and facilities, defines how the maintenance is to be performed, and provides a legal mechanism ensuring the perpetuation of the maintenance, including the assessment and collection of monies necessary for operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of such systems and facilities. Unless waived by the city, the legal mechanism ensuring the perpetual maintenance of the stormwater management system and facilities shall provide for the assessment and collection of monies from all lots and tracts in the subdivision and all lots and tracts for which such stormwater management system and facilities were designed to, or in fact, accommodate stormwater, excluding government owned properties and other properties legally exempt from special assessment. 
(e)	All lot and tract owners within a subdivision and property owners whose property benefits from the stormwater management system and facilities as set forth above, shall be ultimately responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of the stormwater management system and facilities, whether or not a homeowners' association or property owners' association is the designated responsible legal entity. 
(f)	The responsible legal entity shall properly operate, maintain, repair and replace any and all stormwater management systems and facilities, including without limitation, the retention/detention areas, ponds, berms, control structures, weirs, pipes, ditches, swales, gutters, inlets, manholes, outfalls, and underdrains and other improvements and areas not dedicated to the public or the city, in accordance with the standards and requirements of the city code of ordinances, land development code, approved permits, plans and specifications concerning such improvements, good engineering practices and requirements and standards of other applicable governmental authorities, including the applicable water management district and in a manner as not to create a nuisance. If at any time it is discovered that a stormwater management system or facilities are not properly functioning, then the responsible legal entity shall correct the deficiencies in the stormwater management system and facilities to make such system and facilities properly function, including the design, permitting and construction of needed corrective measures. The responsible legal entity shall have a duty to cause the proper functioning of and to correct deficiencies in the stormwater management system and facilities regardless of the reason for such deficiencies or system or facilities not properly functioning, including without limitation, due to such system or facilities not originally being constructed in accordance with approved plans and specifications, by way of heavy rainfall events, natural disasters, other acts of God, or other factors beyond the responsible legal entity's control. 
(g)	Unless expressly authorized by the city, it is prohibited for any person or entity to alter stormwater management systems or facilities, including but not limited to, altering the grade of or original drainage improvements for any lot or tract or easement area, or changing the direction of, obstructing, inhibiting, interfering with or increasing the flow of surface water drainage, or altering or removing of any berm, control structures, ditch, swale, pipe, inlet, manholes, underdrain, pond, gutter, weir or other stormwater improvement and areas, and stormwater collection, storage and conveyance system. The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall contain the above sentence of this subsection. 
(h)	If the city determines that stormwater management systems or facilities are not being properly maintained, repaired, replaced, or otherwise cared for, or were improperly altered, the city shall, after at least 30 days written notice by U.S. Mail, certified mail, or hand delivery to the responsible legal entity and opportunity to cure, have the right to take one or more of the following actions: 
(1)	The city shall have the right, but not the obligation, to impose, through proper enactment, a special assessment, or other mechanism assessing each of the property owners benefiting (excluding government-owned property) from the stormwater management systems and facilities and use such assessments to cause the maintenance, repair, replacement and otherwise care for any and all stormwater management systems and facilities and to pay for any engineering costs, administrative costs and attorneys' fees and costs related thereto incurred by the city. Special assessments against the aforesaid property owners shall be in a pro-rata share based on a methodology to be determined by the city to be equitable; 
(2)	The city shall have the right, but not the obligation, to enter upon the property and take necessary corrective action, at the responsible legal entity's expense. The responsible legal entity shall be liable to the city for any costs and expenses incurred by the city in taking and arising from the corrective action, including but not limited to, material, labor, equipment, engineering and administrative costs, interest, and attorneys' fees. If said costs and expenses are not paid by the responsible legal entity within 30 days of invoicing by the city, then said costs and expenses shall constitute a lien on all real property of the responsible legal entity upon the recording of a notice of lien by the city in the public records. Said amounts owed may be collected, without limitation, by foreclosure of lien, lawsuit for damages, action/motion to compel assessment against benefited properties, and injunctive relief, or any combination thereof; 
(3)	Institute code enforcement proceedings and prosecute code violations; 
(4)	Issue code enforcement citations and impose penalties; or 
(5)	Institute any appropriate action or procedure to bring about compliance or remedy, including but not limited to, instituting an action in court to enjoin violating actions and to seek damages, in which case the violating persons and entities shall be liable to the city for reimbursement of the city's attorneys' fees and costs concerning such action. 
(i)	In the event the city obtains ownership of stormwater management systems and facilities previously privately owned or owned by another governmental entity as the result of or arising from enforcement action under this section, as the result of annexation, or by any other means, the city shall have the right to continue to assess and charge each of the property owners benefiting from the stormwater management systems and facilities for ongoing maintenance, repair, replacement and administrative expenses relating to such stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(j)	The provisions of this section are additional or supplemental requirements and mechanisms to provide compliance with city codes and to provide for effective and efficient stormwater management. Nothing contained within this section shall limit the city's ability to enforce its codes by any other means. 
( Ord. No. 11-13, § 2, 11-6-2013 )  
Sec. 4-188. - Emergency exemption. 
(a)	This division shall not be constructed to prevent the doing of any act necessary to prevent material harm to or destruction of real or personal property as a result of a present emergency, including but not limited to fire, infestation by pests, or hazards resulting from violent storms or hurricanes or when the property is in imminent peril and the necessity of obtaining a permit is impractical and would cause undue hardship in the protection of the property. 
(b)	A report of any such emergency action shall be made to the City Manager by the owner or person in control of the property upon which emergency action was taken as soon as practicable, but not more than ten days following such action. Remedial action may be required by the City Manager subject to appeal to the City Council in the event of dispute.  
Secs. 4-189—4-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FLOODING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-14, § 2, adopted February 5, 2014, repealed art. III, §§ 4-201—4-228 and enacting a new art. III, §§ 4-201—4-219 as set out herein. Former art. III, §§ 4-201—4-225 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, adopted Sept. 7, 2011. 
 
DIVISION 1. - FLOOD HAZARD MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 4-201. - General. 
4-201.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Article of the City of DeBary, hereinafter referred to as "this article." 
4-201.2 Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development, or any other land disturbing activities. 
4-201.3 Intent. The purposes of this article and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)	Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)	Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)	Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)	Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)	Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)	Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)	Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
4-201.4 Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This article is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
4-201.5 Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this article and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the Flood Insurance Study and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this article. 
201.6 Disclaimer of Liability. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City Council of the City of DeBary or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-202. - Applicability. 
4-202.1 General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
4-202.2 Areas to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of DeBary, as established in Section 4-202.3. 
4-202.3 Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The Flood Insurance Study for Volusia County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated February 19, 2014 , and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this article and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the City of DeBary Building Department located at City Hall, 16 Colomba Road, DeBary, Florida 32713. 
4-202.4 Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to Section 4-205 of this article the Floodplain Administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)	Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this article and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)	Are above the base flood elevation for the special flood hazard that completely or partially encompasses the subject land area, the subject land area within the limits of the special flood hazard area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
4-202.5 Other laws. The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
4-202.6 Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article supersedes any ordinance or Land Development Code regulation in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances or code regulations including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this article and any other ordinance or code regulation, the more restrictive shall govern. This article shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this article. 
4-202.7 Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-203. - Duties and powers of the floodplain administrator. 
4-203.1 Designation. The Building Official is designated as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
4-203.2 General. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this article consistent with the intent and purpose of this article and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this article without the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 4-207 of this article. 
4-203.3 Applications and permits. The Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(1)	Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)	Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this article; 
(3)	Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)	Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)	Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)	Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)	Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this article is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)	Coordinate with and provide comments to the Building Official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this article. 
4-203.4 Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall: 
(1)	Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)	Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)	Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
(4)	Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this article is required. 
4-203.5 Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall review requests submitted to the Building Official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 4-207 of this article. 
4-203.6 Notices and orders. The Floodplain Administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this article. 
4-203.7 Inspections. The Floodplain Administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in Section 4-206 of this article for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
4-203.8 Other duties of the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)	Establish, in coordination with the Building Official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to Section 4-203.4.4 of this article; 
(2)	Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)	Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within 6 months of such data becoming available; 
(4)	Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this article and the Florida Building Code and this article to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and 
(5)	Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of City of DeBary are modified. 
4-203.9 Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps; Letters of Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this article; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at DeBary City Hall, 16 Colomba Road, DeBary, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-204. - Permits. 
4-204.1 Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this article, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the Floodplain Administrator, and the Building Official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
4-204.2 Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this article for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the Floodplain Administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
4-204.3 Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this article: 
(1)	Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(2)	Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in section 604.50, F.S. 
(3)	Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(4)	Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
(5)	Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(6)	Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
(7)	Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(8)	Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(9)	Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on Flood Insurance Rate Maps 
4-204.4 Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
(1)	Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)	Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)	Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)	Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in Section 4-205 of this article. 
(5)	State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)	Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)	Give such other data and information as required by the Floodplain Administrator. 
4-204.5 Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this article shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this article, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance or regulation of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the Floodplain Administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
4-204.6 Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
4-204.7 Suspension or revocation. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this article or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
4-204.8 Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)	The St. Johns River Water Management District; section 373.036, F.S. 
(2)	Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; section 381.0065, F.S. and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)	Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; section 161.055, F.S. 
(4)	Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(5)	Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-205. - Site plans and construction documents. 
4-205.1 Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this article shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)	Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)	Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be established in accordance with Section 4-205.2(2) or (3) of this article, and shall be established to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(3)	Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than 5 acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with Section 4-205.2(1) of this article. 
(4)	Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures. 
(5)	Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)	Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)	Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
(8)	Construction plans and drainage basin maps shall be annotated to clearly and accurately delineate the flood hazard area encompassed by the applicable on-site base flood elevation. Topographic and floodplain mapping shall provide a minimum accuracy to a tenth of a foot (i.e., one-foot topographic contour interval and base flood elevation to one decimal accuracy). USGS quadrangle maps depicting five-foot topographic contours are not adequate to comply with these design standards. Floodplains shall be delineated for all storage areas located within the property boundary as defined by the pre-development topography, even if these areas are not illustrated on the City's FIRM panels. 
The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this article but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this article. 
4-205.2 Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the Floodplain Administrator shall: 
(1)	Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices, and shall be prepared to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(a)	Under no circumstances will the City accept a base flood elevation determined by overlaying a FEMA zone A, AE, AH or AO delineation with any topographic contour information. 
(2)	Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. Other sources may include approved drainage studies of a comprehensive and regional nature; and site-specific assessments signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. 
(a)	In the event that topographic contours developed in the field by ground survey techniques utilize a datum other than FEMA's effective (NAVD88) datum, a "datum shift" shall be required to "adjust" the applicable on-site base flood elevation to a common and consistent datum. Several resources are available on the internet for performing a datum shift once the project's latitude and longitude are determined. 
(3)	Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the Floodplain Administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
(a)	Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
(b)	Specify that the base flood elevation is three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than three (3) feet. 
(4)	Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a Letter of Map Change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(5)	Where there are conflicting elevation requirements, require that the design flood elevation used shall be the highest elevation, unless the applicant provides base flood elevations established in accordance with Section 4-205.2(1) of this article. 
4-205.3 Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)	For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in Section 4-205.4 of this article and shall submit the Conditional Letter of Map Revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)	For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the Flood Insurance Study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
(3)	For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in Section 4-205.4 of this article. 
(4)	For development activities proposed on properties with wetlands, depressions and any other low areas within the property boundary that are capable of impounding storm water runoff on the proposed undeveloped portion of the property, a sufficient number of geotechnical borings, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, and ecological assessments shall be conducted to establish the Seasonal High Water Level (SHWL) and Seasonal High Ground Water Table (SHGWT). Geotechnical assessments shall be conducted by a professional geotechnical engineer licensed in the state. Ecological assessments shall include an evaluation of hydric soils, vegetative cover, wetland species, lichen lines, etc. 
(5)	For development activities encroaching into a special flood hazard area, hydraulic calculations and supporting methodology that demonstrate the volume of the encroachment and method of compensatory storage is in accordance with the requirements of Section 4-218 of this article. 
4-205.4 Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a Letter of Map Change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-206. - Inspections. 
4-206.1 General. Development or other land disturbing activities for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
4-206.2 Development other than buildings and structures. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
4-206.3 Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
4-206.4 Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code,or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the Floodplain Administrator: 
(1)	If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
(2)	If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with Section 4-205.2(3)(b) of this article, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
4-206.5 Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the Floodplain Administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in Section 4-206.4 of this article. 
4-206.6 Manufactured homes. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-207. - Variances and appeals. 
4-207.1 General. The City Council shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this article. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the Florida Building Commission shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
4-207.2 Appeals. The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the administration and enforcement of this article. Any person aggrieved by the decision of City Council may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
4-207.3 Limitations on authority to grant variances. The City Council shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in Section 4-207.7 of this article, the conditions of issuance set forth in Section 4-207.8 of this article, and the comments and recommendations of the Floodplain Administrator and the Building Official. The City Council has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this article. 
4-207.4 Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in Section 4-205.3 of this article. 
4-207.5 Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
4-207.6 Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this article, provided the variance meets the requirements of Section 4-207.4, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
4-207.7 Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this article, and the following: 
(1)	The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)	The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)	The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)	The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)	The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)	The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)	The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
4-207.8 Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)	Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this article or the required elevation standards; 
(2)	Determination by the City Council that: 
(a)	Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
(b)	The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
(c)	The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(3)	Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)	If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the Floodplain Administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-208. - Violations. 
4-208.1 Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this article, shall be deemed a violation of this article. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
4-208.2 Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article and that is determined to be a violation, the Floodplain Administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
4-208.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law (Chapter 166.22, Florida Statutes). 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 4-209. - General. 
4-209.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings shown in this section. 
4-209.2 Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this article and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
4-209.3 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this article or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-210. - Definitions. 
Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
Appeal. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
Base flood. A flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)	Area with a floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)	Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to 2 feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas or storage capacity in floodplains. 
Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before November 23, 1973. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before November 23, 1973. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)	The area within a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)	The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Floodplain Administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this article (may be referred to as the Floodplain Manager). 
Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this article. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models accepted by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings. 
Letter of Map Change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include: 
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F). A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR). The Federal Emergency Management Agency's formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)	Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
(2)	Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)	Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and greater than four hundred (400) square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this article, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the Property Appraiser. 
New construction. For the purposes of administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after November 23,1973 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after November 23, 1973. 
Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in section 320.01, F.S.] 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [see in section 320.01, F.S.) 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Seasonal High Water Levels (SHWL). The SHWL is defined as the elevation to which ground or surface water can be expected to rise during a normal wet season. 
Seasonal High Ground Water Table (SHGWT). The SHGWT is defined as the zone of water saturated soil at the highest average depth during the wettest season of the year. 
Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
Start of construction. The date of issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this article, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this article or the Florida Building Code. 
Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
DIVISION 3 - FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 4-211. - Buildings and structures. 
4-211.1 Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to Section 4-204.3 of this article, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of Section 4-217 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-212. - Subdivisions. 
4-212.1 Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)	Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)	All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)	Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
4-212.2 Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)	Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
(2)	Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than 5 acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with Section 4-205.2(1) of this article; and 
(3)	Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of Section 4-213 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-213. - Site improvements, utilities and limitations. 
4-213.1 Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)	Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)	All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)	Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
4-213.2 Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
4-213.3 Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
4-213.4 Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in Section 4-205.3(1) of this article demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
4-213.5 Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this article, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, and Section 4-218 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-214. - Manufactured homes. 
4-214.1 General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to section 320.8249, F.S., and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this article. 
4-214.2 Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 and this article. 
4-214.3 Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
4-214.4 Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with Section 4-214.5 or 4-214.6 of this article, as applicable. 
4-214.5 General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of Section 4-214.6 of this article, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A). 
4-214.6 Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to Section 4-214.5 of this article, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
(1)	Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A); or 
(2)	Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
4-214.7 Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322 for such enclosed areas. 
4-214.8 Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-215. - Recreational vehicles and park trailers. 
4-215.1 Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
4-215.2 Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in Section 4-215.1 of this article for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of Section 4-214 of this article for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-216. - Tanks. 
4-216.1 Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
4-216.2 Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of Section 4-216.3 of this article shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
4-216.3 Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
4-216.4 Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)	At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)	Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-217. - Other development. 
4-217.1 General requirements for other development. All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this article or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)	Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)	Meet the limitations of Section 4-213.4 of this article if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)	Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)	Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)	Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
4-217.2 Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of Section 4-213.4 of this article. 
4-217.3 Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of Section 4-213.4 of this article. 
4-217.4 Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of Section 4-213.4 of this article. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of Section 4-205.3(3) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
Sec. 4-218. - Compensatory storage for encroachments. 
4-218.1 Compensatory storage. Compensatory storage for all encroachments into the City of DeBary's special flood hazard areas shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)	Compliance will be based upon a volume for volume ("cup for cup") methodology, with the volume of compensation equal to the volume of encroachment at each and every elevation (one-foot contour interval). Providing compensating storage equal to the volume of encroachment at each elevation will provide equivalent management for all storm events of magnitude less than the 100-year storm event, and is intended to prevent cumulative water quantity impacts. 
(2)	Compensatory storage creation shall occur below the existing base flood elevation and above the predicted Seasonal High Ground Water Table (SHGWT) and/or the Seasonal High Water Levels (SHWL). 
(3)	Compensatory storage shall occur within dedicated storage areas excavated contiguous to the existing special flood hazard area. 
(4)	Under no circumstances will compensatory storage be allowed within ponds that also provide stormwater management (retention and/or detention) for the proposed development. 
(5)	The City may approve the creation of off-site compensatory storage areas located outside the property boundary on a case-by-case basis. 
(6)	The City reserves the right to enforce additional criteria upon any project that is located within what the City considers a special flood hazard area. At the City's discretion, additional flood control measures may be required to adequately protect upstream systems, downstream systems, and/or off-site properties. 
(7)	Floodplain encroachment shall be computed for all fill placed within the special flood hazard area, or for any other volume displacing activities, below the base flood elevation and above the predicted SHGWT or SHWL. 
4-218.2 Special stormwater management criteria. Special stormwater management criteria may be enforced upon any development activity that proposes any form of stormwater detention within a watershed that does not have a positive outfall (i.e., land-locked basin).  
Sec. 4-219. - The Florida building code. 
The floodplain management regulations put forth in this article are to be coordinated with the Florida Building Code. The City of DeBary hereby adopts local administrative amendments to the 2010 Florida Building Code as set forth in Chapter 14, Article II of the City of DeBary Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 01-14 , § 2, 2-5-2014)  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED. 
 
Secs. 4-220—4-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - WETLAND ALTERATION PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note at Art. III. 
 
Sec. 4-231. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)	It is the purpose and intent of this division to provide for the protection, maintenance, enhancement and utilization of wetlands within the City, recognizing the rights of individual property owners to use their lands in a reasonable manner as well as the right of all citizens to protection and purity of the waters of the City and their associated wetland ecosystems. It is the policy of the City to minimize the disturbance of wetlands in the City and to encourage their use only for the purposes which are compatible with their natural functions and environmental benefits. Wetlands contiguous to waters of the state, noncontiguous and isolated wetlands serve the following important functions in the hydrologic cycle and ecological system: 
(1)	Riverine wetlands and adjacent floodplain lands provide natural storage and conveyance of floodwaters. 
(2)	Inland wetlands adjoining larger lakes and rivers act as barriers to waves and erosion. 
(3)	Inland wetlands provide temporary storage of surface waters during times of flood, thereby regulating flood elevations and the timing, velocity and rate of flood discharges. 
(4)	Wetlands temporarily store flood flows and reduce the velocity of floodwaters, reducing erosion and facilitating the settling of suspended sediment. Wetland vegetation filters and detains sediment which would otherwise enter lakes and streams. 
(5)	Wetlands may protect water bodies by providing settling of suspended sediments, assimilation of nutrients and uptake of other natural and manmade pollutants. Wetland vegetation filters sediment, organic matter and chemicals. Microorganisms utilize dissolved nutrients and break down organic matter. 
(6)	Inland wetlands adjacent to rivers, streams and lakes are important to freshwater fisheries as spawning grounds. 
(7)	Inland wetlands provide essential breeding and predator escape habitats for many forms of mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fishes and invertebrates. 
(8)	Wetlands provide essential habitat for many rare, endangered, and threatened species. 
(9)	Wetlands provide excellent recreation opportunities, including but not limited to fishing, hunting, camping, photography, boating and nature observation. 
(10)	Wetlands, especially those in karst terrain, may contribute to surface water storage and may contribute to groundwater recharge. 
(11)	Forested wetlands provide an important source of forest products. This renewable resource provides a significant economic benefit to the forest landowners of the City. 
(b)	It is further the purpose and intent of this division to ensure that there be no net loss of wetlands function and acreage as defined herein. To this end, a wetland alteration permit will be required as provided herein.  
Sec. 4-232. - Wetland identification. 
The term "wetlands" shall be as defined in section 1-3. The landward extent of wetland delineation shall be as provided in F.A.C. ch. 62-340 et seq. If an undeveloped area has been cleared within 180 days from the date of application submittal or jurisdictional determination of all vegetation, the wetland boundary may be determined by a study of the soils, aerial mapping, photography, hydrology, and other historical information as appropriate.  
Sec. 4-233. - Exemptions. 
Activities which are exempted from this division include: 
(1)	Nonmechanical clearing of wetland or buffer vegetation from an area of 500 square feet or less not to exceed 25 feet in width, for access to open water, provided the vegetation is removed from the wetland and disposed of on a suitable upland site; 
(2)	Minor maintenance or emergency repair to existing structures or improved areas; 
(3)	Clearing and construction of walking trails and timber cat-walks for direct access to water bodies having no fill and six feet wide or less; 
(4)	Overhead utility crossings; provided, however, associated access roads shall be subject to the requirements of this division; 
(5)	Maintenance, together with incidental dredge and fill activities in ditches, retention and detention areas, public road and other rights-of-way, and other related drainage systems; 
(6)	Bona fide mosquito control activities favorably reviewed by the subcommittee on managed marshes and subsequently permitted by federal, state, or regional agencies; 
(7)	Development within artificial wetlands which are created as part of a manmade treatment system; 
(8)	Development where a federal, state, regional, or local agency completed dredge and fill or wetland application or where said agencies have previously determined that no permit was required for a proposed development within one year prior to the adoption of this division; if a permit is aggrieved by the decision of the Environmental Management Director on this issue, said person may appeal directly to the City Council; 
(9)	Bona fide agricultural uses; provided, however, silviculture shall be regulated as provided in section 4-238.  
Sec. 4-234. - Permit requirements. 
It is hereby unlawful for any person to engage in any activity which will remove, fill, drain, dredge, clear, destroy, or alter any wetland or wetland buffer as herein defined on any lot or portion thereof without obtaining a wetland alteration permit in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Said above-described permit may be issued concurrent or in conjunction with other land development permits. It is the intent of this section that construction of a single-family dwelling on upland which does not alter by removing, filling, draining, dredging, clearing or destroying any wetland or wetland buffer shall not require a permit pursuant to this section. 
(1)	Concurrent application with development order review. If the wetlands alteration permit application is to be processed concurrently with development order review under this division or division 3 of this article as the case may be, then it shall be filed as part of the development order review application, and shall include, in addition a wetland management plan, which shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.	A detailed description of all water bodies, watercourses and wetlands on-site and a general description of all water bodies, watercourses, and wetlands immediately adjacent to the site and associated hydrologic conditions. 
b.	A general description of the upland habitats on-site. 
c.	A site survey to scale no greater than one inch equals 50 feet which identifies the landward extent of the wetland boundaries, buffer zones, existing and proposed conservation areas and adjacent off-site conservation areas. Upon approval by the City Forester, a survey to scale up to one inch equals 400 feet may be acceptable. 
d.	A detailed description of any proposed activity within the wetlands and buffer zones. 
e.	A detailed analysis of on-site and/or off-site mitigation areas, if applicable. 
f.	A plan for the control of erosion, sedimentation and turbidity during and after construction which describes in detail the type and location of control measures, and provisions of maintenance. 
g.	A detailed description of methods to be utilized in meeting the criteria listed in section 4-235. 
h.	A copy of all other federal, state, and regional permits and/or applications and conditions issued for the proposed project. 
i.	Other information which the City Forester may reasonably require to determine whether to approve the wetlands alteration permit. 
(2)	Application without development order review. 
a.	Except as otherwise provided in subsection (1) of this section, an application for a wetlands alteration permit shall be submitted with the following information: 
1.	Name, address, and phone number for the property owner and/or agent. 
2.	Signature of agent or owner. 
3.	Legal description of property, including the property appraiser's parcel number. 
4.	A scale drawing of the property identifying existing structures, adjacent streets, and water bodies. 
5.	A scaled drawing and description of the proposed activity and proposed location. 
6.	A copy of all other federal, state, and regional permits and/or applications and conditions issued for the proposed project. 
7.	A wetland management plan as provided for in subsection (1) of this section; provided, however, that such plan shall not be required for the following activities: 
i.	A private dock and additions whose total area does not exceed 500 square feet over waters designated or classified as class II, outstanding state waters, aquatic preserves, or other special designation, or within 100 feet thereof for a single-family residence. 
ii.	A private dock and additions whose total area does not exceed 1,000 square feet over water within any class III waters for a single-family residence. 
iii.	A private boat ramp for a single-family residence which does not exceed 15 feet wide and requires less than ten cubic yards of fill. 
iv.	Construction of a seawall in a manmade canal where the seawall will be connected to existing seawalls on adjacent properties. 
v.	Restoration of existing and functioning structures. 
b.	An applicant is encouraged to arrange a preapplication conference with the City Forester to discuss the proposed wetlands alteration and the scientific methods utilized to evaluate and justify any wetlands alteration prior to submitting a formal application to the City Forester. 
c.	An application for a wetland alteration permit and a nonrefundable processing fee shall be filed with the City Forester. 
d.	Three copies of the required submittals shall be submitted with the application. The submittals shall meet the requirements of this Code and provide the information in this section. 
e.	The City Forester shall determine the completeness of the application within three days of filing. If the application is determined to be incomplete it shall be returned to the applicant. If the application is determined to be complete, the City Forester shall transmit it to the environmental management staff. 
f.	Upon receipt, the environmental management staff shall review the application, conduct a preliminary site inspection, and notify the applicant prior to said inspection. If the application meets all of the requirements of this division, it shall be approved within ten working days of receipt. Upon such approval the environmental management staff shall return the application to the City Forester. If the application is denied, it shall be returned to the City Forester, with the reasons for denial noted thereon, within ten working days of receipt; provided, however, upon receipt of a completed application, the City Forester determines that the proposed activity fails to meet the minimum requirements of this division, or if additional information is required, a request will be made, within ten working days after the preliminary site inspection, to the applicant to provide the additional information and modify the application and/or mitigation plans to prevent or limit the adverse impacts to the wetland or buffer. 
g.	If the applicant fails to make the necessary modifications or provide the additional information within 60 days, then the City Forester shall deny the permit. The City Forester shall approve the permit within ten working days after receiving the required modifications or additional information, unless the modifications fail to meet the requirements of this division. 
h.	The City Forester shall notify the applicant immediately after he approves or denies the application and issues the permit.  
Sec. 4-235. - Standards for review. 
(a)	Review criteria. In determining whether the development is permissible under the provisions of this division, the environmental management staff shall consider but not be limited to the following criteria: 
(1)	The ability of the wetland to receive, store and discharge surface water runoff so as to contribute to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; 
(2)	The ability of the wetland to recharge the groundwater as demonstrated by reliable available information; 
(3)	The ability of the wetland to provide filtration and nutrient assimilation from surface water runoff; 
(4)	The ability of the wetland to provide habitat and significant ecological function in the life cycle for fish, wildlife, or other forms of animal or plant life; 
(5)	The ability of the wetland to function as an integral part of any waters, water body, or watercourse; 
(6)	The cumulative impacts of the proposed development on the wetland system in combination with other developments which have been permitted or constructed in the same drainage basin; 
(7)	The technical feasibility of any proposed wetland mitigation plans and the likelihood of their success in restoring or replacing the environmental benefit altered by the development; 
(8)	The capacity of the existing wetland to provide environmental benefits because of such factors as maturity, size, degree of prior alteration, physical relationship to other water systems, and adjacent land uses; 
(9)	The degree or magnitude of the impact of the proposed alteration on the wetland and how such impact shall be minimized through mitigation measures, either off-site or on-site, or both, and recommendations concerning the appropriate location of said mitigation; 
(10)	Whether, and the extent to which, a proposed project must be located within a wetland or water body in order to perform the project's basic functions; 
(11)	Whether the wetlands impacted by the proposed activity are protected or used in a manner which does not adversely impact their beneficial functions as provided in section 4-231; 
(12)	The ability of the wetland to continue to function after development is completed; 
(13)	Whether the proposed project and the wetland impacts are consistent with the policies in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)	Issuance of permits; conditions. 
(1)	If the application meets the requirements of this division, the City Forester shall issue the permit based upon approval by the environmental management staff, as provided in this division, and may attach such appropriate conditions to the said permit in order to comply with the standards of subsection (a) of this section. The City Forester may deny the permit if it does not meet such standards, stating the reasons therefor. 
(2)	The City Forester may approve a wetlands alteration permit, which shall incorporate the general and specific conditions which were made part of the permit from federal, state, or regional agencies; provided, however, before the issuance of the wetlands alteration permit, said federal, state, or regional permit application when available shall be submitted to the City Forester. Concurrent applications to the local government and any federal, state, or regional agency shall be encouraged; provided, however, that the City Forester is not prevented from approving additional conditions to the said permit in order to comply with the standards of subsection (a) of this section.  
Sec. 4-236. - Buffer requirements. 
(a)	A buffer not less than 25 feet in width shall be established adjacent to and surrounding all wetlands except adjacent to and surrounding all wetlands designated as outstanding state waters (OFW), or natural resource management area (NRMA). Wetland buffers greater than 25 feet in width may be required by the City Manager if the upland activity adversely impacts the wetlands beneficial functions as provided for in section 4-231. The buffer may coincide with the setback on a lot under the zoning regulations; provided, however, there shall be no development in the buffer, except for direct access to water bodies. 
(b)	Development activities or construction which do not have a significant adverse effect on the natural function of the buffer may be allowed within the buffer. Proposed activities within the buffer may be permitted in accordance with the requirements of this division. The activities or construction which may be permitted include but are not limited to pruning, planting of suitable native vegetation, removal of exotic and nuisance pioneer plant species, and the creation and maintenance of walking trails. 
(c)	A buffer not less than 50 feet in width shall be established adjacent to and surrounding all wetlands designated as OFW and NRMA. Provided, however, the buffer shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width if it is located on a lot with less than ten acres of area and is located within an approved subdivision recorded or exempted from the provisions of this division.  
Sec. 4-237. - Mitigation. 
(a)	Mitigation requirements. 
(1)	It is presumed that development activity will have an adverse affect upon wetlands, and that permit conditions are inadequate to avoid potential adverse environmental affects. If the applicant fails to overcome this presumption then mitigation shall be required. Mitigation plans should consider the function of existing natural resources and provide comparable functions after mitigation is completed. Mitigation plans should maximize the preservation of existing natural resources. The mitigation plans shall consider the following methods, in order of priority in which they should be utilized: 
a.	Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action; 
b.	Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action or its implementation; 
c.	Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment; 
d.	Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action; 
e.	Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute resources or environments through creation of new wetlands, enhancement of existing wetlands or reestablishment of wetlands which are no longer functioning due to significant alteration in the past. 
(2)	The purpose of mitigation is to compensate for unavoidable adverse impacts by replacing or providing substitute resources or environments through the creation of new wetlands, enhancement of existing wetlands, or reestablishment of wetlands which are no longer functioning due to significant alteration in the past. Where all or part of a wetland is destroyed or to be destroyed or substantially altered by development, a proposed mitigation plan shall include at least: 
a.	A description of the wetland and buffer to be created or restored, which shall include but not limited to the type and functions of the wetland, the proposed mitigation ratios, species present or to be planted, plant density, anticipated source of plants, soils, and hydrologic regime; 
b.	A plan for monitoring the success of a created or restored wetland; 
c.	A detailed plan describing the monitoring and methods of control and maintenance of exotic or nuisance vegetation; 
d.	Monitoring and replacement to assure a survival rate of 80 percent wetland vegetation for a minimum of three years; 
e.	An upland habitat as an adjacent buffer on mitigated sites, as provided in section 4-236. 
(3)	An acceptable mitigation plan shall be reasonably and technically feasible. Mitigation through restoration of other degraded wetlands is preferred over wetland creation. 
(4)	Mitigation should take place on-site or in close proximity thereto or in areas so designated as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(5)	An applicant who carries out a compensatory mitigation plan shall grant a conservation easement on the newly created or restored wetland and buffer to protect it from future development. A legal mechanism other than a conservation easement may be deemed appropriate on a case-by-case basis to carry out the purpose of the subsection. 
(6)	A mitigation plan approved by a federal, state, or regional agency shall be acceptable to the City Manager; provided, however, that the approved mitigation plan does not result in the loss of function. If no such mitigation plan is required by the approved permit from the federal, state, or regional agency, or if the approved plan results in loss of function, then the City Manager may require a mitigation plan in compliance with this section. 
(7)	A mitigation plan should be designed to ensure that the wetlands provides minimal mosquito larval habitat and does not eliminate habitat for predatory fish. 
(8)	Any wetlands which have been altered in a manner which does not comply with this division and no wetland alteration permit obtained shall be restored and the mitigation requirements as provided in this division shall apply. 
(b)	Mitigation ratios. In determining the replacement acreage ratios for restored or created wetlands, the City Forester shall consider, but not be limited to, the following criteria: 
(1)	The length of time that can be expected to lapse before the functions of the impacted wetlands functions have been restored or offset. 
(2)	Any special designation or classification of the water body, including outstanding state waters, aquatic preserves, or class II waters. 
(3)	The type of wetland to be created and the likelihood of successfully creating that type of wetland. 
(4)	Whether or not the affected wetland is functioning as natural, healthy wetland of that type. 
(5)	Whether the wetland is unique for that watershed. 
(6)	The presence or absence of exotic or nuisance plants within the wetland and adverse effects those plants have on the wetland's beneficial functions. 
(7)	Whether the proposed project eliminates or changes the wetland from one type to another. 
(8)	The amount and quality of upland habitat preserved as conservation areas or buffer. 
(9)	Whether the applicant chooses to allocate funds to the City environmental improvement trust fund as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
Except as provided in subsection (a)(6) of this section, the mitigation ratio shall include replacement of the same type of wetland of at least a one-to-one ratio unless the value of the wetland based on its functional value is determined to warrant a greater or lesser ratio. There should be like-kind replacement, i.e., freshwater for freshwater where practicable. The minimum mitigation ratio for wetlands which have been harvested for timber within 180 days prior to submittal for a development order review shall be a minimum of a one-to-one ratio of created or restored wetlands to the adversely impacted wetland. The minimum mitigation ratio for wetlands which have been developed from agricultural uses within 180 days prior to submittal for a development order review shall be a minimum of one-to-one of created or restored wetlands to the adversely impacted wetlands. 
(c)	Environmental improvement trust fund. 
(1)	If the wetlands alteration permit application is not processed concurrently with development order review and a successful mitigation is not likely to offset unavoidable impacts, then the proposed development shall be assessed a mitigation fee. 
(2)	All mitigation fees shall be deposited in a fund to be known as the City environmental improvement trust fund. The purpose of the fund is to purchase, improve, create, restore, manage and replace natural habitat within the City. The fund shall be used for these purposes. The fund may be utilized in concert with other funding sources for the purposes required under this subsection. The fees may be used for the creation or restoration of any wetland type. 
(3)	The environmental improvement trust fund shall be expended as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)	Off-site mitigation. 
(1)	The City shall designate and attempt to purchase, or otherwise acquire, lands within each watershed and/or subbasin, which are suitable for the creation, acquisition, restoration or preservation of wetlands or wetland habitat systems, including adjacent upland habitat. The purpose of such designation is to provide areas suitable for the off-site mitigation of the impacts of wetland alteration. 
(2)	For those projects which require off-site mitigation, the mitigation shall be performed within the watershed or subbasin of those lands described in this subsection. 
(3)	The off-site mitigation areas may be developed with the intention of utilizing the areas for passive and/or active recreational parks; provided, however, the wetlands beneficial functions are not adversely impacted.  
Sec. 4-238. - Silviculture. 
Bona fide silvicultural harvesting activities are exempt from the permitting and mitigation requirements of this division and as otherwise required herein; provided further, however, failure to comply with the following requirements shall be a violation of this Code: 
(1)	Silvicultural harvesting activities shall follow the best management practices as outlined in the publication titled "Silviculture Best Management Practices Manual," Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Division of Forestry, most recent edition. The use of the "Management Guidelines for Forested Wetlands in Florida," Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, shall be encouraged. 
(2)	Filling, draining, dredging, roadway construction or any activity which requires a permit from the St. Johns River Water Management District. 
(3)	Fire prevention techniques are hereby authorized by this Code.  
Secs. 4-239—4-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - POTABLE WATER WELL FIELD PROTECTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note at Art. III. 
 
Sec. 4-251. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)	The purpose and intent of this division is to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the City by providing for the regulation of the storage, handling, use or production of hazardous substances within zones of protection surrounding potable water supply wells as defined in this Code, thereby protecting the potable water supply from contamination. This division is required by F.S. § 163.3202. 
(b)	Further, there is an urgent need to protect existing and future public and private potable water supply wells as defined in this Code in the City from the irreversible and adverse effects of chemical contamination. 
(c)	Also, the state aquifer was designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency as a "sole source aquifer," which means it is the only practical source of drinking water for the residents of the City.  
Sec. 4-252. - Establishment of well field protection zones. 
The regulations set forth in this division shall apply to all lands surrounding a potable water supply well designated as the primary or secondary well field protection zone as defined in this Code. 
(1)	Mapping. The City Manager shall provide well field protection zone maps to designate and geographically delineate and amend, as necessary, the primary and secondary well field protection zones as defined in this Code. Said maps shall be on file with the City Planner. 
(2)	Interpretation of zone designation. To determine the location of properties and buildings within the primary or secondary well field protection zones, the following rules shall apply: 
a.	Properties located wholly within one protection zone shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to that zone. 
b.	Properties having parts lying within more than one zone shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to the protection zone in which each part of the property is located. 
c.	Where the boundary between two protection zones passes through a building, the entire building shall be considered to be in the more restrictive zone. 
d.	Where the building or portion thereof is overlapped by protection zones of different wells or well fields, the most restrictive regulations shall apply. 
e.	Where a property or portion thereof is overlapped by protection zones of different wells or well fields, the most restrictive of the regulations shall prevail over said overlapped area.  
Sec. 4-253. - Restrictions within the zones. 
(a)	For the primary well field protection zone, except as otherwise provided in this division, any new nonresidential use, handling, production or storage of hazardous substances shall be prohibited; provided, however, any existing nonresidential use, handling, production or storage of hazardous substances is lawful and shall be considered a nonconforming activity, but shall apply for well field protection permit as provided in this division and be subject to the containment standards in section 4-255. 
(b)	For the secondary well field protection zone, except as otherwise provided in this division, the owner or operator of any new or existing nonresidential use, handling, production or storage of hazardous substances shall apply for a well field protection permit as provided in this division.  
Sec. 4-254. - Hazardous substances regulated. 
(a)	The hazardous substances regulated by this division shall consist of the following: 
(1)	F.A.C. ch. 38F-41 (the Florida Substance List). 
(2)	Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations part 261 (Identification and Listing of Hazardous Wastes). 
(3)	Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations part 302.4 (Table 302.4) (List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities). 
(4)	Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations part 355, Appendix A and B (List of Extremely Hazardous Substances). 
(b)	A hazardous substance, as defined herein, includes any solution, mixture, or formulation containing such materials, and also includes any material which, due to its chemical or physical characteristics, as determined by the City Manager upon the advice of the environmental management staff, poses a substantial threat to the life, health, or safety of persons or property or to the environment.  
Sec. 4-255. - Containment standards. 
(a)	Monitoring capacity. Except as provided in sections 4-256 and 4-257, all storage systems intended for the storage of hazardous substances shall be designed with the capability of detecting that the hazardous substance stored in the primary containment has entered the secondary containment. Visual inspection of the primary containment is the preferred method; however, other means of monitoring may be approved by the City Manager. 
(b)	Containment requirements. Primary and secondary levels of containment shall be required for all storage systems intended for the storage of hazardous substances, except as provided in sections 4-256 and 4-257. 
(1)	Primary containment. All primary containment shall be product-tight. 
(2)	Secondary containment. 
a.	All secondary containment shall be constructed of materials of sufficient thickness, density and composition so as not to be structurally weakened as a result of contact with the discharged hazardous substances. Leakproof trays under containers, floor curbing or other containment systems to provide secondary liquid containment shall be installed. The secondary containment shall be of adequate size to handle 110 percent of the total volume of all of the container(s) in order to contain all spills, leaks, overflows and precipitation until appropriate action can be taken. The specific design and selection of materials shall be sufficient to preclude any hazardous substances loss to the external environment. Secondary containment systems shall be sheltered so that the intrusion of precipitation is inhibited. These requirements shall apply to all areas of use, production and handling, to all storage areas, and to aboveground and underground storage areas. 
b.	Vacuum suction devices, absorbent scavenger materials or other devices designated and approved by the City Manager shall be present on-site or available within a time set by the City Manager. Devices or materials shall be available in sufficient supply so as to control and collect the total quantity of hazardous substances. Emergency containers shall be present and of such capacity as to hold the total quantity of hazardous substances plus absorbent material. 
c.	Procedures shall be established for periodic in-house inspection and maintenance of containment and emergency equipment. Such procedures shall be provided to the City Manager in writing. A checklist and schedule of regular maintenance shall be established, and a log shall be kept of inspections and maintenance. As long as the storage system is in operation, such logs and records shall be kept available for inspection by the environmental management staff during regular business hours. 
(c)	Out-of-service storage systems. 
(1)	Storage systems which are temporarily out of service, and are intended to be returned to use, shall continue to be monitored and inspected. 
(2)	Any storage system which is not being monitored and inspected in accordance with this division shall be closed or removed in a manner approved by the City Manager. 
(3)	Whenever an abandoned storage system is located, a plan for the closing or removing or upgrading and permitting of such storage system shall be filed by the owner of the property at a reasonable time as determined by the City Manager. Provided, however, such reasonable time for filing shall not be more than 180 days. 
(d)	Maintenance, repair or replacement. 
(1)	Any modification or repair of a storage system, other than minor repairs or emergency repairs, shall be in accordance with plans to be submitted to the City Manager and approved prior to the initiation of such work. 
(2)	A facility owner or operator may make emergency repairs to a storage system in advance of seeking an approval whenever an immediate repair is required to prevent or contain an unauthorized discharge or to protect the integrity of the containment. 
(3)	Replacement of any existing storage system for hazardous substances must be in accordance with the new installation standards.  
Sec. 4-256. - Exemptions. 
The following activities or uses are exempt from the provisions of this division: 
(1)	The transportation of any hazardous substance through either or both the primary or secondary well field protection zone, provided the transporting vehicle is in transit. 
(2)	Agricultural uses, except that said uses shall comply with F.S. § 487.011 et seq., the Florida Pesticide Law and the Florida Pesticide Application Act of 1974 and F.A.C. 5E-2.001 et seq. and 5E-9.001 et seq. and F.A.C. 
(3)	The use of any hazardous substance solely as fuel in a vehicle fuel tank or as lubricant in a vehicle. 
(4)	Fire, police, emergency medical services and essential utility services. 
(5)	Retail sales establishments that store and handle hazardous substances for resale in their original unopened containers. 
(6)	Office uses, except for the storage, handling or use of hazardous substances as provided for in applicable administrative codes. 
(7)	Repairing or maintaining any facility or improvement on lands within the primary or secondary well field protection zone. 
(8)	Storage tanks which are constructed and operated in accordance with the storage tanks regulations as set forth in F.A.C. ch. 17-61, or its successor, F.A.C. ch. 17-761. 
(9)	Geotechnical borings. 
(10)	Residential activities.  
Sec. 4-257. - Modification of requirements. 
(a)	Any person affected by this division may petition the City Manager for modification from the prohibitions and monitoring requirements of this division; provided that the person demonstrates by a preponderance of competent, substantial evidence that special or unusual circumstances and adequate technology exists to isolate the facility or activity from the potable water supply in the event of a spill. In granting or denying modification, the City Manager shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)	Hazardous substances inventory; 
(2)	Containment; 
(3)	Emergency collection devices; 
(4)	Emergency plan; 
(5)	Daily monitoring; 
(6)	Equipment maintenance; 
(7)	Reporting of spills; 
(8)	Potable water well monitoring; 
(9)	Groundwater monitoring; 
(10)	Alterations/expansions; 
(11)	Reconstruction after catastrophe (fire, vandalism, flood, explosion, collapse, wind, war or other); 
(12)	Other criteria, as applicable to groundwater protection issues. 
(b)	The City Manager may attach any appropriate conditions and safeguards which are necessary to protect the well field pursuant to such modified requirements.  
Sec. 4-258. - Well field protection zone permits. 
(a)	Except as provided in sections 4-256 and 4-257, no person shall construct, modify, install or replace a hazardous substance storage system or component thereof within a primary or secondary potable well field protection zone without obtaining a well field protection zone permit, in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)	Pursuant to section 4-265, under no conditions shall a person allow the discharge of a hazardous substance into the soils, groundwater or surface water within said zones. 
(c)	An applicant is encouraged to arrange a preapplication conference with the City Manager, to determine the location of any existing or proposed well field protection zones prior to submitting a formal application.  
Sec. 4-259. - Application procedures and requirements. 
(a)	Where a development is being processed under division 2 of this article or this division and a well field protection permit is required, the information and exhibits in subsections (b)(1) through (8) of this section shall be provided with the preliminary plat application processed under division 2 of this article or the final site plan application processed under this division for concurrent review. 
(b)	An application for a well field protection zone permit not being processed concurrently with an application pursuant to division 2 of this article or this division shall be submitted in the manner described herein on the forms prescribed by the City Manager with the following information and applicable documents: 
(1)	Name, address and phone number of the property owner, operator and/or agent. 
(2)	Signature of the agent or owner. 
(3)	Legal description of the property, including the tax parcel number. 
(4)	A survey or scale drawing of the property, if required by the City Manager, identifying existing structures, adjacent streets, water bodies and all potable water supply wells located within 1,000 feet of the proposed hazardous substance storage area. 
(5)	A description of the proposed activity at the proposed location. 
(6)	Construction plans and specifications for the hazardous substance storage system, including, but not limited to, details of tanks, conveyance and pumping systems, secondary containment, leak detection, over-fill protection and access, prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state. 
(7)	A list of all known hazardous substances that may be utilized, generated and/or stored at the described property. This shall include, but not be limited to, any substance described in section 4-254. 
(8)	Other information which the City Manager may reasonably require. 
(c)	The application, with all applicable documents and a nonrefundable processing fee, shall be submitted to the City Manager. 
(d)	Three copies of the required documents shall be submitted with the application. The documents shall meet the requirements of this Code. 
(e)	The City Manager shall determine the acceptance of the application within three days of filing. If the application is determined to be incomplete, it shall be returned to the applicant. If the application is determined to be complete, it shall be accepted and the City Manager shall transmit it to the environmental management staff. 
(f)	Upon receipt, the environmental management staff shall review the application, conduct a preliminary site inspection notifying the applicant prior to said inspection and make a determination of approval, approval with conditions or denial within 20 working days of acceptance. If the application meets all of the requirements of this Code, it shall be approved. Upon such approval the environmental management staff shall return the application to the City Manager. If the application is denied, it shall be returned to the City Manager, with the reasons for denial noted thereon. 
(g)	Provided, however, upon receipt of an accepted application, if the environmental management staff determines that the proposed activity fails to meet the minimum requirements of this division, or if additional information is required, a request will be made to the applicant to provide the additional information and modify the application. 
(h)	If the applicant fails to make the necessary modifications or provide the additional information within 60 days, then the City Manager shall deny the permit. If the necessary modifications are made or the additional information is provided, the City Manager shall approve the permit within 20 days from the receipt of the additional information. 
(i)	The City Manager shall issue the permit or denial immediately upon receiving the determination of the environmental management staff.  
Sec. 4-260. - Standards for review. 
In determining whether the proposed development shall be approved under the provisions of this division, the City Manager shall consider the requirements of this division, together with the following criteria: 
(1)	Whether, and the extent to which, a proposed development must be located within the well field protection zone in order to perform the development's basic functions. 
(2)	The impacts of the proposed development on the well field protection zones in combination with other developments which have been permitted or constructed immediately adjacent to the secondary well field protection zone. 
(3)	The protection afforded after development is completed and/or any adverse conditions caused by the development. 
(4)	Whether the proposed development is consistent with the policies in the Land Development Code and the Comprehensive Plan.  
Sec. 4-261. - Issuance of permits; conditions. 
(a)	A permit shall specify the facility covered by the permit. Said permit may cover one or more hazardous substance storage systems located at the same facility. Said permit shall provide conditions necessary to ensure that the provisions of this division are met. Commencement of construction of a facility under a well field protection permit shall be deemed acceptance of all conditions specified in the permit. 
(b)	No hazardous substance storage, handling or use may be commenced unless the owner or operator demonstrates that the system has been constructed in substantial conformity with the permit.  
Sec. 4-262. - Closure of facilities. 
(a)	Upon closure of a hazardous substance storage systems for any reason, the facility owner or operator shall file an application with the City Manager of intention to close the storage system. Said application shall be processed as provided in section 4-259. By signing the well field protection permit application, the owner is held responsible to adhere to the closure procedures outlined in this section. An application to close a hazardous substance storage facility shall include the following: 
(1)	A schedule of events to complete the closure of this activity which does or did store, handle, use, or produce hazardous substances. As a minimum, the owner/applicant shall address the following: 
a.	Disposition of all hazardous substances and contaminated containers. 
b.	Cleanup of the activity and environs to preclude leaching of hazardous substances into the aquifer. 
c.	Certification by the City Manager that disposal and cleanup have been completed in a manner acceptable to the City Manager. Certification may be waived if the applicant provides evidence to the City Manager that all of the following conditions apply to the subject land use facility or activity: 
1.	The entire operation is maintained inside the building of the facility. 
2.	The method of removing operating waste is not a septic tank, sewer main, or floor drain. 
3.	There is no evidence of spills permeating floors or the environs. 
4.	There are not previous outstanding violations of any regulatory agency concerned with hazardous, industrial or special waste. 
5.	There is not evidence of past contamination in the public drinking water well associated with a facility located in the primary or secondary protection zones. 
6.	The applicant shall provide a sworn statement that disposal and cleanup have been completed in a manner acceptable to the City Manager. 
(2)	Reserved. 
(b)	The environmental management staff shall inspect the facility to determine whether or not the requirements of this section have been met.  
Sec. 4-263. - Fee resolution. 
The City may, at its option, adopt a fee schedule by resolution to provide for the funding of this division.  
Sec. 4-264. - Hazardous substance inspection program to comply with federal law. 
The department of fire services shall implement a hazardous substance inspection program for the City. Said inspection program shall ensure compliance with 40 CFR 260.00—265.00. This regulatory program will be in addition to the requirements of this division.  
Chapter 5 - ADDITIONAL LAND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
ARTICLE I. - LANDSCAPING AND BUFFER STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 5-1. - General provisions; purposes. 
(a)	It is the intent of the City to promote the health, safety, and welfare of existing and future residents and visitors of the City by establishing minimum standards for the design, installation, and maintenance of landscaping, and by establishing standards for the development of adequate buffers between adjacent or nearby dissimilar uses within the corporate limits of the City. The requirements of this section are designed to: 
(1)	Improve the aesthetic appearance of the City and maintain and increase land values by requiring development to include landscaping and existing vegetation which complements the scale, color, texture, and materials used in the development. 
(2)	Promote public safety by using landscaping as an integral element of site design to define and reinforce circulation patterns and to separate vehicular and pedestrian traffic areas. 
(3)	Improve environmental quality by requiring landscape materials and areas which: improve air and water quality through photosynthesis and the uptake of minerals and dust; maintain permeable land areas essential to surface water management and aquifer recharge; reduce air, noise, heat, and chemical pollution through the biological filtering capacities of trees and other vegetation; promote energy conservation through the shading of buildings and paved areas, and reduce temperatures through the process of evapotranspiration; and conserve limited fresh water resources through the use of drought resistant plants, mulches, soil amendments, and efficient irrigation systems. 
(4)	Promote economic efficiency in the development of limited land resources by using landscaping to provide screening and separation of land uses of differing character and intensity which are otherwise incompatible in close proximity to one another due to visual or physical intrusions. 
(5)	Provide direct and increasingly important physical and psychological benefits to human beings through the use of landscaping to reduce noise and glare, to break up the monotony of expansive walls and paved areas, and to soften the harsher aspects of urban development by creating landscape transitions between architectural elements. 
(6)	Provide for sound ecological site design which preserves and incorporates native vegetation in the project design and which responds to site specific environmental factors, thus insuring preservation of the native character of the City and creating landscapes which are less demanding on energy and water resources. 
(b)	It is the intent of the City that the provisions of this article be implemented in such a way as to reflect the unique needs of each individual development project. Toward that end, staff and agencies administering this article are encouraged to develop alternative solutions where necessary and appropriate to meet the purposes of this article.  
Sec. 5-2. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5-3. - Applicability. 
(a)	The minimum landscaping requirements of this article shall be met on all sites at the time of development or redevelopment where site plan review is required. As part of site plan review, the City will evaluate the existing site layout for landscape upgrade requirements. Landscape upgrades shall be in the following order of priority: first, by improving treatments along rights-of-way including modifying nonconforming driveway openings; second, by providing treatments along property boundaries; third, by reducing expansive paved areas and defining circulation patterns with planting islands; fourth, by framing and accenting buildings in accordance with the intent of this Code. The City may require excavation of pavement, development of "dead" areas or extra parking space areas for planters, reconfiguring and restriping of parking areas, and any other reasonable and necessary physical improvements to meet the landscape requirements and intent. 
(b)	Development activity or occupancy restricted to a single-family detached or duplex residential use is exempt from the minimum landscape requirements. 
(c)	Approved landscape and vegetation plans shall be valid for two years.  
Sec. 5-4. - Provision of bufferyards and screening. 
Bufferyards are required in order to provide sufficient areas for screening and a landscaped or native vegetation transition area between higher and lower intensity land uses. 
(1)	Residential land uses shall provide a continuous six-foot-high privacy screen along the entire length of frontage along a major street, except for permitted driveway openings. Screening shall be accomplished by preserving native vegetation. If preserved vegetation is insufficient to form the required screen, then additional plantings, berms, or permitted fences or walls shall be used. 
(2)	The higher intensity use shall be required to provide the minimum bufferyard and screening set forth in the table below: 
TABLE I 
Higher Intensity Use 	Adjacent Single-Family Residential Use or Zoning 
	Buffer Width 
(feet)	Screening 
Multifamily (up to 8 dwelling units/acre), agriculture 	20 	Hedge 
Multifamily (8 or more dwelling units/acre), institutional uses, public uses 	25 	Fence 
Commercial, industrial 	30 	Masonry 
wall and 
landscaping 
 
  
(3)	The bufferyards shall be developed and used solely as landscape, preservation and screening areas meeting the design, construction, and maintenance requirements herein. No paving, parking, loading and service areas, dumpsters, accessory uses or structures, utilities, easements, or other fixtures shall be allowed within the bufferyards. Buffer width and screening requirements shall include landscaped areas and tree planting requirements as specified for property perimeters. 
(4)	Any required fence or wall shall be located on the outside boundary of the bufferyard, and shall meet the design, construction, and maintenance standards for screening fences and walls set forth in article III of this chapter. Preserved native evergreen vegetation may be substituted for a fence or wall if it is of sufficient size and density to provide the required screening. The landscape plan shall clearly define the preservation areas and describe the type and density of the plant materials that are preserved as screening.  
Sec. 5-5. - Site fixtures. 
(a)	Project identification signs for a nonresidential or multifamily development shall not be oriented toward or visible from an adjacent single-family residential district. 
(b)	All exterior lighting on a multifamily or nonresidential site shall be hooded or shielded so that the light source is not directly visible from an adjacent single-family residential district. 
(c)	Multifamily residential or nonresidential outdoor recreational uses such as swimming pools, tennis courts, ball courts, or playgrounds shall not be located within 50 feet of a single-family district.  
Sec. 5-6. - Landscaping—Property perimeters. 
(a)	A property perimeter bounded by a building or structure shall contain a landscape area. 
(b)	A property perimeter bounded by open space shall contain a landscape area with a minimum depth on the outside of five feet. 
(c)	A property perimeter bounded by a vehicular use area shall contain a landscape area with a minimum depth on the outside of five feet. Where the property boundary line is adjacent to a public right-of-way, the minimum average depth shall be ten feet. 
(d)	A maximum of 15 percent of the landscape area adjacent to public rights-of-way, excluding permitted driveways, may be used for walks, signs, fountains, or other hardscape amenities. At least 25 percent of the area shall use flowering or ornamental plants located around signage, flanking driveways, at property and building corners, under trees, or elsewhere to present a balanced and colorful accent to the remaining landscaped area. 
(e)	Side or rear perimeter landscape areas which abut existing conforming nonresidential properties or districts may be transferred to an alternate location on the site if the design would be better served.  
Sec. 5-7. - Same—Building perimeters. 
(a)	Continuous landscape areas shall be located adjacent to all building perimeters. For parking garages and decks, the minimum landscape depth shall be ten feet. For all other buildings the minimum depth shall be five feet. The depth of the building perimeter landscape areas shall be measured clear of any building or roof overhangs. 
(b)	Walkways not over six feet wide may be located adjacent and parallel to the building. The building perimeter landscape area shall be located adjacent to the inside of the walkway. 
(c)	Those portions of building perimeter landscape areas in nonresidential developments that would not be visible from any street, vehicular use area, or neighboring property are exempt from this requirement.  
Sec. 5-8. - Same—Vehicular use areas. 
(a)	Landscape areas shall be provided within all vehicular use areas. The required landscape areas shall be bounded on at least three sides by vehicular use area pavement, and shall cover an area equivalent to at least ten percent of the paved area. 
(b)	Landscape areas shall be distributed so that no more than 15 parking stalls are continuously side by side. 
(c)	Each row of parking stalls shall terminate with a landscape island, and interior aisleway intersections shall be defined by planters. 
(d)	The minimum area for interior landscape areas shall be 140 square feet. The minimum dimension of an interior landscape area shall be nine feet. Planters shall be designed without any sharp corners by using a minimum three-foot transition radius between any two sides. The ends of planters next to parking stalls shall be set back two feet from the driving aisles. 
(e)	Interior planters in vehicle use areas shall be at approximately the same elevation (adjusted for curbing) as the adjacent vehicular use area, except as necessary to save existing trees. 
(f)	Interior planters for non-public, specialized vehicular use areas where large machinery or large vehicles are stored, serviced, or used may be relocated to perimeter areas as additional buffers, screening, or beautification.  
Sec. 5-9. - Plant selection. 
The City shall maintain a plant list identifying plants compatible with local soils and climatic conditions including salt tolerance, sun and heat exposure, and mean low temperature. All required landscape plants must be selected from the plant list. Plant material shall be selected that is best suited to withstand the soil and physical growing conditions on the project site. Plant species that are freeze and drought tolerant are preferred. Protection and preservation of native species and natural areas is encouraged. 
_____
TABLE II. RECOMMENDED PLANT LIST 
CANOPY TREES 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 	Height 	Spread 
Sweet Gum 	Liquidambar styraciflua 	16'—18' 	7'—8' 
Southern Magnolia 	Magnolia grandiflora 	14'—16' 	6'—7' 
Laurel Oak 	Quercus laurifolia 	16'—18' 	10'—12' 
Live Oak 	Quercus virginiana 	15'—17' 	10'—12' 
Shumard Oak 	Quercus shumardii 	16'—18' 	10'—12' 
Bald Cypress 	Taxodium distichum 
(low areas only) 	14'—16' 	6'—7' 
Sycamore 	Platanus occidentalis 	70'-100' 	50'—70' 
 
  
UNDERSTORY TREES 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 	Height 	Spread 
Dogwood 	Cornus florida 	8'—10' 	5'—7' 
Loblolly Bay 	Gordonia lasianthus 	8'—10' 	3'—4' 
American Holly 	Ilex opaca var. 	10'—12' 	4'—5' 
Crape Myrtle 	Lagerstroemia indica 	8'—10' 	5'—6' 
Ligustrum Tree 	Ligustrum lucidum 	8'—10' 	8'—10' 
Wax Myrtle 	Myrica cerifera 	8'—10' 	8'—10' 
Slash Pine 	Pinus elliotti 	8'—10' 	3'—4' 
Drake Elm 	Ulmus parvifolia 	8'—10' 	5'—6' 
Red Cedar 	Juniperus virginiana 	35'—50' 	15'—25' 
Longleaf Pine 	Pinus palustris 	80'—100' 	20'—30' 
Cherry Laurel 	Prunus laurocerasus 	15'—25' 	6'—10' 
 
  
TALL SCREENING SHRUBS 
		Minimum Size 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 	Gallons 	Height 	Spread 
Pfitzer Juniper 	Juniperus chinensis 
"Pfitzeriana" 	3 	15"—18" 	15"—18" 
Japanese Privet 	Ligustrum lucidum 		324"—30" 	18"—24" 
Wax Myrtle 	Myrica cerifera 	3 	24"—30" 	18"—24" 
Oleander 	Nerium oleander 	3 	30"—36" 	18"—24" 
Pittosporum spp. 	Pittosporum tobira 	3 	24"—30" 	18"—24" 
Podocarpus 	Podocarpus macrophylla 	3 	3'—4' 	18"—24" 
Southern Indian 
Azalea 	Rhododendron 
indica spp. 	3 	24"—30" 	18"—24" 
Sweet Viburnum 	Viburnum 
odoratissimum 	3 	24"—30" 	18"—24" 
Sandankwa Viburnum 	Viburnum suspensum 	3 	24"—30" 	18"—24" 
Pineapple Guava 	Frijoa sellowiana 	3 	24"—30" 	18"—24" 
Florida Anise 	Illicium floridanum 	3 	24"—30" 	18"—24" 
 
SHRUBS 
		Minimum Size 	
Common Name 	Botanical Name 	Gallons 	Height 	Spread 
Camellia 	Camellia japonica 	3 	24"—30" 	18"—24" 
Crinum Lily 	Crinum asisticum 	3 	24"—30" 	
Sago Palm 	Cycas revolute 		24"—30" 	
Gardenia 	Cardenia jasminoides 	3 	18"—24" 	18"—24" 
Dwarf Burford Holly 	Ilex cornuta "Burfordi" 	3 	15"—18" 	12"—15" 
Dwarf Chinese Holly 	Ilex cornuta "Rotunda" 	3 	12"—15" 	12"—15" 
Dwarf Yaupon Holly 	Ilex vomitoria 
"Shillings" 	3 	12"—15" 	12"—15" 
Anise 	Illicium anisatum 	3 	24"—30" 	18"—24" 
Nick's Compact 	Juniperus chinenses 
"Pfitzeriana-Compacta" 	3 	15"—18" 	18"—24" 
Green Pittosporum 	Pittosporum tobira 	3 	24"—30" 	18"—24" 
Variegated Pittosporum 	Pittosporum tobira 
"Variegata" 	3 	24"—30" 	18"—24" 
Dwarf Pittosporum 	Pittosporum tobira 
"Wheelen" 	3 	12"—15" 	12"—15" 
Plumbago 	Plumbago auriculata 	3 	24"—30" 	15"—18" 
Indian Hawthorn 	Rhaphiolepis indica 	3 	18"—24" 	15"—18" 
Kurune Azalea spp. 	Rhododendron obtusun 	3 	15"—18" 	12"—15" 
 
  
GROUNDCOVERS 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 	Minimum Size 
Cast Iron Plant 	Aspidistra elatior 	1 gal. 
Alegarian Ivy 	Hedera canariensis 	1 gal. 
English Ivy 	Hedera helix 	1 gal. 
Daylily 	Hemerocallis spp. 	1 gal. 
Dwarf Shore Juniper 	Juniperus conferta "Compacta" 	1 gal., 12"—15" spd. 
Blue Pacific Juniper 	Juniperus conferta "Blue Pacific" 	1 gal., 12"—15" spd. 
Parson's Juniper 	Juniperus "Parsoni" 	1 gal., 12"—15" spd. 
Evergreen Giant 	Liriope "Evergreen Giant" 	1 gal., 12"—15" ht. 
Boston Fern 	Nephrolepsis exaltata 
"Bostoniensis" 	1 gal. 
Holly Fern 	Cyrtomium falcatum 	3 gal., 12"—15" spd. 
Mondo Grass 	Ophiopogon japonicus 	1 gal. 
Confederate Jasmine 	Trachelospermum Jasinoides 	1 gal. 
Society Garlic 	Tulbaghia violacea 	1 gal. 
Coontie Fern 	Zamia floridana 	1 gal. 
 
PALMS 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 
Pindo Palm 	Butia capitata 
European Fan Palm 	Chamaerops humilis 
Canary Date Palm 	Phoenix canariensis 
Lady Palm 	Rhapis excelsa 
Cabbage Palm 	Sabal palmetto 
 
  
GRASS/SOD 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 
St. Augustine "Bitter Blue," 
"Floratine," or "Floratam" 	Stenotaphrum secundatum 
Bahia 	Paspalum notatum 
Bermuda 	Cynodon dactylon 
 
(Ord. No. 23-02, § 1(505.05), 1-8-2003) 
_____ 
Sec. 5-10. - Planting design and distribution. 
(a)	Landscape areas shall be designed with an emphasis on aesthetic appeal, function, safety, appropriateness to site conditions, and water conservation. The grouping of plants with similar water requirements is encouraged. 
(b)	All landscape areas shall have at least three plant species per area, one of which shall be a tree. 
(c)	The number of trees on a site shall meet the minimums established in the following table: 
TABLE III 
Landscape Area Depth 	Number of Shade Trees (per 40 lineal feet or portion thereof) 	Number of Small Trees (per 80 lineal feet or portion thereof) 
0—15' 	1 	1 
+15—30' 	2 	2 
+30'—40' 	3 	3 
+40'—50' 	3.5 	3.5 
+50' 	4 	4 
 
  
(d)	Trees shall be preserved and planted as necessary to create a continuous appearance of trees across the property frontage, except as follows: 
(1)	Tree trunks shall be kept out of a visibility zone for permitted ground signs. The visibility zone is that area within the triangle created by connecting a point on each side and 50 feet from the center of the sign along the front property line, to the rear of the sign panel. Within this area additional shrubbery plantings shall be used if the trees cannot reasonably be shifted to fit elsewhere in the front landscape area. 
(2)	Properties that have only wall or projection signs on the building may use additional shrubbery plantings in front of the wall or projection sign for a distance of 50 feet in either direction as measured from the middle of the sign. 
(3)	Properties with both ground and wall or projection signs must follow the rules for the ground sign, with no visibility zone permitted for the wall or projection signs. 
(e)	A variety of tree species shall be provided in accordance with the following table: 
TABLE IV 
Number of Trees 

Required 	Number of 

Species Required 
1—10 	1 
11—20 	2 
21—30 	3 
31—40 	4 
41+ 	5 
 
(f)	Palm trees may satisfy no more than 25 percent of the required tree count. When used to satisfy any portion of the tree requirement, palms shall be planted in pairs and one pair of palm trees shall be equivalent to one shade tree. 
(g)	Trees shall be placed in the building perimeter landscape area at the corners of the building and along the building facade so that there is at least one tree per building side and no more than 50 lineal feet of wall between trees. 
(h)	At least 25 percent of the site's total required landscape area shall be covered by shrubs, ground covers, or vines. The cross slope of mulched planting beds shall not exceed one foot vertical to six feet horizontal. 
(i)	All landscape areas shall be designed with plant spacing to achieve coverage of 80 percent of the landscape areas with living organic plant materials within two years. Required tree and native preservation areas shall be incorporated into the overall landscape design. 
(j)	Accent plantings of shrubs, ground covers, vines and/or flowers shall be provided in property perimeter landscape areas, spaced no more than 40 feet apart. They shall be placed along the outside of any permitted or required fences, walls, hedges, and berms, and adjacent to driveway entrances. Accent plantings shall also be placed at building corners and along pedestrian entrance walks. Each group shall be a minimum of 20 square feet in area. 
(k)	The minimum size planting area for grass shall be 400 square feet with a minimum dimension of ten feet. Small, narrow, or odd-shaped areas for grass are prohibited due to high water demand and difficulty of maintenance. Turf shall not be used as a fill-in material but rather as a major planned element of the landscape. Slopes for lawn grasses shall not exceed one foot vertical to three feet horizontal. 
(l)	No Spanish bayonet, century plant, or similar plant with sharp thorns or spikes shall extend or grow to within three feet of the right-of-way. 
(m)	Vehicular use areas shall be screened from all adjacent streets and residential districts by the use of landscaping, fences, walls, or a combination of these elements. The screening shall be a minimum of three feet in height and shall not interfere with required sight distance at driveway entrances or street intersections.  
Sec. 5-11. - Encroachments and conflicts prohibited. 
(a)	Continuous nonmountable six-inch high concrete curbing shall be designed to standard specifications and installed along the edge of all landscape areas adjacent to vehicular use areas. 
(b)	At the head of parking stalls facing a sidewalk area, curbing or standard size precast concrete wheel stops shall be placed and secured to prevent vehicular encroachment or overhang into the required sidewalk area. The wheel side face of the curbing or wheel stop shall be at least one foot from the required sidewalk area. 
(c)	Buildings, vehicles, poles, fixtures, signs, walkways, dumpster pads, fences, walls, utility lines and pipes, easements, stormwater retention areas, ponds, slopes and other appurtenances shall not encroach upon or conflict with the location and function of the required landscape and native vegetation preservation areas. Site elements shall be designed away from existing utility lines and easements to provide the required landscape areas. Stormwater retention areas, signs, and other permitted features within street yards shall be designed as attractive integral parts of the overall design. Walled retention areas shall not be visible from public streets. 
(d)	Where overhead utility lines are within 25 feet of required shade tree trunks, small ornamental trees shall be substituted at a rate of 1.5 small trees for each required shade tree.  
Sec. 5-12. - Irrigation. 
(a)	Permanent underground irrigation systems shall be provided for all landscape areas, except preserved areas of existing vegetation. The City may allow a temporary irrigation system for landscape areas that utilize drought tolerant plant materials as identified in the plant list. 
(b)	The irrigation system shall supply appropriate amounts of water for all plant materials according to their water needs without over watering or undue water loss. Over-spraying onto vehicular or pedestrian areas is prohibited. Separate zones shall be provided for turf and nonturf areas. A moisture or rain sensor to automatically shut off the system shall be provided to prevent unnecessary watering. 
(c)	Sprinkler heads on the same circuits shall have matched precipitation rates. Pressure compensating devices or heads shall be used to prevent excessive loss of water from dissipation by winds where anticipated. Sprinkler heads shall be spaced so that spray patterns overlap by at least 75 percent. 
(d)	Micro-irrigation systems are encouraged to efficiently water plant materials while reducing the demand on water resources.  
Sec. 5-13. - Materials specifications. 
(a)	Planting soils. The planting soil throughout the full depth and width of the planter areas shall be free of weeds, debris, and noxious materials and shall consist of an easily-crumbled, well-drained soil which contains enough organic material and nutrients to promote and sustain plant health and growth. Compacted and deleterious materials such as but not limited to shell, limerock, and stone shall be excavated and removed from the planting areas. A soil analysis may be required to determine if soil amendments such as peat, topsoil, compost sand, lime, sulfur, or fertilizers will be required. 
(b)	General plant specifications. All plant materials to be installed shall be nursery grown and root pruned stock free of insects, disease, and defects and shall satisfy the requirements of Florida Grade No. 1 quality or better as defined in the most current edition of Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
(c)	Trees. Shade trees shall have a minimum 2.5 inches caliper and a minimum height of ten feet at the time of planting, and shall be species capable of reaching a minimum height of 25 feet and crown spread of 15 feet at maturity. Small trees shall have a minimum 1.5 inches caliper and a minimum height of eight feet at the time of planting. Palm trees shall have a minimum clear trunk of six feet at the time of planting. 
(d)	Shrubs. Shrubs shall be a minimum of one foot high at the time of planting. Shrubs used as required screening for vehicular use areas shall be a minimum of two feet high at the time of planting and be species capable of reaching a three-foot height within two years. Shrubs used for the required screening of properties, uses, or vehicular use areas shall be a minimum of three feet in height at the time of planting and be species capable of reaching a six-foot height within four years. 
(e)	Ground covers and vines. Ground covers shall be species which attain a maximum average height of one foot at maturity and shall be spaced no greater than 1.5 feet on center. Vines shall be a minimum of 2.5 feet in height at the time of planting and physically supported to allow normal growth. 
(f)	Lawn grass. Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded, except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. Slopes steeper than 3:1 shall be sodded. 
(g)	Mulch. All shrubbery, ground cover, and vine planting beds shall be mulched with standard mulch materials such as shredded cypress bark, pine bark chips, pine straw, or decorative stone to prevent invasion of other plant species and weeds, to absorb and retain moisture for the benefit of the plants, to prevent erosion, to enrich the soil, to provide protection from maintenance equipment, and to present a neat and orderly appearance of the landscaped area. 
(h)	Hardscape fixtures. All hardscape improvements such as pavement, curbing, sidewalks, walls, and fences shall be constructed with the highest quality materials and workmanship. The top of curbing shall run parallel to the adjacent pavement and the sides shall run straight and true except for allowable smooth radii. All surfaces of the curbing shall be smooth and all corners eased to prevent chipping.  
Sec. 5-14. - Installation specifications and requirements. 
(a)	All materials installed shall conform to the approved landscape plans. If any changes of materials are desired, amended plans must be submitted and approved before installation. 
(b)	Planting soil shall be placed throughout the planting hole for each plant in an area at least twice as wide as the plant ball and 1.5 times the depth of the plant ball. Backfill shall be thoroughly watered in as it is placed around the roots. 
(c)	All plant materials shall be installed plumb and at their original soil level in accordance with accepted planting procedures. All plant materials shall be properly fertilized at the time of installation. 
(d)	Any wrapping materials around root balls shall be slit after placement in the planting hole to allow the roots to grow and expand. After backfilling, all wire, straps, and wrapping shall be removed from the top one-third of the plant ball. 
(e)	All newly planted trees shall be staked and guyed immediately after installation and shall remain supported until the root systems and the trunk have established themselves to adequately support the tree. Trees in lawn areas shall be protected from lawn equipment by a mulch bed around the base of the tree. 
(f)	Sod shall be placed with staggered and closely butted joints. Grass areas that are installed by methods other than sod shall attain a full grass coverage within 90 days of the date of installation. 
(g)	Mulch beds shall have a uniform coverage and a minimum depth of three inches. 
(h)	Areas of native vegetation to be preserved (15 percent minimum) shall not be encroached upon or damaged during construction by any activities above or below ground. Visible barricades shall be placed around these areas and they shall be kept clear of all construction materials, traffic, and debris. 
(i)	Main irrigation pipe lines shall be buried with a minimum cover of 1.5 feet. All other lines shall have a minimum cover of one foot. All pipe and wiring under paving shall be placed in schedule 40 PVC sleeves or the equivalent and shall be placed at least 1.5 feet below finished grade for the full length of the pavement. All heads shall be set plumb and securely in place. Heads on risers of one foot or greater above grade shall be rigidly secured using an angle iron stake and two stainless steel clamps. Risers shall not exceed the height of the adjacent plants and shall be schedule 40 PVC or equivalent material painted a permanent flat green or black color. All risers shall be set six inches in from adjacent curbs or paved areas. 
(j)	During installation of landscaping, grassed areas off-site or within the public rights-of-way which have been disturbed by construction activity shall be cleaned of all debris, regraded to the proper elevations, and resodded. Any preserved vegetation areas that have been damaged or removed shall be replanted and refurbished to restore the area as much as possible to its original condition.  
Sec. 5-15. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)	The property owner and tenant shall be jointly and severally responsible for maintenance of all required landscape, irrigation, and hardscape improvements as originally approved. This maintenance requirement shall carry with the land and shall be the responsibility of any subsequent owners and tenants of the property. It is the responsibility of the owner to notify any subsequent owners of the property of this responsibility. 
(b)	Landscape areas and site improvements shall be maintained in good condition for a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from weeds and debris. All plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy and vigorous condition through proper irrigation, fertilization, pruning, weeding, mowing, and other standard horticultural practices so as to grow to their normal shape, color, and height, and to fulfill the required functions of screening, shading, buffering, and aesthetic appeal set forth by the City. The hatracking of trees is prohibited. All dead plants shall be replaced. All damaged plants including lawn grass shall be replaced or restored. Mulch shall be at the proper coverage and depth. 
(c)	The irrigation system shall be fully operational and shall be operated on a regular basis to provide the appropriate amount of water to the plant materials to maintain adequate plant health and growth without over watering. In situations where drought tolerant plant materials have not been properly maintained primarily due to lack of sufficient watering, the City may require the installation of a permanent irrigation system meeting the specifications of this Code. 
(d)	Pavement, curbing, wheel stops, and other hardscape improvements shall be sound and in place. If it is determined by maintenance inspections that such curbs are insufficient to prevent vehicular encroachment, then installation of bollards or similar devices substantial enough to prohibit encroachment may be required. Any such fixtures shall be architecturally consistent with other site fixtures and structures for materials and colors. 
(e)	The City shall notify the property owner and tenant in writing of any maintenance violations. Upon notification of a maintenance violation, the property owner, tenant, or authorized agent shall correct the violation within 30 days. Where immediate attention and care may restore damaged plants, the owner or tenant shall submit a treatment narrative and schedule prepared by a registered landscape architect or a local nursery professional. If the treatment plan and procedures fail to restore the plants to vigorous growth to meet their normal growth habit and the original design intent within 90 days, then the plants must be replaced.  
Sec. 5-16. - Modifications. 
(a)	Modifications to the landscape and bufferyard requirements may be requested in accordance with section 1-7. Requests for modifications or waivers shall include a dated transmittal letter from the property owner explaining the request accompanied by a plan showing the proposed revisions. 
(b)	Modifications may also be recommended by the City Manager or DRC for consideration through the development plan approval process.  
Sec. 5-17. - Use of drought resistant plants. 
All new or replacement plantings required for any off-street parking area or landscape buffer shall use, to the fullest extent possible, native plant material or other species with equivalent drought-resistant properties. It is the intent of this requirement to promote the conservation of the City's water resources to be consistent with F.S. § 125.568.  
Sec. 5-18. - Solid waste containers. 
(a)	All solid waste containers, except approved recycling containers, shall be enclosed on at least three sides with a six-foot high screen. The screen shall consist of a vinyl or masonry wall. The zoning official may require that a hedge or similar landscaping material abut the enclosure walls. 
(b)	The container shall be enclosed in such a manner so that said container will be screened from public streets and adjoining properties. A concrete or asphalt pad of appropriate size and construction shall be provided as a base for the container. The container pad shall be at the approximate level of the service vehicle approach area so that the truck's loading mechanism can align with the container's sleeves. 
(c)	The screened enclosure shall not be located within any street right-of-way or required yard area. Containers and enclosures shall be located so as to allow ease of access for collection trucks and direct access to drive areas. Straight-in or circular drives are encouraged to reduce truck maneuvering problems. No parking or other obstructions shall be permitted in the access area for enclosures.  
Sec. 5-19. - Overhead electrical utilities. 
If the buffer area contains or will contain overhead electrical wires, or if existing or proposed overhead electrical wires are within 30 feet of the buffer area, tree selection shall be limited to those trees that will not, at mature height, conflict with overhead utilities. Large trees (height at maturity of over 30 feet) shall be planted no closer than horizontal distance of 30 feet from the nearest existing or proposed overhead conductor. Medium existing (height at maturity of less than 20 feet) require no offset. Palms shall be planted no closer than a horizontal distance equal to the average mature from length plus two feet from the nearest existing or proposed conductor. Climbing vines shall not be planted adjacent to utility poles, transformers, or guy wires. Plantings near padmount transformers shall not restrict access to, or the maintenance of, the transformer.  
Secs. 5-20—5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SIGN REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 5-31. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of these sign regulations shall be to ensure adequate means of communications through signage, while maintaining the attractive visual appearance of the City, preserving property values, protecting vehicular and pedestrian safety, and promoting the general health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of DeBary. The requirements of this article are designed to: 
(1)	Promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City by regulating and limiting the existing and proposed posting, display, erection, use, and maintenance of signs, billboards, posters, bulletins, and other advertising structures within the City; 
(2)	Promote low profile signage of high quality in order to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community, preserve the scenic and natural beauty of the City, and provide a more enjoyable and pleasing community; 
(3)	Protect and maintain visual integrity of roadway corridors within the City by establishing a maximum amount of signage on any one site, by reducing clutter, and by restricting the location and providing setbacks for all signs; 
(4)	Improve vehicular and pedestrian safety, reduce visual distractions, obstructions, and hazards; 
(5)	Provide more open space, curb the deterioration of natural beauty, and avoid visual pollution by regulating and limiting the existing proposed posting, display, erection, use, and maintenance of signs, billboards, posters, bulletins, and other advertising structures within the City; 
(6)	Enhance the appearance of the physical environment by requiring that signage be designed as an integral architectural feature of the site and structure which the signage is intended to identify, and sited in a manner which is sensitive to the existing natural and built environment; 
(7)	Provide for signage which satisfies the need of the business community for visibility, identification, and communication, and which fosters civic pride and community spirit by maximizing the positive impact of development; and 
(8)	Establish procedures for removal of nonconforming signs, maintenance of existing signs, and enforcement of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 5-32. - General provisions; applicability. 
(a)	No person shall erect or maintain a sign, and no property owner shall allow a sign to be erected or maintained on his property except in conformity with these regulations. 
(b)	A permit shall be required for the erection of any sign except as provided in sections 5-33, and 5-35 below. A sign permit may be issued in conjunction with the approval of a development plan showing the necessary information or pursuant to a separate application made to the City Manager. The erection of a sign shall also require building and electrical permits as appropriate, subject to the provisions of the applicable regulations. 
(c)	Inspections of the sign and/or sign structure are required as provided for under building permit and electrical permit regulations. 
(d)	A permit shall be required for change of copy of an existing sign and/or for any sign when the use of the premises changes, however no permit will be required for change of copy on a changeable message, electronic message center or reader board sign. 
(e)	All sign structures shall be located a minimum of five feet from any lot line. New signs shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any side property line and five feet from all other property lines. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 5-33. - Exempt signs. 
The following signs are exempt from the permitting process with certain conditions where applicable, as noted: 
(1)	Identification signs and home nameplates of two square feet or less and having no individual letters, symbols, logos or designs in excess of eight inches in vertical or horizontal dimension. 
(2)	Instructional signs of four square feet or less. 
(3)	Public signs. Signs erected by or under the authorization of a governmental body, including legal notices, identification signs, and traffic, directional or regulatory signs. 
(4)	Flags complying with the terms of the sign regulations. 
(5)	Real estate signs. One real estate sign shall be permitted for each street frontage on each parcel of land located in any district; provided that such signs do not exceed an area of six square feet in a residential area and 16 feet in nonresidential classifications. Such signs may include "For Sale", "Open House," "Open For Inspection," "Open" and other similar signs. 
(6)	Holiday signs including lights and decorations. Subject to compliance with specific provisions governing holiday signs that are stated herein. 
(7)	Vehicular signs. 
(8)	Menus of less than two square feet mounted at the entrances to restaurants. 
(9)	Yard sale signs of two square feet in area or less, which are located on the property upon which a permitted sale is being conducted and only on the days for which the yard sale is permitted. 
(10)	No more than one "open/closed" and one "vacancy/no vacancy" sign, not to exceed two square feet in area each, may be displayed for each business. 
(11)	Legal notices. 
(12)	Instructional signs to indicate the dangers of trespassing, swimming, animals or similar hazards not to exceed four square feet in area. 
(13)	Accent/decorative outdoor lighting. Bare bulb white/clear strings of lights on nonresidential property for commercial purposes used to accentuate key architecture of a building, emphasize landscape features and profile street frontage trees shall be permitted. Lights shall be low voltage and bear no advertising matter. Lights shall only be permitted on buildings (i.e. roof overhand) and landscaping to create ambiance and for the illumination of landscape features. Lights shall not be strung on utility poles or vehicles. Twinkling and flashing lights are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 5-34. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs shall be prohibited: 
(1)	Animated signs including swinging signs, lights or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, or vary in intensity or color; and signs with visible moving, revolving, or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic, or mechanical means, message center signs, and excepting: traditional barber pole signs, electronic/LED message signs expressly permitted by the Gateway Corridor Sign Regulations and gas station electronic signs that display static images of gas prices only where the price/image only changes once per 24-hour and time, temperature signs with a complete time and/or temperature sequence span of four to eight seconds. 
(2)	Snipe signs. 
(3)	Signs which prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. 
(4)	Any sign attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(5)	Any sign or other advertising structure which by reason of its position, shape or color interferes, obstructs or may be confused with any authorized traffic control device or emergency vehicle signal. 
(6)	Any sign except a public sign that is placed or erected on or over a public right-of-way. 
(7)	Any A-frame sign. 
(8)	Any add-on sign except pursuant to a permit issued in conformance with this Code. 
(9)	Signs attached to or painted on vehicles which are not regularly used as part of the advertised business and are obviously parked or located in such a way so as to advertise to the passing motorist or pedestrian in a manner inconsistent with this Code. 
(10)	Strings of colored, flashing, twinkling light bulbs used on nonresidential structures for commercial purposes, other than traditional holiday decorations. Traditional holiday decorations must be removed no later than 14 days following the holiday. 
(11)	Signs, commonly referred to as wind signs, consisting of one or more banners, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers or captive balloons, or other devices fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind, and including inflatable signs. 
(12)	Billboards, except signs that are expressly permitted by state or federal law; provided that such signs are in strict conformity with all current state and federal standards and in B-6 (Highway Interchange Commercial) and I-1 (Light Industrial) zoning classifications in the vicinity of the Interstate highway only. 
(13)	Roof signs. 
(14)	Abandoned signs. 
(15)	Residential real estate "SOLD" signs which remain on display for more than 30 days after the date of closing. 
(16)	Nonresidential real estate "SOLD" signs which remain on display for more than 60 days after the date of closing. 
(17)	Signs erected on private utility facilities or rights-of-way. 
(18)	Handbills, including any signs, circulars, dodgers or other advertising which are distributed or placed on any public or private property in such a manner that the same may be blown, carried by water or otherwise scattered by the elements, or so as to constitute litter. Also, any handbills or other form of advertising matter distributed by throwing or placing the same on or into any vehicle within the City. 
(19)	Signs having fluorescent colors. 
(20)	Any sign which is accessory to an otherwise unpermitted or unlicensed business or land use. 
(21)	Any other type or kind of sign which does not comply with the terms, conditions and provisions contained in the sign regulations or which supplement the sign regulations. 
(22)	Off-site signs which advertise businesses, establishments, activities, goods, products, facilities or services or other messages not made, produced, sold or present on the premises or site where the sign is installed and maintained. 
(23)	Signs that are mounted on rocks or other natural features or affixed to trees. 
(24)	Hand held and human signs. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 5-35. - Temporary signs. 
The following signs may be permitted on a temporary basis, as provided below. Such signs shall not count toward the restrictions on the number or total area of permitted permanent signs. A sign permit may be required for a temporary sign, as indicated below. 
(1)	Reserved. 
(2)	Construction signs. Construction signs shall be permitted beginning when permits are issued for site preparation or construction and for the duration of actual construction, and shall be removed within 15 days following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, completion or abandonment of work, whichever occurs first. Such signs shall not exceed an area of 16 square feet and a height of six feet. Each sign shall be at least 20 feet from contiguous property lines of adjacent landowners and at least five feet from any right-of-way. Only one construction sign per street frontage shall be allowed. 
(3)	Development signs. 
a.	Areas being developed for residential, commercial or industrial uses, shall be permitted two temporary non-illuminated signs designed and intended to advertise and promote the sale of lots and/or structures. Signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area and six feet in height shall be permitted at the principal street entrance of a subdivision or development. Such signs shall be permitted only within the confines of the development and shall not be within any right-of-way. Permits for such development signs shall be issued for a period of one year only, subject to renewal upon reapplication. Permits for residential subdivision may be renewed by the City Manager only after determination that the promotion of the subdivision is active. All signs must be removed from the premises within 30 days of the date on which the project is completed or suspended. Each sign shall be at least 20 feet from side property lines and at least ten feet from any right-of-way. 
b.	Notwithstanding the requirements in subsection (3)a. of this section, in Planned Unit Developments having multiple sub-phases containing varying residential unit types, one additional development sign may be permitted off-premise. Such sign shall be located no farther than 150 feet from the principal entrance of the Planned Unit Development. 
(4)	Political signs. Political signs may be placed on private property to support one or more candidates or public policy positions. Political signs shall not be posted on or over any public property, including any street right-of-way. 
a.	Political signs in residential classifications shall be limited to six square feet in area and five feet in height. Each such sign shall be located at least five feet from any right-of-way or property line, sidewalk, driveway entrance, or intersecting street right-of-way. No such sign shall be illuminated or attached to any tree or utility post. 
b.	Political signs in nonresidential classifications shall be limited to 16 square feet and seven feet in height. Each such sign shall be located at least five feet from any right-of-way or property line, sidewalk, driveway entrance, or intersecting street right-of-way. No such sign shall be illuminated or attached to any tree or utility post. 
c.	Posting time limits. No political sign may be posted more than 45 days prior to the date of the election in which the candidate's name or the issue will appear, and signs shall be removed within five days after the election. The City Manager may remove or cause the removal of any political sign not meeting these restrictions. In furtherance of this standard, candidates qualifying for City election through the City Clerk's office shall post a deposit of $100.00. This deposit shall be returned in full if all signs are removed, but shall be forfeited if signs are not removed as required by this provision. If not removed immediately by the applicant, the City shall remove the signs and charge the applicant the cost of removal. 
d.	During tropical storm or hurricane warnings, all political signs must be removed by an applicant to protect the public from signs becoming flying projectiles. 
(5)	Temporary window signs (sign permit required). Total signage on any one façade may not cover more than 20 percent of the total surface area of the transparent portion of all windows and doors. 
(6)	Holiday signs. Displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observance of holidays. Such signs shall be removed within 14 days following the holidays. 
(7)	Temporary promotional and special event signs (sign permit required). Temporary signs announcing any public, charitable, education, religious or other special event or function may be installed subject to compliance with the following conditions: 
a.	Such signs shall be placed not more than 14 days prior to the event and must be removed no later than 24 hours after termination of the event. A maximum of three separate occasions or special events may be permitted within any calendar year. Notwithstanding, any new business or relocation of any existing business within the City shall be allowed grand opening signs not to exceed 30 days. 
b.	Properties with less than 100 feet of frontage shall be permitted a total of 32 square feet of sign area for temporary promotional signs. Properties of more than 100 feet of frontage shall be permitted a total of 64 square feet of sign area for temporary promotional signs. In addition, professionally made banners and pennants may be utilized as temporary promotional or special event signs. Banner signs may not be hung on utility poles or vehicles. Inflatable signs may not be used. 
c.	The City Council may waive these limitations and may impose other conditions as necessary to meet the purpose and intent of this Code. 
(8)	Temporary identification signs. In an effort to minimize inconvenience during a roadway or right-of-way construction project, one temporary sign may be erected within the public right-of-way by the applicable government agency that identifies an individual business (for single use property) or a commercial center. The sign shall only be placed at or near the access point for the business establishment to be identified. Sign placement shall be coordinated with the governmental entity implementing the roadway or right-of-way improvements. 
(9)	Weekend directional signs (sign permit required). Permitted on weekends only, after 3:00 p.m. Friday; removed by 8:00 a.m. Monday (or 8:00 a.m. Tuesday for city holidays) within 4 miles from the event/subject being advertised. Permit for a weekend directional sign shall be valid for a maximum of 30 days and for weekends only during those 30 days. 
a.	Weekend directional signs shall be a maximum of four (4) square feet and three (3) feet in height and may be placed at the property line. 
b.	A maximum of five (5) signs for any one event shall be permitted. Each sign must be a minimum of 50 ft. apart. 
c.	They shall be mounted on an independent single or double pole device and shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, utility poles and other signs. 
d.	Weekend directional signs are prohibited in road rights-of-way. Corner visibility shall not be obstructed. Applicant must obtain permission in writing from the property owner of the property where the sign is to be placed and attach the permission to the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 5-36. - General sign standards. 
(a)	Rules for interpreting sign calculations. 
(1)	Determining the number of signs. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. 
(2)	Computation of sign area. The surface area of a sign shall be computed by including the entire rectangular area enclosing the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or color forming the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting posts under two feet in diameter. 
(3)	Multisided signs. With respect to three-dimensional or multisided signs, the surface area shall be computed by including the total of all faces designed either to attract attention or communicate information. However, a double-faced sign shall not be deemed a multisided sign provided said faces of each sign are not separated by more than two feet and they have the same size and shape. Where the two faces of a sign are not parallel (as with a vee-shaped sign), the area may be calculated as the area of only one face. 
(4)	Total sign surface area. Unless otherwise provided, the total surface area devoted to all signs on any lot shall not exceed the limitations established in these regulations and all signs except temporary signs shall be included in this calculation. 
(b)	Construction and maintenance. All signs shall comply with all applicable standards of the City's building code, fire code, health code, electrical code, and all other applicable codes. All signs within the City limits including all supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be kept in good repair. The owner of any sign shall keep it in good repair, which includes restoring, repainting or replacement of a worn or damaged legally existing sign to its original condition. The Building Official may order the removal by and at the expense of the owner or lessee of any sign that is not properly maintained. The repainting, changing of parts and preventive maintenance of signs not normally requiring a building permit shall be permitted provided, however that the maintenance is consistent with the originally approved sign plan and otherwise in conformance with this chapter. 
(c)	Signs not to constitute a traffic hazard. No sign shall be placed at any location in the City where it may interfere with or obstruct a motorist's view, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. The City Manager shall have the authority to refuse the erection or to order the removal of any sign, if any signs constituting an obstruction to motorists or pedestrians or otherwise are viewed to be impediments to traffic safety or traffic flow. 
(d)	Signs not to encroach electric utility clear zone. No sign shall be placed closer than eight feet horizontally from the nearest part of any utility pole which supports electrical transmission lines. No sign shall be placed closer than eight feet horizontally or vertically from the nearest part of any electric transmission line. If the City's electrical code is now or hereafter more restrictive than the provisions of this section, the most restrictive provisions shall prevail. 
(e)	Illuminated signs. 
(1)	Shielded light source. The light from any illuminated signs, or from any light source, shall be shaded, shielded or directed so that the light intensity or brightness shall neither adversely affect the surrounding premises nor impede safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on streets or parking areas. 
_____ 
(2)	Exposed lighting restrictions. No signs, except time and temperature signs, shall have exposed fluorescent lighting, exposed neon, fluorescent paint, or be phosphorescent. All unexposed neon shall be approved by a testing laboratory and shall meet the criteria established below. Similarly, illuminated tubing or strings of lights that outline property lines, sales areas, or similar areas are prohibited, excepting holiday observance signs. Limitations on brightness and intensity shall be as follows: 
TABLE V 
Light Source 	Commercial 
Classifications 
or 
Public/Institutional 
Classification 	Industrial 
Classifications 	All Other 
Classifications 
(Including 
Residential 
Classifications) 
Exposed bulbs 	15 watts 	15 watts 	10 watts 
Luminous 	150 lamberts 	90 lamberts 	90 lamberts 
Illuminated 	50 footcandles 	50 footcandles 	50 footcandles 
 
_____ 
(3)	Neon signs. Neon signs and decorative neon may be permitted in the same manner as for a wall sign. The area calculation for such sign shall be based on the entire area within which the sign is displayed. Neon signs and decorative neon suspended behind windows and visible from the right-of-way shall be considered as wall signs, and included in the total permitted wall sign area. Exposed neon tubing shall be prohibited. 
(4)	Restriction on flashing signs. No flashing sign shall be permitted except time and temperature signs, public signs, and holiday observance signs. 
(f)	Height of and distance separating signs. No part of any sign affixed to a building shall exceed the height of the building to which the sign is affixed. The height of the building shall be measured exclusive of elevator shafts and/or air conditioning condensing units and/or cooling towers. No sign shall project over motor vehicle use or storage areas. The height of ground signs is controlled by the use classification as described herein. Distance requirements in the regulations shall be measured from the nearest part of any sign (or its structure) to the nearest point of the closest applicable restricting line or point of separation (including distance between signs) or height limitation. 
(g)	Appearance of signs. Shape, color, lettering, location and arrangement of signs shall not be clearly disharmonious with the building design and surrounding landscape. Every sign shall have good scale and good proportion in its design and in its visual relationship to buildings, surroundings, and other signs. Colors shall be used harmoniously. Lighting shall be harmonious with the design. If external spot or flood lighting is used, it shall be arranged so that the light source is shielded from view. 
(h)	Flags. No more than three flags or insignias of governmental, charitable, religious, fraternal, corporate or other organizations may be displayed on any site. The maximum height from top to bottom of any flag shall be 20 percent of the total height of the flagpole, or in absence of a flagpole, 20 percent of the distance from the top of the flag or insignia to the ground. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 5-37. - Residential district signs. 
(a)	Single-family residences and duplexes. Home nameplates and instructional signs not exceeding two square feet shall be permitted for single-family homes and duplexes. These signs do not require permits. 
(b)	Multiple-family structures of ten units or less. A single sign per street frontage indicating the name and/or address of the premises shall be permitted, provided the sign has a maximum area not exceeding ten square feet, and shall not be higher than five feet. These signs require permits. 
(c)	Multiple-family structures of more than ten units and mobile home parks or approved nonresidential uses in residential classifications. A single sign per street frontage, indicating only the name and/or address of the premises, shall be permitted. The sign shall have a maximum area not exceeding 24 square feet and shall not be higher than five feet. These signs require permits. 
(d)	Subdivision entrance signs. 
(1)	Two permanent monument signs may be erected at each principal entranceway to a residential subdivision provided each sign shall not exceed a copy area of 32 square feet. However, only one such entranceway sign shall be permitted for each secondary entrance serving a residential subdivision. Such sign must be located wholly within the property line of the subdivision which the sign identifies and shall be not located within any right-of-way. 
(2)	In addition to the above regulations, walls, fences, gates or ornamental devices constructed as an integral part of a subdivision sign may be permitted in conjunction with the development of a subdivision provided such construction meets the following: 
a.	The plans for the subdivision sign and ornamental devices in connection therewith shall be submitted with the application/plans for the subdivision infrastructure improvements. If a wall and/or fence is not detailed with final engineering plans, a site plan will be required with applicable fees. 
b.	The combined subdivision entrance sign copy, as permitted by this subsection, and all associated entry appurtenances shall not exceed an aggregate area of 32 square feet and not exceed an overall vertical height limitation of ten feet above grade level. 
c.	When placed on the face of a wall or other entry embellishment, the subdivision sign copy shall be limited to a vertical dimension of four feet. No subdivision entrance sign, wall or other ornamental device shall be constructed which interferes with the line of sight of motorists approaching or exiting a subdivision. 
d.	Permit required. Prior to construction of any subdivision sign, a sign permit/building permit shall be obtained all with the appropriate permit fees. 
(e)	Instructional signs. In multiple-family classifications, only on-premises instruction signs having an area not exceeding four square feet are permitted, provided such signs, if freestanding, shall be a maximum of five feet in height. In single-family residential classifications, such on-premises instructional signs may be placed only on premises developed for nonresidential uses approved by the City Council. 
(f)	Churches. Churches, which are authorized in residential zoning districts as special exception uses, shall be permitted one monument sign not to exceed six feet in height and 48 square feet in sign area. Such signs shall not have changeable copy area. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 5-38. - Public/institutional district sign regulations (additional regulations apply to the Gateway Corridor, see section 5-127). 
(a)	Ground signs. One sign shall be permitted per street frontage or per each 300 feet of street frontage, whichever is greater. Furthermore, where two or more ground signs are placed along a single street frontage, such signs shall be separated by a minimum distance of 48 feet. The maximum copy area of any single sign shall not exceed 32 square feet and shall not be higher than eight feet. These signs require permits. 
(b)	Wall signs. The cumulative wall sign area shall not exceed ten percent of the square footage of any one facade. Wall signs may be affixed to only those facades of a building that are exposed to a street. No such sign shall exceed the height of the building. Permanent window signs shall count as permanent signage whether placed on the interior or the exterior of a window or door. 
(c)	Instructional signs. Instructional signs having an area not exceeding four square feet are permitted, provided such signs, if freestanding, shall be located a minimum of five feet within all property lines and shall not exceed five feet in height. Such signs require permits. 
(d)	Other signs. Scoreboards inside ballparks or recreational ball fields are exempt from the provisions of this subsection. These signs do not require permits. Religious symbols and governmental signs may be erected and exceed the above reference requirements subject to the approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 5-39. - Commercial/office/industrial district sign regulations (additional regulations apply to the Gateway Corridor, see section 5-127). 
(a)	Ground signs . One sign shall be permitted per street frontage or per each 300 feet of street frontage, whichever is greater. Furthermore, where two or more ground signs are placed along a single street frontage, such signs shall be separated by a minimum distance of 48 feet. The maximum background/copy area of any single sign shall not exceed 48 square feet and maximum height shall be eight feet. These signs require permits. 
(b)	Projecting signs substituted for ground sign. A projecting sign may be substituted for an allowed ground sign. However, the maximum allowable size for such sign shall not exceed one-half the allowable size of the ground sign for which it is substituted or shall not exceed the allowable amount of facade sign area, whichever is less. When a projecting sign is utilized, all other wall signs permitted on the wall on which the projecting sign is attached shall not be permitted. No projecting sign, which is entirely dependent upon a wall for support, shall be erected on a wall of any building so as to project above the roofline or parapet wall or above the roof level where there is no parapet wall. A sign attached to a corner of a building and parallel to the vertical line of such corner shall be deemed to be erected at a right angle to the building wall. A projecting sign shall not project more than 36 inches from the wall of a building and shall not overhang a public right-of-way. Such sign shall comply with height regulations stated herein and shall be elevated to a minimum of seven feet six inches over any pedestrian way. No sign shall project over any parking area or driveway. No sign or part of a sign or its supporting structure shall cover any window or part of a window. No projecting sign or supporting structure shall be located in such a manner as to obstruct window light and vision. 
(c)	Wall signs. The maximum allowable wall sign area shall be 1½ square feet per one linear foot of building frontage only with a maximum sign copy area of 80 square feet for any one sign. In the case of double street frontage lots, sign area may be transferable to the non-entry facade only where the same or similar facade treatment is used on both front and side, and the copy area does not exceed one-third of the total copy area permitted. Maximum sign vertical dimension shall not exceed 25 percent of the building height. Wall signs shall be framed-out with a construction material permitted by this section. 
(1)	Placement of wall signs and marquee signs. Such signs may be placed in whole or in part upon a parapet, but no sign shall be extended above or be mounted upon the top of a parapet or marquee. One identification sign may be attached to the sides or front of a marquee or hung under a marquee at a business entrance, in which case the sign shall not exceed three square feet in area, shall maintain a seven-foot six-inch minimum clearance above the sidewalk or ground level and shall not extend beyond the marquee's perimeter. A wall sign shall not project from the wall on which it is mounted more than 12 inches. 
(2)	Signs not to cover openings or project. No wall signs shall cover wholly or partially any required wall opening, nor project beyond the top of the wall to which it is attached. 
(3)	Wall sign projection. All bracing and/or lighting shall be hidden or covered so that it shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. The covered portion of the ends of such signs shall not be used for advertising purposes. 
(4)	Gas station and convenience store canopy signs. For the purposes of these regulations, 16 square feet of copy area containing the name, logo, initials, or other identification symbol of the business may be displayed on attached or detached canopy structures for gas station and convenience stores, over their gasoline pumps islands only. If the total copy area of signage located on the canopy structure exceeds 16 square feet, the canopy shall be considered a wall sign. However, the canopy signage shall only be situated on the sides of the canopy structure facing a right-of-way. 
(5)	Wall sign construction materials. Wall signs shall be made of the following materials: acrylic, alumalite, aluminum and MDO (Multiply Density Overlay-exterior plywood panels that have a resin impregnated fiber overlay and that has been fused on the surface of the panel). The edges of MDO signs must also be treated with an end cap product. Vinyl sheet and non-MDO wood signs are prohibited. Channel lettering, vinyl letters that appear to be painted on with a minimum thickness of four mil, and plastic coated and painted Styrofoam may be used for lettering and design on wall signs. 
(6)	Projecting/blade sign substituted for wall sign. A projecting or blade sign may be substituted for an allowed wall sign. However, the maximum allowable size for such sign shall not exceed five square feet per sign face. When a projecting sign is utilized, all other wall signs permitted on the wall on which the projecting sign is attached shall not be permitted. No projecting sign, which is entirely dependent upon a wall for support, shall be erected on a wall of any building so as to project above the roofline or parapet wall or above the eave height where there is no parapet wall. A sign attached to a corner of a building and parallel to the vertical line of such corner shall be deemed to be erected at a right angle to the building wall. A projecting sign shall not project more than 36 inches from the wall of a building and shall not overhang or encroach a public right-of-way. Projecting signs shall be elevated to a minimum of seven feet six inches over any pedestrian way. No sign shall project over any parking area or driveway. No sign or part of a sign or its supporting structure shall cover any window or part of a window. No projecting sign or supporting structure shall be located in such a manner as to obstruct window light and vision. 
(d)	Off-site directory signs. Off-site directory signs may be permitted to assist customers and the general public to find businesses located in industrial areas or industrial parks. Such signs shall be located on private property and shall not be maintained by the City. Only the name of the industrial park or area shall be shown on the sign. These are limited to two square feet. 
(e)	Pylon/pole signs. A pole mounted or pylon sign may be substituted for a monument sign where the City Council determines that there is no practical way to locate a monument sign on the property due to the requirements for vehicular movement, pedestrian or vehicular safety, or aesthetics of the development. In such a case, the City Council may grant a waiver on a case by case basis to allow an existing pole sign to remain in lieu of a required monument sign. A new pole sign and/or structure granted under this section shall not exceed 15 feet in height and shall have a ground clearance of ten feet in order to provide adequate visibility. The square footage of copy area of such a pole sign may not exceed the maximum permitted square footage of a monument sign in the same zoning district. 
(f)	Awning signs. Awnings signs shall be allowed provided that: 
(1)	On single occupant property, one (1) awning sign may be allowed in lieu of wall signage permitted on the wall which the awning is attached. 
(2)	On a multi-occupant property, one (1) awning sign may be allowed over each separate occupant entrance, in lieu of other wall signs. 
(3)	The maximum area of an awning sign shall not exceed ten percent of the total awning face front and side area. 
(g)	Window and door signs. A maximum of 20 percent of the glassed area of a window or door may contain window signage. Window signage must be professionally made and present an attractive visual appearance. Window and door signage may not obstruct view of the cashier/payment area from view from the outside and may not be placed in the upper one-third of storefront windows. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 5-40. - Agricultural district sign regulations. 
(a)	Single-family residences may have one nameplate and one instructional sign, not exceeding two square feet each, for each single-family residence. These signs do not require permits. 
(b)	Approved nonresidential uses in agricultural classifications. Except for residential uses, the uses allowed as permitted uses, or special exception uses, shall be allowed a single ground sign per street frontage, indicating only the name and/or address of the premises. The ground sign shall have a maximum sign area of 24 square feet, and shall not be higher than five feet above the level of the street frontage. These signs shall require permits. 
(c)	All signs in the agricultural districts shall comply with the provisions of section 5-36 (general sign standards), except that illuminated signs are specifically prohibited in all agricultural zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 5-41. - Signs in multitenant developments. 
All tenant wall signage and tenant panels in ground and monument signs within a multitenant development, including shopping centers, industrial complexes and office complexes, shall comply with the additional requirements of this section. 
(1)	Any development intended or designed for multitenant use shall establish a sign program identifying the overall sign specifications (not exceeding the provisions of this Code) and allocating signage for individual tenant use. 
(2)	Where an established pattern of uniform signage exists, signage for tenants in multitenant developments without approved signage programs, but with an established pattern of sign style, location and size, shall be required to conform with such pattern. An established pattern shall be identified as the predominant style, location and size utilized by a minimum of 50 percent of the tenants. 
(3)	Where no established pattern of uniform signage exists, in multitenant developments where no established pattern exists, the owner of the development shall be required to submit a sign program to the City for approval prior to issuance of any new sign permits. Such program shall address size, location, style, and materials. 
(4)	The maximum allowable wall sign area shall be one square feet per one linear foot of tenant frontage with a maximum sign copy area of 80 square feet for any one sign. In the case of corner stores in the multitenant development, sign area may be transferable to the nonentry facade only where the same or similar facade treatment is used on both front and side, and the copy area does not exceed one-third of the total copy area permitted for the tenant. Maximum sign height shall not exceed 25 percent of the building height. Wall signs shall not be located on the rear of a multitenant building, or the sides of a multitenant building when such display would orient the sign to a residential zoned area. 
(5)	Ground signs are not permitted for multitenant developments in the Gateway Corridor. Such developments shall utilize monument signs as defined by this Code and shall also comply with the following additional design standards: 
a.	Vertical structure supports for monument signs shall be concealed in an enclosed base. The width of the enclosed base shall be equal to at least two-thirds of the horizontal width of the sign surface. 
b.	Construction materials: The base shall be of a low maintenance finish which is compatible with the architectural style of the principal building limited to split face block, stone, finished metal, synthetic EFIS stucco or brick. 
c.	The maximum background/copy area of any single sign shall not exceed 50 square feet and a maximum height of ten feet. 
d.	Illumination: Monument signs may be internally illuminated pursuant to section 5-36(e). They may also be externally illuminated with a burial fixture or hidden within a planter bed. The light source should not be able to be seen from adjoining properties or roads. 
e.	Setbacks: Five feet from all property lines. New signs shall be erected at least ten feet from any side property line and five from all other property lines. 
f.	Landscaping: Whenever possible, new monument signs shall be encased in a landscape planter at least two feet in height or a landscaped area of no less than four feet wide on each side of the sign. The planter or landscape area may contain any combination of low lying shrubs, ground cover and flowers. 
g.	Signs made of wood shall be prohibited in the Gateway Corridor. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 5-42. - Nonconforming signs. 
Any lawfully existing permanent sign which was made non-conforming by the adoption of these regulations (Ordinance No. 02-12) or any subsequent amendments of these sign regulations may continue in existence provided that such non-conforming signs shall be removed from the premises or brought into compliance with these provisions or any subsequent amendments by September 30, 2017. The intent is to discourage the survival of nonconforming signs and encourage their owners to invest in conforming signs. 
(1)	Continuance of nonconformities. A nonconforming sign use may be continued until September 30, 2017, subject to the following regulations: 
a.	A nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged or increased in any way from its lawful size at the time of the adoption of these regulations; however this restriction does not apply to the change of copy (face changes) or changeable copy signs. 
b.	Nonconforming signs or sign structures that are defined as abandoned signs under these regulations shall not be permitted for reuse. 
c.	There may be a change of tenancy or ownership of a nonconforming sign without the loss of nonconforming status, if the property is not abandoned as defined in these regulations. 
(2)	Removal of prohibited signs. 
a.	Prohibited signs on public property or rights-of-way shall be removed immediately, and may be removed by the City or its agent without notice. 
b.	Abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner, agent or person in charge of the premises within 30 days after receipt of written notification by the City Manager. If the sign is not removed in a timely manner, the violation may be referred to the Code Enforcement Board. 
(3)	Impact of damage to nonconforming signs. Any nonconforming sign which is destroyed or damaged to the extent of 50 percent or more of the background/copy area, or is altered or replaced, shall not be altered, replaced or reinstalled unless and until it shall have been made to conform to the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 5-43. - Substitution of noncommercial speech for commercial speech. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter or Code to the contrary, any sign erected pursuant to the provisions of this article, chapter or Code with a commercial message may, at the option of the owner, contain a noncommercial message unrelated to the business located on the premises where the sign is erected. The noncommercial message may occupy the entire sign face or any portion thereof. The sign face may be changed from commercial to noncommercial messages, or from one noncommercial message to another, as frequently as desired by the owner of the sign, provided that the sign is not a prohibited sign or sign type and provided that the size, height, setback, and other dimensional criteria contained in this article, chapter and Code have been satisfied. 
( Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 5-44. - Severability. 
(a)	Generally. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article or chapter concerning sign regulation is declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article. 
(b)	Severability where less speech results. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in subsection (a) above, or elsewhere in this article, this Code, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article or chapter is declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article or chapter, even if such severability would result in a situation where there would be less speech, whether by subjecting previously exempt signs to permitting or otherwise. 
(c)	Severability of provisions pertaining to prohibited signs. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in subsection (a), above, or elsewhere in this article, this Code, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article or any other law is declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article that pertains to prohibited signs, including specifically those signs and sign-types prohibited and not allowed under section 5-34 of this article. Furthermore, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of section 5-34 is declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of section 5-34, thereby ensuring that as many prohibited sign-types as may be constitutionally prohibited continue to be prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Secs. 5-45—5-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FENCES AND WALLS 
 
Sec. 5-61. - General provisions. 
A permit shall be obtained prior to erection of any wall or fence or repair or replacement of 50 percent or more of any wall or fence. The provisions of this section may be waived by the City Council where it determines that the benefit to the public and neighboring properties of good appearance is outweighed by the cost to the property owner of compliance, with consideration to the cost of all proposed improvements to the property. 
(Ord. No. 21-07, § 2, 9-5-2007)  
Sec. 5-62. - Height and location. 
(a)	Except to the extent specifically provided otherwise, fences, walls, and hedges shall be permitted in any required yard. 
(b)	Any fence with barbed wire must be set back at least three feet from the right-of-way. 
(c)	Solid face fences, wire fences, and walls in residential districts, shall not exceed four feet in height along and between the front lot line and the front building line and shall not exceed six feet in height elsewhere on the lot. Fences more than four feet in height shall be located at the building line (in-line with the building frontage) within the front yard. For corner lots, a six-foot-high fence or wall may be constructed on one of the two front lot lines behind the building frontage of a dwelling unit. 
(d)	Wire fences in industrial districts shall not exceed eight feet in height. All other fences in nonresidential district shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(e)	Hedges shall not exceed four feet in height along and between the front lot line and the front building line, and shall not exceed six feet in height elsewhere on the lot. 
(f)	Fences or walls along multifamily or nonresidential property perimeters adjacent to public rights-of-way or residential land uses shall be set behind any required landscape or buffer yard area. Where the perimeter is not adjacent to such uses, the fence or wall may be placed on the property line and tree planters with accent plantings shall be placed adjacent to the inside of the fence or wall. 
(g)	Additional restrictions on the height or location of fences, walls, or hedges may be imposed where necessary for purposes of traffic safety. 
(h)	Estate gates shall be permitted to be a maximum of seven feet in height for residential lots zoned R-1 (Urban Single Family Residential) located on Ft. Florida Road and for residential lots in agricultural zoning districts and rural residential zoning classifications: RR (Rural Residential) RA (Rural Estate). Swing gates shall open inward towards private property and shall not encroach into the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 09-08, § 2, 8-6-2008; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 10-13, § 2, 11-6-2013 )  
Sec. 5-63. - Retaining walls. 
(a)	Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to prohibit or prevent the erection of a retaining wall on any property where the wall does not adversely affect the natural flow of surface water. 
(b)	If a six-foot-high screening wall is required where it would be atop a retaining wall, the screening wall may be modified or waived to allow an alternative size or type of screen to be installed above the retaining wall which satisfies the screening function. 
(c)	A retaining wall along a property perimeter adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be constructed of stone, brick, or other decorative surface, or shall be screened by landscaping.  
Sec. 5-64. - Construction specifications. 
(a)	All fences and walls shall be constructed with quality materials and workmanship. Fences and walls shall be built plumb and sturdy enough to withstand normal windloads and stresses. Wooden fences shall be erected with the finished side facing out toward the perimeter of the property. The "finished side" shall refer to that side of the fence that does not show exposed supporting members and posts. 
(b)	Required screening walls shall be six feet high. The lower four feet shall be solid-faced construction; the upper two feet may be solid-faced, open-faced or ornamental construction provided at least 50 percent opacity is maintained. The exterior surface of the wall shall be painted or stuccoed to industry standards to protect the wall from moisture absorption and to enhance appearance. The exterior color of the wall shall be an earth tone. 
(c)	Required screening fences shall be solid face construction of concrete or vinyl materials. Plywood, particle board, or similar materials are prohibited. Fences required for buffers shall be constructed with a stockade style solid face. The color of the fence shall be an earth tone stain. 
(d)	Required screening hedges for nonresidential land uses adjacent to residential land uses shall be three feet high at the time of planting, and shall be of a species capable of attaining a six-foot-high dense screen at maturity. 
(e)	The top of all fences and walls shall be level and all posts shall be set perpendicular to the top. On sloping sites, the top of the fence or wall shall be stepped with a maximum step height of 24 inches, and the maximum height shall not be exceeded. 
(f)	Perimeter or buffer walls in residential subdivisions built after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be constructed of permanent materials, including masonry or permanent vinyl. No wood shall be used in such walls.  
Sec. 5-65. - Fences and walls along major roads. 
(a)	For the purpose of improving the visual appearance from public streets, all properties along the major arterials listed in subsection (b) of this section shall meet the requirements of this section. The requirements of this section shall be met when improvements are made requiring development plan review. 
(b)	These requirements are cumulative and shall apply to all fences and walls constructed within 24 feet of, or within a front, side or rear yard along, the right-of-way of any of the following streets: 
(1)	Charles Richard Beall Boulevard (U.S. 17/92). 
(2)	Dirksen Drive. 
(3)	Enterprise Road. 
(4)	Highbanks Road. 
(5)	Saxon Boulevard. 
(c)	Fences and walls shall be located a minimum of five feet from the front property line and behind any required landscaping. Except for driveways allowed through the site plan approval process, gates in the fences on the rear of through lots along the major arterial shall be prohibited. 
(d)	Fences and walls shall be a maximum of six feet high (eight feet in industrial zoning districts). This limit shall not apply to subdivision entrance signs or fences or walls which are integral to such sign. 
(e)	Fences and walls shall be of a design consistent with the architectural theme of the site as developed, and shall be compatible with adjacent properties and the neighborhood. arterials shall be masonry, wrought iron, aluminum, concrete, or durable plastic. 
(f)	Wire mesh fencing may be used along the arterials on properties zoned and used for a bona fide agricultural pursuit and for which an agricultural ad valorem tax exemption has been granted. 
(g)	The use of barbed wire or concertina wire in fencing is prohibited, except around electrical substation and other public utility facilities. The additional height of up to three feet resulting from the installation of the outriggers or extensions for fences around such electrical substations and other public utility facilities shall not be considered in measuring the height of a fence or wall. 
(h)	Walls shall be masonry, stone, or brick construction. Masonry walls shall have a stucco finish or a textured manufactured finish such as "fluted" block. Plexiglas panels may be used for walls around pool decks. 
(i)	Fence or wall colors shall be matte finish earth tones, matte black, matte white, or pastels with a minimum matte white content of 90 percent. Colors shall complement the primary color of the development and shall not be so extreme in contrast or intensity that the color competes with the building for attention or acts as a sign. 
(j)	Temporary fencing of galvanized wire, durable plastic, or wood erected to protect construction sites, shall be exempt from these requirements. Construction site fencing shall be permitted to remain as long as the building permit is active. Other temporary fencing shall be maintained for no more than 60 consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 5-66. - Maintenance. 
Walls and fences shall be maintained at the proper height and density in a plumb and upright position, free of any defects, damage, and discoloration.  
Secs. 5-67—5-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TREE PRESERVATION 
 
Sec. 5-81. - Purpose. 
The City Council finds and determines that it is in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare to protect and preserve trees and enhance tree cover in the City. The value of trees is many and varied and includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Trees are valuable producers of oxygen, a necessary element to the human survival, and serve to reduce the environmentally dangerous carbon dioxide concentration in the air; 
(2)	The leaves of the trees trap and filter out ash, dust and pollen in the air; 
(3)	Trees may reduce wind velocity and noise levels; 
(4)	Trees may prevent erosion by stabilizing the soil through their root system and by breaking the force of raindrops pounding upon soil surfaces; 
(5)	Trees reduce the quantity of surface runoff and reduce the percentages of impervious surfaces; 
(6)	Trees help purify water by removing the nutrients from waters passing through the ground from the surface to the groundwater table; 
(7)	Trees provide shade and transpire water which helps to moderate temperatures and cleanse the air; 
(8)	Trees provide food, shelter and essential habitat for wildlife; 
(9)	Trees provide valuable visual aesthetics and psychological contrast to the urban environment; 
(10)	Trees are a valuable asset and increase the economic and aesthetic value of developed and undeveloped properties.  
Sec. 5-82. - Penalty. 
(a)	Violations of this article are punishable as provided in section 1-14 and Chapter 2, Article III, Code Enforcement, of the City of DeBary Code of Ordinances and penalties set forth in this article. In the event of a violation, the penalties set forth in this article shall be applicable to the offending property owner, tenant, any contractor clearing the owner's property or any other person operating on behalf of the owner. 
(b)	Any person who violates a provision of this article may be required to replace an affected tree, at the option of the City Manager. Application and approval of a tree permit in accordance with the requirements of section 5-87 must be obtained. Replacement stock must be planted within 90 days of permit issuance. The cross sectional area of the replacement stock shall be taken at the tree's caliper and shall be equal to 150 percent of the cross sectional area of the tree removed. The City Manager may reduce the replacement schedule based on the nature of the violation. All other tree replacement provisions of section 5-93 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1(B), 3-7-2007)  
Sec. 5-83. - Documents incorporated by reference. 
When a word, term, or phrase is not defined in section 1-3, the definitions set forth in publications recognized as authoritative in the scientific and engineering fields, as applicable, shall apply. Such publications shall include the latest edition of Trees Native to Tropical Florida, by Tomlinson; Dig Manual, by the State of Florida; Guide for Plant Appraisal, by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers; Trees and Development, by Jim Clark and Nelda Matheny; Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance—Standard Practices, by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI A-300); and Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. These publications, as amended, are adopted and incorporated into this article by reference.  
Sec. 5-84. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5-85. - General prohibitions. 
Unless otherwise authorized by this article, no person shall cause, suffer, permit or allow: 
(1)	The removal of any historical tree without first obtaining approval from the City Council to conduct the removal. 
(2)	The removal of any tree without first obtaining a tree removal permit from the City as herein provided. 
(3)	Any encroachments, excavations, or change of the natural grade within the drip line of a tree unless it can be demonstrated to the City Manager, prior to the commencement of said activity, that the activity will not negatively impact any tree. 
(4)	Land clearing or the operation of heavy equipment in the vicinity of a tree without placing and maintaining a protective barrier around the drip line of the tree. The protective barrier shall be conspicuous enough and high enough to be seen easily by operators of trucks and other equipment. Tree protection provisions of section 5-95(1) shall apply. 
(5)	The storage or use of materials or equipment within the drip line of any tree, or attachments, other than those of a protective and nondamaging nature, to any tree.  
Sec. 5-86. - General exemptions. 
(a)	During emergency conditions caused by a hurricane or other natural disaster, the provisions of this article may be suspended by the direction of the City Manager. 
(b)	Nuisance trees, as specified in section 1-3 are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(c)	Deteriorated trees which have been removed with prior approval of the City Manager or his designee are exempt from the provisions of this article. Trees removed without prior approval of the City Manager shall be presumed to have been in good condition. Removal of said trees without review by the City shall be considered a violation of this Code and subject to the provisions of section 5-82. 
(d)	Trees with trunks which lie wholly within the property boundaries as described herein are exempt from the requirements of this article if the following conditions are met: 
(1)	Residential owner-occupied. Said property is classified (zoned) pursuant to chapter 3 of this Land Development Code, as amended, as a: 
a.	Single-family or two-family use area, in a community development plan or PUD, excluding mobile home rental parks; 
b.	Single-family or two-family dwelling or mobile home is located on said property; and 
c.	Said property is owner-occupied. 
(2)	Existing rights-of-way and easements. 
a.	Any trees, except historic trees, within an existing private right-of-way or maintenance easement which must be removed or thinned to ensure the safety of the motoring public and to maintain visibility of oncoming traffic at intersecting public streets. Trees which may disrupt public utilities such as power lines, drainage ways and similar public needs may be removed only upon prior written approval by the City Manager and pursuant to the requirements of subsection (d)(4) of this section. However, historic trees located in public or private rights-of-way or utility easements may only be impacted pursuant to City permit requirements. 
b.	Planned public or private rights-of-way shall be designed to preserve as many trees as possible. However, historic and specimen trees located in public or private rights-of-way or utility easements may only be impacted pursuant to City permit requirements. 
(3)	Trees for sale. Trees which are planted and grown for sale to the general public or for some public purposes. Licensed wholesale plant or tree nurseries and botanical gardens are exempt from this article. 
(4)	Tree removal. Removal of trees, except historical or specimen trees, by franchised utility companies, provided that: 
a.	The utility company provides prior written notice of its intention to remove trees to the City Manager and the record property owner. The written notices shall be delivered, at minimum, 15 days prior to the intended tree removal; and 
b.	The utility company can demonstrate to the City Manager prior to tree removal that: 
1.	The tree will cause a continual disruption of service; and 
2.	The threat of service interruption cannot be remedied by tree pruning in accordance with standards as set by the American National Standards Institute, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1(E), 3-7-2007)  
Sec. 5-87. - Tree permit application requirements. 
(a)	Application forms. A complete permit application for removing or relocating trees shall be submitted by a property owner or authorized agent of the owner, on City approved application forms. 
(b)	Fees. Each permit application must be accompanied by the appropriate fees as established by the City Council. The permit application fees are nonrefundable and nontransferable. 
(c)	Required application data. The City approved permit application must be accompanied by surveys, and other documents as required by the City Manager, that describe the proposed activities to be performed in sufficient detail to meet the standards of this article and to clearly identify all potential impacts to the environment and public health. A property boundary survey shall be submitted with the application. Property boundaries must be locatable in the field by the inspectors. As a minimum, property corners must be located and so designated to be clearly identifiable and visible on-site. Property corners shall be intervisible or line markers shall be provided. 
(d)	Action on permit application. The City Forester or his designee shall, in a timely manner, determine if the application is complete. If it is determined the application is incomplete, it shall be returned to the applicant. If the application is determined to be complete, the City Forester shall have 15 working days from the date of receipt of a complete application to approve or deny the permit. 
(e)	Modification of application requirements. 
(1)	Application requirements may be modified upon agreement of the City Manager to reflect specific on-site needs for information. Modification would be based on the type of development proposed, the vegetative cover being impacted, and the degree of impact anticipated. 
(2)	Statistical tree survey information may be considered at the discretion of the City Manager. However, such statistical surveys shall be limited to sites containing an overstory consisting predominantly of trees uniform in age, species and distribution, which do not contain specimen or historic trees. Statistical surveys must be conducted in compliance with accepted forestry practices.  
Sec. 5-88. - Area tree protection requirements. 
Fifteen percent of the square footage of any development shall be designated for the protection of trees. The area required to protect specimen trees may be included to satisfy this requirement. This required area may be constituted as one or more subareas within the development. Said area may include any landscape buffer or other landscape buffer or other landscape areas required by this Code, as amended, on a development. Such designated areas shall be a minimum width and depth of 20 feet to comply with minimum tree protection standards to adequately protect the trees contained within the areas. A minimum of 50 percent of the required minimum number of trees as provided in section 5-89 shall consist of existing trees within said area. The City Forester may provide for a waiver or modification of this requirement if the development contains an insufficient amount of existing trees to meet this requirement or if the City Forester determines that modification of this requirement is warranted by specific on-site conditions. On new subdivision plats or replats, the required tree protection/preservation areas shall be exclusive of any lots, stormwater retention, utility easements, or any other area not compatible with the preservation of existing trees and native vegetation. All tree preservation/protection areas shall be located in separate tracts dedicated to the Home Owners Association or Property Owners Association for the subdivision for preservation/protection by that organization. Such a tract shall not be transferred to any entity other than the City, subject to the City's acceptance. No lot shall contain any portion of a required tree preservation/protection area. A tree preservation/protection area shall not be included in the calculations for the developable area of any lots. On commercial site plans the required tree protection/preservation areas shall be exclusive of any stormwater retention, utility easements, or any other area not compatible with the preservation of existing trees and native vegetation. All tree preservation/protection areas shall be clearly labeled as such on the site plan and shall not be altered except as approved by the City Forester. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1(G), 3-7-2007)  
Sec. 5-89. - Minimum tree coverage requirements. 
Each lot shall contain a minimum of one tree for each 2,500 square feet of lot area (rounded up to the nearest whole number). If the lot contains an insufficient number of existing trees to meet this requirement, or if the lot has no existing trees, replacement trees shall be provided in accordance with section 5-93.  
Sec. 5-90. - Natural vegetation retention (areas). 
(a)	Areas of the property may be designated as natural vegetation retention areas indicating that all existing vegetation will remain on that area of the site. 
(b)	Under this designation, trees meeting the minimum replacement size criteria, up to trees of the minimum tree definition criteria, may be retained as replacement stock for trees to be removed elsewhere on the site. 
(c)	Cross sectional area of these replacement trees must be calculated and may be applied toward replacement volume needed on the site as a whole. Trees designated as replacement stock pursuant to this method become protected trees.  
Sec. 5-91. - Tree permits. 
(a)	Standards for issuance. The City Manager shall consider the following standards in reviewing the application: 
(1)	The extent to which the actual or intended use of the property requires cutting down or destruction of vegetation and trees, including whether the applicant has made every reasonable effort to incorporate existing trees into the project and to minimize the number of trees removed. 
(2)	The desirability of preserving any tree by reason of its size, age or some other outstanding quality, such as uniqueness, rarity or status as a historic or specimen tree. 
(3)	The extent to which the area would be subject to increased water runoff and other environmental degradation due to removal of the trees. 
(4)	The heightened desirability of preserving tree cover in densely developed or densely populated areas. 
(5)	The need for visual screening in transitional areas, or relief from glare, blight, commercial or industrial unsightliness, or any other affront to the visual or aesthetic sense in the area. 
(6)	The effect that changes in the natural grade will have on the trees to be preserved. 
(7)	The removal of trees will significantly affect the natural clearing of the atmosphere by vegetation through particulate matter interception, and the ingestion of oxygen released to the atmosphere as a by-product of photosynthesis. 
(b)	Requirements for subdivision development. 
(1)	Except as otherwise exempted in this article, compliance with the provisions of this article shall be required of all subdivisions subject to requirements of this Code. Review for compliance shall be a function of subdivision review pursuant to this Code, as amended, and shall be clearly documented in the subdivision planning documents. 
(2)	Tree removal on individual lots within the subdivision may be permitted either as a part of the subdivision review process or independently under the requirements of this section following approval of the subdivision. 
(3)	If said lots are to be cleared as part of the subdivision review process, clearing may be limited, based on a determination made by the City Forester. If permitted with the subdivision process, tree replacement requirements must be provided with the subdivision approval. Permitting fees for tree removal on lots within the subdivision shall be determined based on the number of protected trees removed and shall be calculated independently of the fees for the subdivision in section 5-99. 
(4)	Lots to be cleared as part of the subdivision review process shall be subject to the following: 
a.	The developer must demonstrate a site-specific need for lot clearing based upon the type of trees on-site, the topography of the site, and other factors as may be determined by the City Manager. 
b.	The developer must demonstrate that clearing can be accomplished without damage to other protected trees within the subdivision. 
c.	The developer must demonstrate that clearing is in compliance with an approved preliminary plat. 
d.	Clearing does not violate any provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City or of this Land Development Code. 
e.	The development agreement specifies permitting fees and replacement requirements for lots to be cleared. 
f.	The developer shall provide documentation of financial hardship to justify the need for lot clearing within the subdivision. 
g.	Clearing would be limited to an amount not to exceed 20 percent of the approved lots with the subdivision during any one calendar year. 
h.	In the event the majority of the trees to be cleared are sand pines, then the 20 percent limitation may be modified in accordance with a tree removal and abatement plan approved by the City Manager. 
(c)	Tree permit issuance. 
(1)	If the application meets the requirements of this article, the City Manager shall approve the application subject to appropriate permit conditions. In the event that the application does not comply with the requirements set forth in this article, said application shall be denied, with reasons stated. 
(2)	Upon approval or denial of the application, the City Manager shall notify the applicant. If the application is approved, the City Manager will notify the applicant that the tree permit is approved subsequent to the requirement of section 5-95. If the application is denied, the City Manager shall notify the applicant, stating the reasons for the denial. 
(d)	Posting of permit. A copy of the approved tree permit shall be clearly posted on the job site during all phases of clearing and construction activities. 
(e)	Termination of permit. All tree permits shall expire one year from the date of issue unless time extensions are granted by the City Manager. Application for extensions of time shall be made in writing to the City Manager at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. 
(f)	Notification of impending activity. The person holding an approved permit shall notify the City Forester prior to the start of any land activity that will affect trees. Notification shall be timely, allowing the City Manager sufficient notice to perform necessary site inspections. The City Manager or his/her designee will inspect the site for compliance with section 5-95. A tree removal permit will be issued only after these pre-activity inspections are complete.  
Sec. 5-92. - Tree relocation option. 
Any person may elect to relocate a nonhistoric tree subject to prior approval by the City Manager. Any person electing to relocate a tree, rather than remove it, shall receive credit for successful relocation equal to 100 percent of the cross sectional area of the tree, deducted from the tree replacement requirements as specified in section 5-93. 
(1)	Tree relocation requirements. To ensure successful relocation and transplanting of trees to the following guidelines shall be adhered to: 
a.	No other trees on-site shall be unnecessarily damaged by the relocation. 
b.	A relocated tree shall not interfere with existing or proposed utilities, either above or below ground. A relocated tree that may reach a height of 30 feet shall not be placed within 20 feet of an overhead powerline. 
c.	A tree should be relocated within the vicinity from which the original tree was removed, where practicable. 
d.	Any tree being relocated shall not be unnecessarily damaged during removal, transport or replanting of that tree. 
e.	If a tree has a dormant period, it should be transplanted during that time. A tree should not be transplanted during periods of strong, dry winter winds or during droughts. 
f.	Adequate space for root and canopy development shall be provided. 
g.	Prior to transplanting, the tree shall be root and canopy pruned according to sound arboricultural standards. All crown pruning shall be done in accordance with standards set by the American National Standards Institute, as amended. 
h.	During and following transplanting of a tree, the root ball and trunk shall be protected. The root ball must be kept moist at all times. 
i.	A transplanted tree shall be braced for at least one year after its relocation. 
j.	A transplanted tree shall be fertilized as appropriate and shall be watered sufficiently until tree growth is re-established. 
(2)	Tree relocation maintenance/monitoring requirements. Any person conducting tree relocation activities shall: 
a.	Maintain the health of a relocated tree for a period of two years following final inspection and approval. 
b.	Replace, with a equivalent cross sectional area, within 60 days, a relocated tree that dies or is determined by the City Forester to be effectively destroyed within two years of being relocated. The two-year maintenance period shall begin anew whenever a tree is replaced. 
(3)	Tree relocation bond requirements. 
a.	Unless otherwise exempted by this article, any person conducting tree relocation activities must post a bond to insure the survival of the relocated trees designated for preservation. Said bond shall meet the approval of the City attorney and may be in the form of a letter of credit drawn upon banks or savings and loan institutions legally doing business in the state, cash bonds issued by an insurance company legally doing business in the state or other acceptable means as approved by the City attorney. This bond shall be in addition to any other bond that may be required by any other governmental entity. 
b.	Determination of the bond amount shall be computed based upon the most current version of the Guide for Plant Appraisal, published by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
c.	Government entities are exempt from bond requirements. 
d.	Release of bonds. Tree relocation bonds will be released upon successful tree relocation as set forth in this article and written approval by the City Manager. 
e.	Drawing on bonds. If a tree is determined by the City Forester to be effectively destroyed within two years from the date of relocation, the bond shall be drawn upon and funds will be deposited into the tree replacement trust fund. Said funds will be expended pursuant to section 5-97.  
Sec. 5-93. - Tree replacement requirements. 
(a)	Trees identified for removal on the tree permit application shall be replaced by replacement stock. Replacement shall be based on the replacement of 15 percent of the total of the cross sectional area of the trunk of the tree removed. Replacement for sand pine ( Pinus clausa ) shall be based on replacement of seven percent of the total cross sectional area of the trunk of the tree removed. 
(b)	Diameter used to determine cross sectional area shall be as defined in the Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, State of Florida, Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
(c)	Single trees may be replaced with two or more trees provided the cross sectional requirements are met. In no event shall replacement stock be less than six feet in height nor have a caliper of less than two inches. 
(d)	Replacement species shall be the same general species as the tree removed or an alternative species acceptable to the City Forester. 
(e)	Replacement trees shall meet the requirements for Florida No. 1 or better grade, as provided in Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, State of Florida, Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
(f)	Replacement trees provided in conjunction with the site plan or subdivision approval shall be considered required improvements. 
(g)	Palms may be used as replacement stock up to the full cross sectional replacement area of palms being removed from the site. Palms may be substituted as replacements for other species being removed under the following conditions: 
(1)	If the cross sectional area of palms being removed from the site comprises zero to 25 percent of the total cross sectional area of trees being removed, palms may be substituted for replacement of nonpalm species up to a maximum of 25 percent of the total replacement cross sectional area required. 
(2)	If the cross sectional area of palms being removed exceeds 25 percent of the total cross sectional area of trees being removed, no substitution of palms for nonpalm species will be allowed. The use of palms will be restricted to the replacement cross sectional area originally calculated based on palms that are being removed. 
(3)	Since palms are generally moved as mature trees, it is necessary to equate cross sectional area of commonly moved palms to cross sectional area of commonly planted nonpalm species when substituting palms for nonpalm species pursuant to subsection (g)(1) of this section. For the purpose of substitution of palms for nonpalm species, a ratio of 16 square inches of replacement cross sectional area of palms may be substituted for one square inch of replacement cross sectional area of nonpalm species. For example, a six-inch DBH palm tree containing 28.26 square inches may be substituted for a two-inch caliper hardwood tree containing 3.14 square inches of cross sectional area. The following informational chart indicates common size comparisons: 
TABLE VI 
DBH of Palm 	Caliper of 

Nonpalm 

Species 
6? equates to 	2? 
8? equates to 	2½? 
10? equates to 	3? 
12? equates to 	3½? 
14? equates to 	4? 
16? equates to 	4½? 
 
This substitution ratio applies only when replacing nonpalm species with palms. 
(h)	General requirements for replaced trees. Any person conducting tree replacement activities shall: 
(1)	Refrain from unnecessarily damaging any other tree or trees remaining on-site while planting or preparing the site for any replacement tree; 
(2)	Plant the replacement tree so that it will not interfere proposed utility lines or cables, either above or below ground. A tree which may reach a height of 30 feet shall not be planted within 20 feet of an overhead powerline; 
(3)	Plant replacement tree species and use installation and maintenance methods that follow xeriscape principles, where practicable; 
(4)	Plant a replacement tree in an area with adequate space for root and canopy development; 
(5)	Complete tree replacement within 180 days of the issuance of a tree removal permit unless granted an extension by the City Manager. 
(i)	Maintenance/monitoring requirements for replaced trees. Any person conducting tree replacement activities shall: 
(1)	Maintain the health of a replacement tree for a period of two years from the date of planting; 
(2)	Replace, within 60 days, any replaced tree that dies or is determined to be effectively destroyed within two years of being planted, as determined by the City Manager. The two years' maintenance period shall begin anew whenever a tree is replaced. 
(j)	Remuneration in lieu of tree replacement. If it is determined by the City Manager that the replacement is not feasible due to lack of available planting space, the following applies: 
(1)	The person conducting the tree replacement activity shall, in lieu of actual tree replacement, pay a replacement contribution into the City tree replacement trust account. 
(2)	The replacement contribution will be determined using a replacement tree fee schedule/formula in compliance with the accepted national value per square inch of tree diameter at breast height and as sanctioned by the America Society of Landscape Architects (ASLA) and the Florida Nursery Standards and as accepted by the City Manager. 
( Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Sec. 5-94. - Historic and specimen trees. 
(a)	Historic trees. Historic trees shall only be removed or relocated upon approval of a permit granted by the City Council. However, if said trees are deteriorated, dying, or considered to be a hazard, the City Manager, upon prior review, may grant approval for removal under the terms of section 5-86(c). 
(1)	For historic tree removal, a tree permit application shall be filed, processed and reviewed in accordance with section 5-91. For historic tree relocation, a permit application shall be filed, processed and reviewed in accordance with sections 5-91 and 5-92. 
(2)	The City Manager shall prepare a report and recommendation on the application within 15 working days of receipt of the application for inclusion on the next available City Council agenda. 
(3)	The City Council shall consider the report and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The report of the City Council action shall be transmitted back to the City Manager, stating any reasons for denial or conditions. 
(4)	Upon receipt of the City Council actions, the City Manager shall immediately act concerning issuance of the permit. 
(b)	Specimen trees. 
(1)	Specimen trees shall only be removed or relocated in accordance with a permit issued by the City Manager, upon compliance with the following requirements: 
TABLE VII. MINIMUM SPECIMEN TREE 
PROTECTION 
Number of Specimen Trees per Acre 	On-Site Protection 

Required 
Less than 3 or a portion thereof 	80 percent of 
all specimen trees 
3.0 to 5.0 	65 percent of 
all specimen trees 
5.1 to 8.0 	50 percent of 
all specimen trees 
8.0 or more 	4 specimen trees 
per acre 
 
(2)	Any specimen tree removed in accordance with a permit must be replaced pursuant to section 5-93.  
Sec. 5-95. - Standards for tree protection during development activities. 
The following are minimum standards necessary to protect trees designated for preservation from damage during development activities after a permit has been approved: 
(1)	Protection of existing trees. Prior to the commencement of construction of a development, the applicant shall clearly mark any tree or tree groups to be maintained in the proximity of any area where land clearing equipment is to be operated. In addition, prior to any clearing of improved, vacant or unimproved land unless specifically exempted from this article, trees to be preserved shall have barriers constructed around them by the developer to prevent physical damage from heavy equipment and other activities incidental to development. Required barriers shall be subject to inspection by the City as a condition of permit approval and prior to any clearing. The barriers shall be: 
a.	Large enough to include the entire area inside the drip line of the tree or one foot of radius per inch of the diameter, whichever is greater; 
b.	Conspicuous enough and high enough to be easily seen by operators of trucks and other equipment; 
c.	Constructed of sturdy material as approved by the City Forester based on professional judgment that the intent of this provision shall be met; and 
d.	Constructed as a condition of the issuance of any tree permit, building permit, and any other development permit and prior to any construction or other development activities and required to remain in place throughout the construction. 
Barriers or barricades shall be completely removed from the site at the end of the construction, unless otherwise stipulated on the approved tree preservation plan. 
(2)	Tree protection zones. The area within the drip line of trees designated for preservation is considered the tree protection zone. Only hand clearing is permittable within the tree protection zone, unless otherwise stipulated in the approved tree permit. Encroachments into the tree protection zone will require submittal and approval of a drip line encroachment plan outlining tree protection measures to be utilized. 
(3)	Other required protection of trees and understory. Developers shall, as required by the approved tree permit, protect the trees and understory plants designated for preservation from chemical poison, excavation, and grade changes to at least the following minimum standards: 
a.	Utility line trenches. Utility line trenches shall be routed away from trees to an area outside of the drip line. If underground utilities must be routed through a tree protection barrier zone, tunneling will be required. 
b.	Grade changes. The site shall be utilized as to require the smallest possible grade change around existing trees. The project shall be designed to utilize site topography to the greatest extent possible. No grade changes are to be allowed within the drip line of existing trees unless approved by the City Forester. 
c.	Tree wells of an approved design shall be constructed around all trees to be preserved when fill material will be deposited within the drip line of protected trees and utilize retaining walls and drywells to protect any tree to be preserved from severe grade changes. 
d.	Swaling and minor negative grade changes shall be designed outside the drip line of the area of trees to be preserved. If ditches, swales, or other significant grade changes are required near a tree that is designated to be preserved, piping shall be used. Trenching within the drip line of trees to remain shall be avoided. Tunneling shall be used in lieu of trenching within the drip line of trees to remain. 
e.	Where automobile traffic areas are proposed within the drip line of trees to be preserved, and less than two inches of grade change is proposed, surfaces that allow air and water in the soil shall be used in lieu of asphalt or other impervious surfaces. 
(4)	Pruning of trees and vegetation. The developer is permitted to properly cut or prune branches and roots of trees designated for preservation under the supervision of the City Forester. However, tree pruning shall be accomplished in accordance with the procedures set forth by the American National Standards Institute, as amended. 
(5)	Root system protection. The root systems of trees shall be protected as follows: 
a.	Excavation within a drip line. The City Manager may approve a drip line encroachment plan upon the applicant's request to excavate within the drip line of a tree as part of a clearing permit. 
b.	Standards for root protection. The following standards shall apply and the City Manager may establish additional standards for root protection consistent with this section if deemed warranted by site conditions or the project proposal: 
1.	If roots are exposed, the developer shall provide temporary earth cover, mixed with peat moss and wrapped with burlap, to prevent exposure from drying out before permanent backfill is placed. 
2.	The developer shall also fertilize, water and maintain in a moist condition and otherwise temporarily support and protect the tree root from damage until the tree root is permanently covered with earth. 
c.	Protection of the tree root system. The developer shall protect tree root systems from damage due to noxious material in solution caused by runoff, or spillage during mixing and placement of construction materials, or drainage from storage materials. The developer shall also protect the root systems from flooding, erosion and excessive wetting resulting from dewatering or grading operations. 
(6)	Trees damaged during construction. The developer shall have trees damaged by construction repaired by a professional arborist in a manner acceptable to the City Manager as follows: 
a.	Immediate notification to the City. The City Manager must be notified immediately after any damage to any tree damaged by construction operations. 
b.	Prompt repair. Repairs shall be made promptly, as necessary, after damage occurs, to prevent progressive deterioration of damaged trees. 
c.	Removal and replacement of damaged trees. The developer shall remove trees which are determined by the City Manager as being incapable of restoration of normal growth pattern. Such trees shall be subject to replacement pursuant to section 5-82(b).  
Sec. 5-96. - Tree relocation by City. 
Where a tree is intended to be removed pursuant to the provisions of this article, the City may, with the owner's permission, relocate the tree at the City's expense. The tree will be relocated within the incorporated area on public land. If the City does not elect to relocate a tree, it may give the tree to the school board, the county, or any other municipality within the county the right to acquire the tree, at its expense, for relocation within the incorporated areas for public use, or to a school board owned site. The relocation shall be accomplished within 15 working days of the issuance of a permit. If it is necessary to root prune the tree to insure survival, the relocation shall be accomplished within a time frame agreed to by all parties.  
Sec. 5-97. - Tree replacement trust account. 
(a)	Establishment. A City tree replacement trust account is hereby established as a depository for tree replacement fees and monies. 
(b)	Dispersal of assets. The funds in said account shall be expended, utilized and disbursed for the planting of trees, and to cover any other ancillary costs, including but not limited to landscaping, sprinkler systems and other items or materials necessary and proper for the preservation, maintenance, relocation or restoration of tree ecosystems on any public land within the City. These monies may also be utilized to engage support elements such as landscape architects and additional personnel, if deemed necessary in the opinion of the City Manager, following established City procedures. 
(c)	Deposit of monies in trust account. All monies deposited for use as specified in this section shall be deposited in trust, in a separate account established and maintained apart from the general revenue funds and accounts of the City.  
Sec. 5-98. - Issuance of certificates of occupancy. 
Compliance with this article, including any conditions attached to the clearing permit, shall be a condition to the issuance of certificates of occupancy from the City or any agency or entity retained by the City for such purposes. Under certain circumstances, conditions may warrant postponing installation of replacement trees due to unfavorable planting conditions. If conditions warrant, and if acceptable to the applicant and the City Manager, a certificate of occupancy may be granted without completion of the replacement requirements under the terms of this article, provided the applicant agrees to be bound by said conditions, and appropriate performance guarantee is provided in accordance with the requirements of this Land Development Code, as amended.  
Sec. 5-99. - Tree permit requirements for residential construction. 
(a)	Residential construction application requirements. At the time of application for building permits for residential construction, the applicant must submit a tree survey, that at a minimum, identifies all trees over six inches DBH on the site by size and species, the footprint of the house and driveway, and the location of the well and septic system if applicable. The City Forester or his designee will determine which trees must be removed to accommodate the home and required infrastructure. Those trees may be removed and replacement shall be five percent of the total cross sectional area (cssi) of trees removed. Additional trees may be approved for removal at the time of permit application at the request of the applicant. Those trees will require replacement at 15 percent of cssi. If, at the time of final inspection, it is found that trees not approved by the tree removal permit were removed, replacement will be 100 percent of cssi. 
(b)	Exemptions. Each section of this article shall apply to residential construction except: 
(1)	The area tree protection requirements of section 5-88; 
(2)	The specimen tree requirements of section 5-94(b); and 
(3)	Tree replacement requirements of section 5-93, within the buildable area. Historic tree removal for residential construction is not exempt. 
(c)	Application for tree permit prior to building permit. A tree clearing permit may be issued prior to the issuance of a building permit application. It shall remain valid for one year unless extended by the application for a building permit. If no such application is tendered, then replacement of protected trees shall be required. 
(d)	Optional residential tree permit procedures. At the developer's option, and with concurrence of the City Forester, the following tree permit standards for residential development may be utilized: 
(1)	Lots containing less than 20,000 square feet in lot area shall contain a minimum of one tree per 1,000 square feet of lot size, rounded up to the next whole tree. 
(2)	Replacement trees may be existing trees, planted trees, or a combination thereof. Existing trees remaining on the property after construction will meet this requirement as long as adequate protection has been provided during construction in accordance with section 5-95. Planted trees must consist of a variety of species. 
(3)	Except for the historic tree provisions of section 5-94(a), tree removal on lots developed pursuant to this option are exempt from the replacement schedule set forth in section 5-93. However, a tree permit must be obtained in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1(R), 3-7-2007)  
Sec. 5-100. - Appeals. 
Aggrieved parties may appeal any decision of the City Manager to the City Council under section 1-7.  
Secs. 5-101—5-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GATEWAY CORRIDOR STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 5-121. - Purpose. 
Gateway Corridors serve as primary entrances to the City and, as such, provide the first impressions of the City for visitors. The purpose of applying enhanced design standards to new development and redevelopment along a Gateway Corridor is to: 
(1)	Enhance the appearance of the corridor; 
(2)	Provide for a well landscaped, scenic gateway to the City; 
(3)	Provide for the implementation of uniform design standards to promote quality development in the corridor; 
(4)	Minimize visual pollution which may result from uncoordinated uses, structures and buildings; 
(5)	Provide for traffic circulation patterns that enhance public safety, roadway capacity, vehicular and nonvehicular movement functions; 
(6)	Maintain and enhance property values; and 
(7)	Create an active place that is visually, financially and economically sustainable. 
(Ord. No. 23-02, § 1(505.01), 1-8-2003)  
Sec. 5-122. - Corridor standards, definitions and applicability. 
(a)	In addition to the existing, or hereafter amended, development requirements presently in this Code, including the standards found in identified overlay districts, the following shall apply on all properties fronting on a Gateway Corridor as defined herein. Gateway Corridor standards shall be applicable to all new development or redevelopment within the designated Gateway Corridors. In case of a conflict in the applicability of Gateway Corridor standards, existing requirements and overlay districts, the most stringent and restrictive standards shall apply. 
(b)	Gateway Corridors shall include the following corridors within the City: 
(1)	U.S. 17-92. 
(2)	Highbanks Road. 
(3)	Enterprise Road. 
(4)	Saxon Boulevard. 
(5)	Dirksen Drive. 
(6)	I-4 frontage roads including: Palm Road, Gardenia Avenue and Cardinal Drive. 
(Ord. No. 23-02, § 1(505.02), 1-8-2003)  
Sec. 5-123. - Gateway Corridor architectural standards. 
(a)	Applicability. The architectural standards shall apply to all new development and redevelopment within the designated Gateway Corridor, with the following exceptions: 
(1)	Single-family and two-family dwellings. Where served by existing aboveground power, such dwellings shall be exempt from subsection (b)(12)a of this section. 
(2)	Additions, renovations, replacement or redevelopment of an existing structure or project, where the cost of such additions, renovations, replacement or redevelopment does not exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the existing structure, or 30 percent of the square footage of the existing structure, unless the use of the structure or project has ceased for a period of more than 365 consecutive days, or unless cumulative additions, renovations, replacement or redevelopment initiated during any five-year period meet the thresholds listed above, whereupon the provisions herein shall apply. 
(b)	Gateway Corridor appearance criteria. Compliance with the intent, standards and provisions of this Code shall be as provided for below: 
(1)	Architectural style and application. It is the intent of this Code to ensure a harmonious streetscape, compatibility between structures, and well-designed transitions between architectural styles from project to project according to subsection (b)(4) of this section. Architectural elevations of all facades of all structures to be constructed shall be a required exhibit for all site plan approvals. Such exhibit shall include colors, materials, building dimensions, location of service areas and mechanical equipment, screening devices, site furnishings, lighting fixtures, and any other information as determined necessary to ensure consistency with the intent of this Code. 
a.	Structures within the same development shall reflect similar styles, materials, details, and colors and shall be designed with a recognized architectural style. A recognized architectural style shall be one that is recognized by design professionals as having a basis in classical, historical or academic architectural design philosophies. The use of features deemed by this Code to be "integral features of a recognized architectural style" shall have a rational and aesthetic relationship to the elevation of a structure, and be harmonious with the pattern, proportions and materials of surrounding structures. The following shall not be considered recognized architectural styles: 
1.	Highway architecture as commonly described by architectural historians. 
2.	Corporate signature or commercial phototype architecture, unless such is consistent with other requirements of this Code. 
3.	Any architecture having a historical reference that is so unique and different from current design philosophy that such reference is inconsistent and incompatible with surrounding structures. Examples of such include igloos, tepees, medieval castles, caves and the like. 
4.	Any kitsch architecture which does not resemble a typical structure, but resembles an exaggerated plant, animal, fish, edible food or other such item such as giant oranges, ice cream cones, dinosaurs and the like. 
b.	Structures on different parcels and not within the same development shall reflect styles and materials that are similar to surrounding structures, if the surrounding structures are of a recognized architectural style. All construction shall conform in street orientation and massing to pre-approved site plans. 
In Gateway Corridor locations where there is no established architectural pattern between adjacent structures, standards shall be implemented for new structures and renovations as set forth herein. 
(2)	Building mass (see Illustration No. 1 following the end of this chapter). 
a.	A single building mass with more than one tenant shall be varied by height and width so that it appears to be divided into distinct massing elements and architectural details can be viewed from a pedestrian scale. 
b.	For structures less than 5,000 square feet in gross building area on the ground floor, no uninterrupted horizontal length of a building facade shall exceed 35 linear feet. 
c.	For structures greater than 5,000 square feet in gross building area on the ground floor, no uninterrupted horizontal length of a building facade shall exceed 50 linear feet. 
d.	Blank wall areas (those without relief or uninterrupted) shall incorporate the use of landscaping, painting or architectural features to break up the monolithic appearance of such areas. Blank wall areas shall not exceed ten feet in vertical direction nor 20 feet in horizontal direction of any building facade. 
(3)	Design detail (see Illustration No. 2 following the end of this chapter). Buildings shall be designed to enhance the attractiveness of the City's streetscape. Buildings shall, through use of architectural details and scale, have architectural features and patterns that provide visual interest from the perspective of the pedestrian and the motorist. The following techniques shall be incorporated into building design in order to accomplish such requirements: 
a.	All buildings shall be required to provide the following exterior design elements: 
1.	Canopies or porticos, integrated with building massing and style at entryways. 
2.	Trim elements of appropriate materials at entries and fenestration. 
b.	Reserved. 
(4)	Building transition (see Illustration No. 3 following the end of this chapter). Facade and height transitions between buildings are key elements in creating and maintaining an attractive streetscape. Height and scale of new development and redevelopment shall be compatible with that of surrounding development. In order to accomplish appropriate facade transitions, and to maximize City streetscape aesthetics, the following transitional techniques shall be applied to new development and redevelopment when within 600 feet of an existing building (see Illustration No. 5): 
a.	Buildings shall be designed to provide transitional elements and architectural features (architectural style, scale, design details, construction materials and the like) that are architecturally compatible with adjacent structures. Buildings that are twice the height, or greater, than an adjacent structure shall also provide transitional elements and features that provide for transitional blending of heights. 
b.	The pattern of placement, proportions and materials of windows and doors shall be harmonious with surrounding structures. 
c.	The ratio of wall surface to openings and the ratio of width and height of windows and doors shall be consistent and compatible with surrounding structures. 
d.	The requirements contained in items (4)a, b and c of this section may be waived where the City Council determines that City aesthetics would be enhanced by a change in the pattern of development that has been previously established by adjacent structures. In such a case, the City Council shall determine the appropriate style and exterior materials for the new development or redevelopment. 
(5)	Entryways/customer entrance design (see Illustration No. 4 following the end of this chapter). Entryways shall be designed to provide project focal points. Entryways shall be designed in accordance with the techniques listed below. In the event that the entryway is not oriented toward the major road that, as determined by the City, provides access to the building, the side of the building facing such road should also be designed to comply with this subsection. 
a.	Entryways shall be differentiated from the remainder of the facade through, at a minimum, the use of color, change in materials, application of architectural features (arches, columns, colonnades, etc.), setbacks, offsets, level changes, and the like. 
b.	Entryway design shall incorporate landscaping, landscape planters or wing walls with landscaped areas. 
c.	Entryway areas shall be provided with structural or vegetative shading features and benches or other seating components. 
(6)	Exterior materials and colors. Exterior building materials and colors contribute significantly to the visual impact of a building on a community, which, in turn, individually and collectively reflect upon the visual character and quality of a community. In order to project an image of high quality City aesthetics, building materials and colors shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.	All buildings shall be faced with materials that exhibit a durable, high quality appearance. 
b.	Materials shall be of a low maintenance type, retaining a consistent, clean appearance. 
c.	Generally accepted exterior facing materials shall relate to the mass of the structure based on square footage as follows: 
1.	For all structures, the following materials shall be acceptable on all facades that are or will be exposed to the general public: 
i.	Brick. 
ii.	Exposed aggregate. 
iii.	Stone. 
iv.	Cellulose fiber-reinforced cement building boards. 
v.	Stucco, if used, shall be flat finish, "knocked-down," or sand finish. 
vi.	E.I.F.S. (exterior insulation and finish system). 
2.	Two wall materials may be combined on any facade, up to all four facades, horizontally. The visually heavier facade material must be below and can cover the first third of the overall wall height only. 
3.	Exterior colors shall not be specifically limited, but shall be consistent with earth tones, warm tones and muted hues. The selection of pastels shall be limited to those colors having a minimum white content of 90 percent. Other colors, excluding fluorescents, may be permitted as accent colors, not to exceed 20 percent of the surface area of any one elevation. 
4.	The requirement for earth tones and pastels shall not apply to colors commonly found in natural materials such as brick or stone, unless such material has been artificially colored in a manner which would be contrary to the intent of these regulations. 
5.	A color or color scheme which is directly inherent to a unique recognized architectural style or exterior artwork, but not otherwise in compliance with this section, may be permitted through the development plan approval process. 
6.	Approval for change of exterior design required. Any exterior change of any nonresidential structure or multifamily structure in a Planned Unit Development, overlay district or conventional zoning district shall require review and approval by the City Council. Such changes shall include, but not be limited to, colors, materials, roof finishes and signage. The purpose of such approval shall be to ensure that any exterior change is consistent with the intent and requirements of this article. Routine maintenance and replacement of materials which does not affect the approved exterior design shall be exempt from this subsection. 
7.	Building materials and colors shall be consistent around the entire building. 
8.	Exposed metal building sidings shall not be permitted. 
(7)	Building orientation (Illustration No. 5 following the end of this chapter). Buildings shall be oriented so as to enhance the appearance of the City's streetscape. This requirement shall be met by incorporating the following techniques into project design and shall be approved in site plan development review. 
a.	The building's entrance shall be visible from the public road from which driveway access is provided. 
b.	The building's primary facade shall face parallel to the public road from which driveway access is provided. Where, because of site constraints or other factors, the building's primary facade is unable to be oriented parallel to the major road providing driveway access, each facade which is clearly visible from a public right-of-way or public area of adjoining properties shall be designed with full architectural treatment. 
c.	Building orientation shall be such that service areas are placed out of view from public rights-of-way, parking areas and adjacent properties. Structural screening and/or landscape screening to comply with these standards shall be used to visually encapsulate service areas. 
d.	Garage doors and bays associated with any use within the corridor shall be located perpendicular to the public right-of-way providing primary driveway access. 
(8)	Roof design and materials (Illustration No. 6 following the end of this chapter). Roof features shall be in scale with the building's mass and complement the character of the structure, adjacent developments and neighborhoods. Roofs shall be constructed of durable, high quality materials in order to enhance the appearance and attractiveness of the community. Roofs shall incorporate the design elements and materials listed below: 
a.	The design of roof structures shall be flat with a parapet wall, hip roof, or gable roof. The parapet wall and cornice shall include decorative brackets. Parapet edges or slopes may use concrete tiles or terra cotta. If the roof surface is visible, hipped or gabled, the material shall be metal standing seam or "V" crimp metal, shingle or tile. 
b.	Roof-like appurtenances such as false roofs, parapets and other similar features may be allowed if such features are required for mechanical equipment screening or acoustical control that cannot be accomplished through utilization of approved roof styles. Application of such roof-like features shall be accomplished in such a manner as to minimize the appearance of a flat roof design. 
c.	Roofs shall be designed to be of such height, bulk and mass so as to appear structural even when the design is nonstructural. 
(9)	Fence and wall design (see Illustration No. 7 following the end of this chapter). Design and construction quality of fences and nonbuilding walls are important visual reflections of community character and quality. In order to promote quality site aesthetics, fence and wall design and construction shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.	Fences and walls, whether required for project approval or whether incorporated into overall project design, shall be designed as an integral part of the principal structure. Such design shall include the use of similar materials, colors and finishes as the principal structure. 
b.	Fences and walls shall be architecturally designed with offsets, raised elements and landscape pockets to avoid an expansive monolithic appearance. 
c.	Chain link and vinyl fencing is not permitted, unless screened from view from public rights-of-way, parking lots, and adjacent properties. If foliage is used for screening, the foliage must screen the fence from view within 720 days of installation of the fence. Wood fencing shall not be permitted under any circumstances. 
(10)	Screening of mechanical equipment. Lack of, or inadequate screening of, mechanical equipment can have negative visual impacts on the City's streetscape, ambient landscape or community image. Such impacts shall be minimized through compliance with the following requirements: 
a.	Mechanical equipment located on the ground, such as air conditioning units, heating units, satellite dishes, irrigation pumps, propane tanks and refilling areas, utilities lift stations and the like shall be screened from public view. Screening shall, at a minimum, be at the same height as the equipment. Structural screening shall be architecturally integrated into the overall project design and shall be compatible, in terms of style, construction materials, colors, and finish, with the principal structure. Landscaping may be substituted for structural screening if plantings are compatible with the landscape plan for the project and are of such size and maturity as to be able to provide a fully opaque screen at time of planting. 
b.	Equipment and appurtenances mounted on rooftops shall be kept to a minimum. All exposed rooftop mounted equipment and appurtenances shall be fully screened from view from any public right-of-way. All screening shall, at a minimum, be at the same height as the equipment and appurtenances. Screening shall be an integral part of the design of the building and shall be architecturally consistent with the style, colors, construction materials and finish of the building. 
(11)	Exterior lighting (see Illustration No. 8 following the end of this chapter). Lighting fixture design and placement are important components of an attractive urban environment as well as important to public safety. In order to enhance site aesthetics and minimize visual distraction, yet maintain adequate public safety, project lighting shall comply with the requirements listed below: 
a.	An exterior building and site lighting master plan detailing areas and structures requiring illumination, lighting fixture styles, light source and light levels shall be included as part of a project's submittal for approval. 
b.	Recessed lighting fixtures shall be required in order to conceal the actual source of the light so as to reduce glare and direct the light to specific areas while shielding other areas. Lighting shall be of the metal halide type, or other lighting that is uniform in color and intensity. 
c.	Backlighting. Backlit awnings/canopies are not permitted. 
d.	Parking areas. Parking lot lighting shall be designed as follows: 
1.	Light poles shall be located only within landscaped strips, interior landscape islands, or terminal landscape islands. Light poles are not allowed in corridor buffers. 
2.	The maximum height of the light pole shall be 20 feet, including the base. 
3.	The minimum setback of the light source from the property line shall be a horizontal distance of ten feet. 
4.	Neon lighting is not permitted. 
5.	Building illumination and architectural lighting shall be indirect and with no visible light source. 
6.	Ground level light fixtures shall be of the burial vault type or shall be fully screened by landscaping materials. 
(12)	Utilities. The location and aesthetic treatment of utilities is an important factor in creating an attractive urban environment. In order to enhance and maintain the image of quality in the urban environment, utilities construction and placement shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.	All utility lines, whether new or relocated, shall be installed underground. Any new lines within the corridor right-of-way that are required to serve the development shall be installed underground. 
b.	Utility conduit and utility panels/boxes shall be painted to match the color of the building on which they are placed. Additionally, panels/boxes shall be located on the same facade considered the service side. 
c.	Water and sewer lift stations, pump houses and similar features shall, be located, to the extent possible, at the rear of the project site and shall be fully screened from view by structural or vegetative means. Where screening is accomplished by structural means, such screening shall be compatible in design and color with the main building. 
(13)	Outdoor storage and display. Outdoor storage and display of equipment or merchandise is not permitted, unless permitted pursuant to Section 3-133(10) in the B-2, B-3, B-4 and B-5 commercial zoning districts or screened from view from public rights-of-way, parking lots, and adjacent properties. 
(14)	Accessory uses and structures. Structures and uses accessory to principal structures and uses shall be integrated into project design in a manner such that they will not detract from site aesthetics. Such structures and uses shall comply with the requirements listed below: 
a.	Accessory structures shall be designed and constructed so as to be compatible with the architectural design of the principal structure. Exterior finishes, colors and materials on accessory structures shall be similar to those used on the principal structure. 
b.	Site furnishings such as benches, bicycle racks, newspaper racks, trash receptacles and the like shall be compatible with the architectural design of the principal structure. Permanent shopping cart storage shall be contained within the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 23-02, § 1(505.03), 1-8-2003; Ord. No. 15-04, §§ 1—3, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 21-07, § 2, 9-5-2007; Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012)  
Sec. 5-124. - Landscaping of corridor buffer. 
A minimum 20 feet landscaped corridor buffer shall be provided by the developer/property owner along the property's frontage on a designated Gateway Corridor. 
(1)	The buffer shall be planted with live oak or other canopy trees with a minimum three-inch to five-inch diameter at breast height (DBH), and 15 feet in height at planting, along a line ten feet back from the right-of-way line. The number of trees shall meet the requirements found in the City's Landscape and Buffer Standards regulations, as amended. 
(2)	Xeriscaping is strongly encouraged in order to minimize water usage for irrigation. 
(3)	Shrubs may be planted as a substitute for grass. When shrubs are planted, that portion of the landscaped buffer not covered by the shrubs shall be sodded. The ground area surrounding the shrubs for a radius of 24 inches shall be mulched or covered with groundcover plants and mulched. 
(Ord. No. 23-02, § 1(505.04), 1-8-2003; Ord. No. 15-04, § 4, 11-3-2004)  
Sec. 5-125. - Parking areas. 
(a)	Perimeter planting (see Illustration No. 9 following the end of this chapter). Plantings located around the perimeter of buildings enhance site aesthetics and increase green space. All projects shall incorporate perimeter plantings into project design in accordance with the requirements listed below: 
(1)	Perimeter landscape plantings shall be located adjacent to the primary facade and along any blank facade wall areas that are, or will be, exposed to the general public. Such plantings shall also be included at entrance areas, plazas and courtyards. 
(2)	Perimeter landscaping shall consist of a combination of trees, palms, shrubs and ground covers. Planting material type, size and spacing shall, at a minimum, be consistent with the requirements of this Code. 
(b)	Pedestrian access to properties. A clear, safe and convenient pedestrian path shall be provided from the sidewalk along the corridor right-of-way to the main entry door of each principal structure. The pedestrian path shall be functionally delineated by using construction materials that are different than the materials used for the construction of the parking area (e.g., use of brick or concrete for the pedestrian access when the parking lot is an asphalt surface). Such access shall be at least four-foot-wide paved walkways with at least two feet of landscaping on each side leading to entranceways. Access across driveways and parking aisles shall be delineated by crosswalk striping at locations that accommodate convenient pedestrian access. 
(c)	Location and design of parking areas. Parking areas may be within the front, rear or side yard setbacks. 
(d)	Cross access. Driveways, curb cuts, parking and internal roadway/traffic circulation shall be designed so that uninterrupted vehicular access from parcel to parcel is achieved.  
Sec. 5-126. - Exposed metal building facades prohibited. 
No building permit for the construction of any principal or accessory nonresidential building, or for any addition to a principal or accessory building, shall be issued if such building or addition will have an exposed metal facade that will be visible from the right-of way of any roadway defined herein as a "Gateway Corridor." This requirement shall not apply to any exposed metal roof or roof treatment for which an exposed metal roof is considered an integral part of, and is compatible with, a recognized architectural building style. 
City of Debary Gateway Corridor Standards Illustrations  

Illustration No. 1 
      

Illustration No. 3 
                   
Sec. 5-127. - Gateway Corridor Sign regulations. 
(1)	Applicability: The Gateway Corridor Sign regulations shall apply to all new signs within the Gateway Corridor with the exception of permitted "face" changes to legal non-conforming signs. 
(2)	The sum total of allowed sign area for single use developments (not including multi-tenant development) within the Gateway Corridor is 140 square feet. The total copy area includes the copy area for the monument sign, the wall signage and the window signage. 
(a)	Monument signs. One monument sign shall be permitted per street frontage or per each 400 feet of street frontage, whichever is greater up to a maximum of three signs per parcel or premise. Furthermore, where two or more ground signs are placed along a single street frontage, such signs shall be separated by a minimum distance of 100 feet. The maximum background copy area for each sign shall not exceed 48 square feet and the maximum height shall not exceed eight feet from the average grade elevation. 
1.	Design standards: Vertical structure supports for monument signs shall be concealed in an enclosed base. The width of the enclosed base shall be equal to at least two-thirds of the horizontal width of the sign surface. No copy area shall extend or be placed on the base of the sign. 
2.	Construction materials: The base shall be of a low maintenance finish which is compatible with the architectural style of the principal building limited to split face block, stone, finished metal, synthetic EFIS stucco or brick. 
3.	Illumination: Monument signs may be internally illuminated pursuant to section 5-36(e). They may also be externally illuminated with a burial fixture or hidden within a planter bed. The light source should not be able to be seen from adjoining properties or roads. 
4.	Setbacks: Five feet from all property lines. New signs shall be erected at least ten feet from any side property line and five from all other property lines. 
5.	Landscaping: Whenever possible, new monument signs shall be encased in a landscape planter at least two feet in height or a landscaped area of no less than four feet wide on each side of the sign. The planter or landscape area may contain any combination of low lying shrubs, ground cover and flowers. 
6.	All signs shall be erected above the enclosed base of the sign and no sign shall be mounted directly in front or to the rear of the base. 
7.	Signs made of wood or vinyl sheets shall be prohibited in the Gateway Corridor. 
(b)	Wall signs. Per Article II, Sign Regulations, section 5-39(c). 
(c)	Window signs. A maximum of 20 percent of the glassed area of a window or door may contain window signage. 
(d)	Pole signs are not permitted within the Gateway Corridor except as expressly permitted in the B-6 Interstate Commercial Zoning District on Dirksen Drive as a special exception and when City Council determines that there is no practical way to locate a monument sign on the property due to the requirements for vehicular movement, pedestrian or vehicular safety, or aesthetics of the development. Such pole sign and/or structure may not exceed 15 feet in height and shall have a ground clearance of ten feet in order to provide adequate visibility. The square footage of copy area of such a pole sign may not exceed the maximum permitted square footage of a monument sign in the same zoning district. 
(e)	Signs in multitenant developments. See Article, II Sign Regulations, Section 5-41. 
(f)	All signs allowed under the Gateway Corridor Sign Regulations shall comply with all other provisions of the City of Debary Sign Regulations (Article II, Sign Regulations) including section 5-42, Non-conforming Signs. 
(3)	Electronic message center signs are permitted in place of a manual changeable copy board sign in the City's Gateway Corridor. An electronic message center sign is a sign that is capable of displaying electronic images, including text, where the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. 
(a)	Except as specifically permitted in an approved comprehensive sign plan or planned development agreement, electronic message center signs within the Gateway Corridor shall meet the following design, construction, location, and operational standards: 
1.	Only one sign is permitted within the same development or contiguous parcel of property under single ownership, control, or use. For purposes of this section, property is contiguous where it is separated only by a public road. 
2.	Only the identification of the tenants within the center or building shall be permitted; off-site advertisement is prohibited. 
3.	Signs must be set back at least five feet from the front property line and ten feet from side property lines. 
4.	The display screen shall not be oriented toward or face a residential zoning district. 
5.	Signs must be constructed as monument signs and have landscaping provided around the base of the sign. 
6.	The display screen must be integral to the design of the sign structure and shall not be the dominant element. The display screen area shall not exceed 50 percent of the sign face. The display area shall apply towards the maximum amount of signage permitted per each site regardless of whether it is illuminated or utilized. 
7.	Operational limitations. Such displays shall contain static messages only, changes only through dissolve or fade transitions or with the use of other subtle transitions and frame effects that do not have the appearance of moving text or images and shall not have movement or the appearance or optical illusion of movement are permitted. 
8.	Minimum display time. Sign copy may change only at intervals of not less than 30 seconds. Continuous scrolling, animation, or flashing of lights is prohibited. A notarized affidavit shall be provided with the sign permit application stating the sign will be constructed and operated in compliance with City code, and that it will not flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, or vary in intensity or color. 
9.	The display screen is restricted to a single permanent background image, per copy change. 
10.	Only static graphics shall be displayed on the display screen area. Obscene, immoral and/or lewd graphics and/or language shall not be displayed at any time on the display screen area. 
11.	The display screen area shall provide a high-resolution picture quality with pixel spacing of 16 millimeters or less. 
12.	A photometric plan outlining the proposed illumination levels in foot-candles or a certification of compliance from the sign manufacturer shall be provided with the sign permit, which shall demonstrate/certify that illumination levels will not exceed 0.3 foot-candles (Lux meter) above ambient light levels, as measured from a preset distance depending on sign area. Measuring distance shall be determined with the following formula: The square root of the product of the sign area and 100. 
Example using a 48 square foot sign: Measurement Distance = v (48 Sq. Ft. x 100) = 69.3' 
13.	Automatic dimming controls such as photocell technology shall be installed to automatically dim the electronic display area as ambient light conditions change. 
14.	A malfunctioning sign must be turned off or display a blank screen. 
15.	Electronic message center signs shall not be added to, or used to change or expand any nonconforming sign. 
16.	City government electronic message center signs shall provide necessary public information, including, but not limited to directions, schedules, or information regarding public facilities or places and events of general interest within the City. The City Council may approve a government sign that deviates from the standards in this section upon finding that the deviation is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
17.	An information sheet shall be submitted as part of the sign permit application which includes the manufacturing specifications of the display screen being installed, along with contact information of the property owner, sign contractor and the display screen maintenance provider. 
(b)	In addition to the enforcement and penalties provided in section 1-14, failure to adhere to the operating standards contained in subsection 3-128 (3)(a) above shall result in suspension or revocation of the sign permit, as follows: 
1.	For a first violation within any continuous 12-month period, the sign permit shall be suspended for a period of 24 continuous hours. 
2.	For a second violation within any continuous 12-month period, the sign permit shall be suspended for a one-week period. 
3.	For a third violation within any continuous 12-month period, the sign permit shall be revoked, the sign must be removed from the property, and no permit for an electronic message center at the site shall be issued for a period of one year. 
4.	Finding of violation: 
a.	The City Manager or designee shall provide written notice of the violation and a hearing date and time. Notice of the violation and hearing shall be personally delivered to the permit holder or responsible person at the premises where the sign is located. If the recipient at the premises is not the permit holder, a copy shall also be sent to the permit holder by certified mail. 
b.	The hearing shall be held before the code enforcement Special Master. The Special Master shall consider all relevant evidence presented by the parties. All parties shall have an opportunity to respond, to present evidence and argument, to conduct cross-examination and submit rebuttal evidence, and to be represented by counsel or other qualified representative. The lack of actual knowledge of, acquiescence to, participation in, or responsibility for, a violation on the part of the permit holder shall not be a defense. 
c.	If the Special Master finds that a violation has occurred, the Special Master shall suspend or revoke the sign permit and provide written notice of the decision and suspension period or revocation date within ten days of the date of the hearing. 
d.	The Special Master's final order is subject to review in a court of competent jurisdiction in Volusia County, Florida, as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 02-12, § 2(exh. A), 9-5-2012; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2013 )  
Secs. 5-128, 5-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SOUTHEAST MIXED-USE AREA/TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (SEMUA/TOD) OVERLAY DISTRICT STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 5-130. - Regulating plan. 
(a)	Background. The Florida Department of Transportation in cooperation with the federal government and local officials from Orange, Osceola, Seminole and Volusia Counties is implementing a commuter rail transit service, named SunRail, linking DeLand on the north with downtown Orlando and Poinciana on the south. SunRail will run 61 miles with 17 stations along the existing CSX railroad. Phase 1 of SunRail is 31 miles and will connect DeBary/Fort Florida Road to Sand Lake Road in Orange County. Phase I includes the construction of a rail station near the intersection of Fort Florida Road and U.S. Hwy. 17-92 (Fort Florida Station) in DeBary. The SunRail station plans call for a park and ride lot with a bus dropoff area for the DeBary station. The DeBary station is near some of Central Florida's most scenic parks and significant cultural resources, and is easily accessible to Interstate 4. SunRail commuter rail service will be available in the city beginning in 2013. 
Commuter rail improves transportation options for DeBary residents, many of whom work in the Orlando area to the south, as well as potentially creating economic development opportunities through a concentrated mix of uses to include retail commercial, office, institutional uses and medium and high density residential development. 
In response to commuter rail service in DeBary, the City Council adopted the city's evaluation-based amendments, which includes a Transit Oriented Development (TOD) Overlay District. Transit oriented development is the functional integration of land use and transit. It is a land use planning concept that promotes a mix of residential, commercial, office and public uses, all within a comfortable walking distance to maximize access to public transportation, and incorporates features to encourage transit ridership. 
(b)	Purpose. To establish the regulatory framework to implement the TOD Overlay District adopted by the City's Comprehensive Plan through the adoption of a regulating plan that will create the desired built form. This regulating plan promotes compact land use patterns that support energy efficiency and multimodal transportation options as well as require street design that creates public space that is safe and welcoming for pedestrians. The general purposes of this document are to: 
(1)	Encourage transit use; 
(2)	Increase housing opportunities; 
(3)	To provide standards to ensure a high quality appearance; 
(4)	Provide a functional mix of land uses; 
(5)	Promote energy efficient land use patterns; 
(6)	Promote walking and bicycling. 
(c)	General applicability. No premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and no principal building, accessory structure or sign shall be hereafter erected, constructed, moved or altered except in conformity with these regulations. 
(1)	The Transit-oriented Development Overlay District is within the Southeast Mixed Use Area (SEMUA/TOD) as depicted on the City's Future Land Use Map and as described in subsection 5-130(e), TOD boundaries, of this regulating plan. 
(2)	Reserved. 
(3)	This article applies to all those properties that choose to develop under the TOD Overlay District. Such properties shall comply with the City of DeBary Comprehensive Plan specifically Future Land Use Policy 5.406 (a)(5) and this regulating plan. 
(4)	The standards and requirements put forth by this regulating plan (chapter 5, article VI) shall supersede the standards and requirements presently specified in the Land Development Code unless not addressed herein. Failure of this regulating plan to address a particular condition or term of restriction shall not relieve an applicant of the necessity of complying with the law governing said permitting requirements, conditions, terms or restrictions. 
(5)	Agricultural Exemption. All land with an underlying agricultural zoning designation shall have the right to utilize the property for agricultural purposes until such time that the property owner chooses to develop under these overlay criteria. 
(6)	This article was created with images and figures as visual aids to enhance understanding and comprehension, however, in the event there is a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this article and any figure or illustration, the text shall prevail. 
(7)	The regulations of this article are organized by development standards with subarea requirements interspersed throughout each category of development standards. The TOD Overlay District includes four subareas. These areas are approximate distances to allow flexibility for desired development to be approved by the DRC. The city may extend these sub-areas if the developments meet the purpose of the TOD Overlay District. 
U.S. Hwy. 17-92 —Developments facing U.S. Hwy. 17-92 involving direct design treatments from back of curb to building. 
TOD Core —Properties within approximately one-fourth mile of the DeBary Commuter Rail Station. 
Outside TOD Core —Properties between approximately one-fourth mile and one-half mile of the DeBary Commuter Rail Station. 
Transitional areas —Properties beyond approximately one-half mile of the DeBary Commuter Rail Station. 
(d)	Administrative procedures. 
(1)	A preapplication meeting shall be required prior to submitting any development proposal within the TOD Overlay District. The purpose of this meeting is to review the TOD Overlay District requirements and discuss any deviations from the strict application of the regulation that may be addressed with a development agreement approved by City Council. 
(2)	A development agreement with the City of Debary is suggested, but not required. However, if a proposed development is going to utilize any bonuses or incentives or is going to deviate from the strict application of this regulating plan, a development agreement shall be required. If a development agreement is utilized by the developer, this agreement will specify any incentives, bonuses and waivers, as provided by the City of DeBary Land Development Code, that the developer may wish to employ in the design of the proposed site. The development agreement shall be created based on a standard form provided by the city. All incentives and bonuses shall be presented to City Staff for review and recommendation prior to the Development Agreement being presented to the City Council for approval. Appropriate incentives and bonuses may be approved by City Council on a project by project basis. Upon approval by the City Council, the developer of the proposed project will have a clear guide to rules of development for the project. 
(3)	Those properties which develop under the TOD Overlay District shall not be required to rezone their property. It shall be administratively rezoned by ordinance to TOD zoning concurrently with Subdivision Overall Development Plan approval or final site plan approval by City Council. 
(4)	If subdivision is necessary, it shall be in accordance with chapter 4, division 2, Subdivision Regulations, sections 4-41 through 4-47. The Subdivision Overall Development Plan shall also be reviewed against this regulating plan for code compliance. 
(5)	Platting of property within the TOD Overlay District shall also be in accordance with chapter 2, section 2-4 of the City's Land Development Code. 
(6)	A final site plan shall be submitted in accordance with division 3, Final Site Plan Approval Procedures, and be reviewed by the Development Review Committee (DRC) against this regulating plan for code compliance in order to obtain a development order. 
(7)	For mixed-use projects the City shall calculate total allocation of land uses within the TOD Overlay District, based on the proposed mix of uses. Allocation of the proposed uses shall determine allocation of density and intensity (i.e., a commercial/office/residential mixed-use development on 1 acre, with 50 percent retail commercial, 25 percent office and 25 percent residential uses constructed uses would attribute one-half acre to retail commercial allocation, one-fourth acre of office and one-fourth acre of residential allocation to the overall allowance for the TOD Overlay District). 
(8)	The Land Development Manager (LDM) shall have the authority to grant minor deviations from final site and subdivision plans where less than 10 percent of the development plan is impacted by proposed revisions. Such revisions shall include, but not be limited to the following: setbacks, height, density/intensity, parking, buffers, open space and other site design dimensions. However, all deviations from the plan must meet the minimum criteria set within the Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code, unless a waiver is sought through a Development Agreement. Final site plans shall be updated to include all proposed revisions and be resubmitted to the City. 
(e)	Transit Oriented Development Boundaries. The TOD Overlay District is comprised of approximately 261 acres and is located on the south side of Dirksen Road on the east and west sides of U.S. Hwy. 17-92 running approximately 210 feet south of Buckley Drive. 
Figure 1: TOD Boundaries
 
(f)	Incentives. Incentives for developing within the TOD Overlay District include the elimination of the Planned Unit Development zoning requirement, higher densities, increased building heights, additional permitted land uses, and reduced parking and stormwater management requirements. The City may also consider other incentives for development, including but not limited to economic incentives, expedited permitting, and development and infrastructure standards to enhance the physical and economic feasibility of transit-oriented and pedestrian-friendly development. Such incentives may include: 
(1)	A 25 percent discount on final site plan application base fee; 
(2)	Expedited permit reviews; 
(3)	Modification of impact fees (such as, but not limited to, residential, thoroughfare, road and stormwater management by requesting fee reductions from Volusia County and other appropriate agencies); 
(4)	Public/private partnerships to provide infrastructure; 
(5)	Modification of building permit fees; 
(6)	Establishment of a Community Development District or Special Assessment District; 
(7)	Any other financing mechanism deemed appropriate. 
(g)	Nonconforming uses. All nonconforming properties, uses and structures previously developed under the TOD Overlay District that do not conform to this regulating plan shall be subject to chapter 1, section 1-12 Nonconforming lots, structures and uses, of the City Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 2(Exh. A), 12-29-2010; Ord. No. 02-15 , § 2, (Exh. A), 8-26-2015)  
Sec. 5-131. - Land use and building density. 
(a)	Purpose and intent. 
(1)	The TOD Overlay District is to improve quality of life by creating walkable and livable areas where people are able to reduce vehicle usage without sacrificing access to neighborhood and community amenities. This is accomplished by the following: 
a.	Encourage transit-supportive land uses, which generally have higher densities and intensity within the TOD Core, then stepping down in density, intensity and height to promote neighborhood compatibility. 
b.	Create opportunities for shorter, multipurpose trips by encouraging a mix of uses within the TOD Overlay District. 
c.	Locate the highest level of activity and mix of uses within the TOD Core and along major streets. 
d.	Provide for and encourage development and redevelopment that contains a compatible mix of residential, commercial services, and employment within close proximity to each other and to the DeBary Commuter Rail Station. 
e.	These areas are approximate distances to allow flexibility for desired development to be approved by the DRC. 
(2)	The provisions of this section shall apply within the area identified on the Future Land Use Map as the "Southeast Mixed-Use Area/Transit Oriented Development Overlay District." 
(b)	Compatible land uses. Each of the properties within the TOD Overlay District maintains their current zoning designations until such time as they are developed or redeveloped. Then an administrative rezoninq to PUD will be processed by the City. To further the intent and purpose of the TOD Overlay District, certain specific and incompatible uses shall be prohibited.. 
(1)	Purpose and intent. 
a.	The purpose of the TOD Overlay District is to provide additional development restrictions and opportunities within the TOD area consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan. The plan provides for a compact, pedestrian and transit oriented multi-use and mixed-use development area of retail and service, to support the overall growth and development of the city. It is the intent of this section that adequate flexibility be provided to accommodate the purposes and style of development described in the plan. 
b.	The provisions of this section shall apply within the area identified on the zoning map as the "TOD Overlay District." 
c.	Proposed developments are encouraged, to the greatest extent practicable, to be presented as an assemblage of smaller properties or parcels to achieve the greatest development potential and provide for more cohesive integration into the overall development framework within the TOD Overlay District 
d.	Parcels that are located at transition lines between subareas of the TOD District Overlay may be allowed to reasonably continue the development densities and intensities from the more intense subarea into the less intense subarea, if it is necessary to complete a development project and if approved by City Council. 
e.	Mixed-use development proposals shall be calculated toward the total allocation of land uses within the TOD Overlay District, based on the proposed mix of uses. Allocation of the proposed uses shall determine allocation (i.e., a commercial/ office/residential mixed-use development on one acre, with 50 percent retail commercial, 25 percent office and 25 percent residential uses constructed uses would attribute one-half acre to retail commercial allocation, one-fourth acre of office and one-fourth acre of residential allocation to the overall allowance for the TOD Overlay District). 
(2)	Additional regulations applicable to permitted and prohibited uses within the TOD Overlay District as specified in the following Comprehensive Land Use Table. 
P (Permitted) 	— (Prohibited) 
Residential Uses 	U.S. Hwy. 17-92 	TOD Core 	Outside TOD Core 	Transitional Area 	Additional Requirements 
Assisted/Congregate Living 	— 	P 	P 	P 	
Condominium Residential 	p 	P 	P 	P 	
Duplex Residential 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Group Residential 	— 	P 	P 	P 	
Class A Home Occupation 	P 	P 	P 	P 	In accordance with chapter 3, article III, division 4, section 3-127 of the City of DeBary Land Development Code. 
Mobile Home Residential 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Multifamily Residential 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Single-Family Residential 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Townhouse Residential 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 
P (Permitted) 	— (Prohibited) 
Commercial Uses 	U.S. Hwy. 17-92 	TOD Core 	Outside TOD Core 	Transitional Area 	Additional Requirements 
Art Gallery 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Arts Centers (Galleries, Schools & Workshops) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Includes art, dance, music, culinary, martial arts. 
Auction House 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Automobile Body Shops 	— 	— 	— 	P 	No outside storage of vehicles. All work areas are to be within enclosed building. 
Automobile Driving Schools 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Automobile Service Station 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Automotive Detail/Washing 	— 	— 	— 	P 	Not allowed within 100 feet of corner. The use must meet all applicable design requirements in this document. 
Automotive or Vehicular Sales 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Includes auto, motorcycle, boat and personal watercraft. 
Automotive Rentals 	— 	— 	— 	P 	No outside storage of vehicles. 
Automotive Repair Services 	— 	— 	— 	P 	No outside storage of vehicles. Al! work areas are to be within enclosed building. 
Back Office Operation Center 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Bakery/Confectioners/Deli 	P 	P 	P 	P 	May include on-site preparation of goods. Outside service is permitted. 
Bars, Pubs and Lounges 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Limited to 5,000 gross square feet unless accessory to a restaurant as primary use. Outside service is permitted. 
Bed & Breakfast 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Bicycle Sales and Rentals 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Book and Stationery Stores 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Bowling Alleys 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Building Material Sales and Storage 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Call Center 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Campus Employment 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Customer Service Centers 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Catering Services 	— 	— 	P 	P 	Limited to 5,000 gross square feet. May include on-site preparation. 
Civic Clubs 	P 	P 	P 	P 	i.e., American Legion, Moose Lodge, Masonic Lodge, etc. 
Coin-Operated Amusements 	— 	P** 	P 	P 	Nongambling-related uses not greater than 2,500 gross square feet. ** Permitted as accessory to restaurant or bar. 
Commercial Parking Garage 	— 	P 	P 	P 	
Communication Towers 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Not exceeding maximum height over 70 feet in height above ground level. Encouraged to be placed on top of buildings or integrated into the buildings' architecture. 
Consumer Repair Services 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Contractor's Shop, Storage and Equipment Yard 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Convenience Store without Fuel Dispensers 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Convenience Stores with Fuel Dispensers 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Dental Laboratories 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Employment Agencies 	— 	P 	P 	P 	Excluding day labor agencies. 
Exercise Gym and Health Spas 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Financial Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Drive-through windows only permitted along U.S. Hwy. 17-92. 
Funeral Homes with Crematory as an Accessory Use 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Funeral Services 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
General Retail Sales 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
General Retail Sales 
(Convenience) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Maximum size of 2,000 gross square feet. No fueling stations. No fueling stations except in Transitional Areas. 
Hardware Stores 	— 	— 	P** 	P 	No outside storage or display. ** Limited to 5,000 gross square feet. 
Hotel-Motel 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Indoor Amusements/Arcade 	— 	P 	P 	P 	Only as accessory to restaurants or bars, pubs or lounges. 
Kennels 	— 	— 	— 	P 	A kennel use must be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure. 
Liquor/Wine Sales 	— 	P 	P 	P 	Limited to 2,500 gross square feet. Outside service is permitted. 
Off-Site Accessory Parking 	— 	P 	P 	P 	Accessory to primary use off-site businesses. 
Office (General) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Office (Medical) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Office (Professional) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Pawn Shop Services 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Personal Care Services (Hair/Beauty Salons/Spas) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Personal Dry Cleaning Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Drop-off/pickup only. 
Personal Laundry Services 	P 	P** 	P 	P 	No bulk laundry or cleaning plant, no diaper services or linen supply services allowed in TOD Overlay District. ** Drop-off/pickup only. 
Personal Storage/Miniwarehouse 	— 	— 	— 	P 	No outdoor storage. 
Pest Exterminators 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Pet Grooming Services 	— 	— 	P 	P 	Maximum size of 2,000 gross square feet. All services within enclosed structure. 
Pharmacies 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Drive-through windows only permitted along U.S. Hwy. 17-92. 
Plant Nursery (Retail) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Plant Nursery (Wholesale/Retail) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Printing and Publishing 	— 	P 	P 	P 	Limited to 2,000 gross square feet within TOD Core, otherwise not greater than 5,000 gross square feet. 
Radio and Television Broadcasting Stations 	— 	P 	P 	P 	Limited to 5,000 gross square feet. 
Restaurant (Bakery/Deli) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Maximum size of 5,000 gross square feet. Outside service is permitted. 
Restaurant (Catering) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Maximum size of 5,000 gross square feet. Outside service is permitted. 
Restaurant (Fast Food) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Drive-through windows only permitted along U.S. Hwy. 17-92. Outside service is permitted. 
Restaurant (General) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Drive-through windows only permitted along U.S. Hwy. 17-92. Outside service is permitted. 
Retail Repair Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Repair services for personal clothing, jewelry or electronics. 
Rug Cleaning Establishments 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Scrap and Salvage 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Special Event Entertainment 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Special events permit required. 
Theaters (Movie and Live) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Veterinary Services 	— 	— 	P 	P 	A veterinary services use must be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure. No outdoor kennels or runs. 
 
P (Permitted) 	— (Prohibited) 
Civic Uses 	U.S. Hwy. 17-92 	TOD Core 	Outside TOD Core 	Transitional Area 	Additional Requirements 
College and University Facilities 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
College and University Satellite Facilities 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Community Recreation 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Common Open Space 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Convention Center 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Day Care Services 	— 	P 	P 	P 	Limited to 5,000 gross square feet. 
Government Postal Facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Hospital Services (General) 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Museums 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Parks and Plazas 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Private Primary Educational Facilities 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Private Secondary Educational Facilities 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Public Primary Educational Facilities 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Public Secondary Educational Facilities 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Public Safety Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Police, Fire, Ambulance, EMS. 
Religious Assembly (Churches) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Technical/Trade Schools 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Telecommunication Tower 	— 	P 	P 	P 	Limited to 70 feet maximum height from ground surface to pinnacle. Encouraged to be placed on top of buildings or integrated into the buildings' architecture. 
Transportation Terminal 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Urgent Care Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Limited to 5,000 gross square feet. 
 
P (Permitted); S (Special Exception) 	— (Prohibited) 
Commercial Uses 	U.S. Hwy. 17-92 	TOD Core 	Outside TOD Core 	Transitional Area 	Additional Requirements 
Bakeries 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Bottling and distribution plants 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Convenience stores without gasoline pumps 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Sale (retail or wholesale) of products or parts manufactured or assembled on the premises 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Employment agencies offering day labor services and where workers congregate at the business location to receive daily assignments 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Essential utility services 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Flex-space 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Industrial vocational training school 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Laundries and linen services 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Machinery and machine shops 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Manufacturing 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Micro-breweries 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Printing, publishing and engraving 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Publicly owned parks and recreational areas 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Restaurants. Types A and B, when contained within the principal industrial structure 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Sign and paint shop 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
Testing of materials, equipment and products 	— 	— 	S 	S 	
 
(c)	Reserved. 
(d)	Density/intensity. Highest density within the TOD Core then stepping down in density, intensity and height. 
(1)	TOD Core—Minimum 10 du/acre; Maximum 32 du/acre. 
(2)	Outside TOD Core/Transitional Area—Minimum 8 du/acre; Maximum 20 du/acre. 
(3)	Intensity—Minimum 0.4, Maximum 2.0 FAR. 
(4)	Parcel assemblage of at least 1 acre is required for residential mixed-use developments, 2 acres is recommended for residential mixed-use developments in order to meet minimum residential densities. 
(5)	Residential densities below these minimums may be permitted for sites with physical constraints. This shall be determined on a case-by-case basis through PRC during the development review process. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 2(Exh. A), 12-29-2010; Ord. No. 02-15 , § 2, (Exh. A), 8-26-2015)  
Sec. 5-132. - Circulation, connection and streetscape standards. 
(a)	Purpose and intent. 
(1)	Ensure that site design promotes efficient pedestrian and vehicle circulation patterns. 
(2)	Ensure the creation of a high-quality street and sidewalk environment that is supportive of pedestrian and transit mobility and that is appropriate to the roadway context. 
(3)	Provide a convenient, safe, and pleasant pedestrian system appropriate for people of all ages and abilities. 
(4)	Ensure that trees, sidewalks, and buildings, three of the major elements that make up a streetscape, are arranged in a manner that supports the creation of a safe, human-scaled, and well-defined roadway environment. 
(5)	Ensure that there are multiple travel route options for all transportation modes in and around the TOD Overlay District. 
(6)	Ensure that vehicular parking is accommodated in a manner that enriches and supports, rather than diminishes, the pedestrian environment, and that does not create a barrier between the pedestrian environment and the buildings. 
(7)	Ensure that sites are developed in a manner that supports and encourages connectivity for all modes of travel and that new and existing development, pedestrian and bicycle paths, and open spaces complement and link to one another. 
(8)	Connectivity to other areas outside the TOD Overlay District. 
(b)	Roadway types. 
(1)	The following types of roadways are to ensure a cohesive development pattern along the streets, and to create safe, pleasant and convenient walking environments. 
a.	U.S. Hwy. 17-92 —This is a primary state roadway that traverses the center of the TOD Overlay District and carries the highest level of vehicular traffic and transit to the internal mixed-use developments and being most appropriate for nonresidential development. A landscaped boulevard can be created along the medians to enhance the pedestrian environment. 
 
Boulevard (Source: City of Panama City Beach, 2010)
b.	TOD Core streets —These streets will be primary interior roadways of mixed-use developments to support a sufficient population density and mix of uses connecting to U.S. Hwy. 17-92 and the Debary Commuter Rail Station. These streets will carry vehicular, transit and pedestrian flow and being most appropriate for nonresidential and mixed-use developments. A median landscaped boulevard and avenue can be provided to accentuate the entry drive and primary streets with interconnecting alleyways for activities "behind the scene", such as parking, loading areas, trash collection, utility location, etc. 
c.	Pedestrian priority streets —These streets serve as primary pedestrian routes outside TOD Core leading directly to the TOD Core, connecting to neighborhoods, trails, parks and other public facilities, and being most appropriate for neighborhood commercial, and multifamily and single-family residential developments. A landscaped avenue, road and parkway can be provided with interconnecting alleyways for activities "behind the scene", such as parking, loading areas, trash collection, utility location, etc. 
d.	Local streets —These streets serve as secondary routes within the Transitional Area making up the rest of the street network, while pedestrian accommodation is still prioritized and being most appropriate for commercial and business park developments. A landscaped avenue and roadway can be provided with interconnecting alleyways for activities "behind the scene", such as parking, loading areas, trash collection, utility location, etc. 
 
Avenue (left) and Road (Source: City of Panama City Beach, 2010)
(c)	Streetscape. 
(1)	The following streetscape standards specify the typical configuration of the roadway types: U.S. Hwy. 17-92, TOD Core streets, pedestrian priority streets and local streets. 
a.	U.S. Hwy. 17-92. 
1.	The streetscape shall include the following: 
i.	Street tree/furniture zone shall be the width of the existing unpaved right-of-way, which includes the existing sidewalk width. 
ii.	Required 20-foot multiuse buffer [see subsection 5-133 (b)(4)e.]. An additional ten-foot-wide utility easement may be required by Volusia County along the east side of U.S. Hwy. 17-92. If the utility easement is necessary, a 30-foot multiuse buffer shall be required. 
iii.	Placement of street trees/planting strips; street furniture including seating, street lights, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, bus shelters; public utility equipment such as electric transformers and water meters; and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility may be permitted within the street tree/furniture zone, utility easement (where applicable) and multiuse buffer. If any of these items is removed or damaged due to maintenance of the utilities within an easement, they must be replaced. 
iv.	Meandering multiuse trail clear zone should be a minimum width of eight to 12 feet, which may extend into the street tree/furniture zone and utility easement (where applicable) no more than 50 percent from the edge of the multiuse buffer/utility easement and 50 percent the width of the development site, unless otherwise approved as part of the site plan review process. 
v.	The street trees should be planted at an average spacing not greater than 50 feet on center. If landscaping within the utility easement is removed for any work/construction, the landscaping must be replaced with similar plant materials and size specifications. 
2.	All utility lines shall be underground for all new construction from the building to the property line. Utility lines within the right-of-way shall be placed underground. 
3.	Where existing electric utilities remain overhead, the centerline of street trees shall be located within a ten-foot radius of the energized conductor, unless otherwise approved by the DRC. 
4.	The DRC may approve a payment of money into the city sidewalk improvement trust fund as specified in chapter 4, article II, division 1, section 4-26 of the LDC. The city shall establish a U.S. Hwy. 17-92 TOD subfund to construct the sidewalk along U.S. Hwy. 17-92. The city shall also adopt a sidewalk master plan to identify circulation, phasing and design criteria for U.S. Hwy. 17-92. 
Figure 2: US Hwy. 17-92 Streetscape
 
 
b.	TOD Core streets. 
1.	Sidewalk should be a minimum width of 14 feet from back of curb, unless otherwise approved as part of the site plan review process. Sidewalks shall consist of two zones: a street tree/furniture zone located adjacent to the curb, and a sidewalk clear zone. 
i.	The street tree/furniture zone shall have a minimum width of six feet (from back of curb) and shall be continuous and located adjacent to the curb. 
ii.	The street tree/furniture zone should be planted with street trees at an average spacing not greater than 40 feet on center. 
iii.	The street tree/furniture zone is intended for the placement of street furniture including seating, street lights, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, newspaper vending boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks; public utility equipment such as electric transformers and water meters; and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
iv.	The sidewalk clear zone should be a minimum width of eight feet, shall be hardscaped, shall be located adjacent to the street tree/furniture zone, and shall comply with ADA standards. The sidewalk clear zone shall be unobstructed by any permanent or nonpermanent element. 
2.	The minimum sidewalk requirement should apply regardless of the available right-of-way, unless otherwise approved as part of the site plan review process. 
3.	Where required, the sidewalk shall extend onto private property with a sidewalk easement provided. 
Figure 3: TOD Core Streetscape
 
c.	Pedestrian priority streets. 
1.	Sidewalk should be a minimum width of 14 feet in width from back of curb, unless otherwise approved as part of the site plan review process. Sidewalks shall consist of two zones: a street tree/furniture zone located adjacent to the curb, and a sidewalk clear zone. 
i.	The street tree/furniture zone shall have a minimum width of six feet (from back of curb) and shall be continuous and located adjacent to the curb. 
ii.	The street tree/furniture zone should be planted with street trees at an average spacing not greater than 40 feet on center. 
iii.	The street tree/furniture zone is intended for the placement of street furniture including seating, street lights, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, newspaper vending boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks; public utility equipment such as electric transformers and water meters; and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
iv.	The sidewalk clear zone should be a minimum width of six to eight feet, shall be hardscaped, shall be located adjacent to the street tree/furniture zone, and shall comply with ADA standards. The sidewalk clear zone shall be unobstructed by any permanent or nonpermanent element. 
2.	The minimum sidewalk requirement should apply regardless of the available right-of-way, unless otherwise approved as part of the site plan review process. 
3.	Where required, the sidewalk shall extend onto private property with a sidewalk easement provided. 
Figure 4: Pedestrian Priority Streetscape
 
d.	Local streets. 
1.	Sidewalk shall be a minimum width of 12 feet in width, unless otherwise approved as part of the site plan review process. Sidewalks shall consist of two zones: a street tree/furniture zone located adjacent to the curb, and a sidewalk clear zone. 
i.	The street tree/furniture zone shall have a minimum width of six feet (from back of curb) and shall be continuous and located adjacent to the curb. 
ii.	The street tree/furniture zone should be planted with street trees at an average spacing not greater than 50 feet on center. 
iii.	The street tree/furniture zone is intended for the placement of street furniture including seating, street lights, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, newspaper vending boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks; public utility equipment such as electric transformers and water meters; and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
iv.	The sidewalk clear zone shall be a minimum width of six feet, shall be hardscaped, shall be located adjacent to the street tree/furniture zone, and shall comply with ADA standards. The sidewalk clear zone shall be unobstructed by any permanent or nonpermanent element. 
2.	The minimum sidewalk requirement shall apply regardless of the available right-of-way, unless otherwise approved as part of the site plan review process. 
3.	Where required, the sidewalk shall extend onto private property with a sidewalk easement provided. 
 
Figure 5: Local Streetscape
(d)	On-street parking. 
(1)	On-street parking is encouraged to serve retail, office, and residential parking needs. It is especially important in areas where there are active edge designations to support ground floor businesses and to serve as a buffer for pedestrian activity from the streets. 
(2)	On-street parking is required on TOD Core streets, pedestrian priority streets and local streets, and located on the same side of the street as the use. 
(3)	The parking stall shall be a minimum 22 feet in length and eight feet in width. The design may be accommodated adjacent to the curb line or by providing parking inside the curb line. 
(4)	The streetscape provisions under subsection 5-132(c) shall continue to apply to on-street parking, with both a clear zone and street tree/furniture zone placed adjacent to the curb at the inside of the parking spaces. 
(5)	On-street parking spaces may be counted toward the total number of parking spaces. 
Figure 6: On-Street Parking (Source: City of Austin, 2009)
 
(e)	Connection and circulation. 
(1)	All projects that are adding a street(s) must provide a project circulation plan as part of the site plan review process. 
(2)	The project circulation plan shall identify the roadway types: U.S. Hwy. 17-92, TOD Core streets, pedestrian priority streets and local streets. 
a.	The project circulation plan shall demonstrate: How the on-site circulation system will be integrated with surrounding streets, bicycle facilities, trails, existing or future development, etc. 
b.	That the street and pathway system will contribute to safe and convenient pedestrian connections between primary destinations (i.e., DeBary Commuter Rail Station, mixed-use, commercial, noncommercial, parks, etc.) and surrounding residential neighborhoods and destinations. 
c.	How traffic calming methods have been incorporated into the design of new streets. 
(3)	A site shall be generally divided into internal blocks with connecting streets that are interconnected with grid-like transportation system on the site. The block size shall be the following: 
a.	TOD Core and Outside TOD Core —Maximum 2.8 acres (300 feet × 400 feet) with intersecting alleyways accessed from the grid pattern streets for parking, loading and service ways. 
b.	Transitional areas —Maximum 8.5 acres (560 feet × 660 feet) with pedestrian pathway provided as a mid-block route to connect to public streets and/or other existing or planned pedestrian routes through the site or adjacent to the site. Intersecting alleyways may be provided for parking, loading and service ways. 
Figure 7: Mid-Block Pathway (Source: City of Austin, 2009)
 
(4)	Curb cuts for vehicular connections. 
a.	TOD Core streets and pedestrian priority streets shall not occur more frequently than every 200 feet. 
b.	U.S. Hwy. 17-92 and local streets shall not occur more frequently than every 300 feet. 
c.	For a lot with street frontage less than 50 feet wide abutting TOD Core (U.S. Hwy. 17-92), access to the lot shall be provided from a single joint use driveway. 
(5)	Curb-cut widths shall comply with the following standards: 
a.	Maximum residential driveway width for single-family, duplex, and townhome residences shall be 18 feet. 
b.	Driveways along street frontages with an active edge designation are discouraged. When they are deemed necessary during site plan review, the maximum driveway width for multifamily residential and commercial uses shall be 30 feet along an active edge. 
c.	Other commercial driveways within the TOD Overlay District shall be no more than 30 feet wide. 
d.	The maximum curb return radius for all residential driveways shall be ten feet and all commercial driveways shall be 15 feet. 
e.	Sidewalk clear zones crossing a driveway shall be continuous and as straight and level as possible. Curb cuts shall ramp up and down to the level of the sidewalk rather than require additional curb ramps along the sidewalk. 
(6)	Provide cross access easements, where feasible. 
(7)	Alleys are encouraged to focus specific types of activity "behind the scenes" and to potentially allow for another point of access to the site. Alleys may provide space for, but not limited to, the following: loading areas, trash collection, utility location, and access to parking. Alleys shall have a 20-foot right-of-way with a minimum 12-foot paved surface. 
(8)	Provide direct pedestrian access from any street adjacent to the property line to a building entrance (the pedestrian access point must be fully accessible during operating hours). 
(9)	Where public parkland is adjacent to the property line, provide pedestrian and bicycle access from the trail or walkway system on that parkland to the building entrance (the pedestrian and bicycle access points must be fully accessible during operating hours). 
(10)	Minimum five-foot-wide bike lanes along all streets, either demarcated by a symbol or color laneways along U.S. Hwy. 17-92, pedestrian priority streets and local streets. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 2(Exh. A), 12-29-2010; Ord. No. 02-15 , § 2, (Exh. A), 8-26-2015)  
Sec. 5-133. - Site development standards. 
(a)	Purpose and intent. 
(1)	Ensure that buildings relate appropriately to the surrounding area, create a cohesive visual identity and attractive street scene, and frame the pedestrian environment. 
(2)	Encourage equitable distribution of affordable housing and mixed income communities around the DeBary Commuter Rail Station through the use of development incentives within the TOD Core and Outside TOD Core areas. 
(3)	Ensure that buildings relate appropriately to their roadway context, allowing for easy pedestrian access to buildings and providing well-defined edges to the roadway environment. 
(4)	Ensure that building entryways are convenient and easily accessible from the pedestrian circulation system. 
(5)	Provide opportunities to enhance the roadway and pedestrian environment, such as outdoor dining, porches, patios, and landscape features. 
(6)	Ensure that vehicular parking is accommodated in a manner that enriches and supports, rather than diminishes, the pedestrian environment. 
(7)	Provide adequate, secure, and convenient bicycle parking to meet the needs of the users of a development and to encourage cycling activity. 
(8)	Ensure that utilities and mechanical equipment are obscured and are not prominent features of a development that negatively impact the visual experience. 
(9)	Ensure that exterior lighting creates a safe night-time atmosphere and encourages activity in the evening, but does not overwhelm the environment and intrude onto adjacent properties. 
(10)	Provide both private and public open space amenities to residents, workers and visitors of the TOD Overlay District. 
(b)	General development standards. 
(1)	Lot requirements. 
Land Uses 	Minimum Lot Area 
(sq. ft.) 	Minimum Lot Width 
(ft. front bldg. line) 	Maximum Impervious Surface 1 (%) 
Single-Family Residential 	None 	None 	75 
Multifamily 
(1 to 2 units) 	None 	None 	75 
Multifamily 
(3 to 4 units) 	None 	None 	75 
Multifamily 
(5+ units) 	None 	None 	75 
Nonresidential Mixed-Use with maximum 2 live/work units 	11,000 	None 	85 
Residential Mixed-Use 	43,560 2 	None 	85 
Commercial/Office/Hotel 	5,000 	None 	80 
 
	1 	Impervious surface includes all buildings, pavements and other impervious surfaces. 
	2 	Refer to subsection 5-131(d)(4) for recommended parcel size to meet minimum residential densities. 
 
(2)	Setbacks and building heights. 
Land Uses 	Maximum Setbacks from Property Lines (in feet) 	Maximum Building Height (in number of stories 4 ) 
	Front 	Side 	Side Adjacent to Street 	Rear 	
U.S. Hwy. 17-92 
Commercial/Office 	75 1 	10 	5—TOD Core 
15—Outside TOD Core & Transitional Area 	10 	5 
TOD Core 
Mixed-Use/Hotel 	6 2 	0 	5 2 	10 	5 
Commerciai/Office 	6 2 	5 	5 2 	10 	5 
Outside TOD Core 
Mixed-Use/Hotel 	10 2 	15—Adjacent to residential 
10—Adjacent to all other uses 	15 2 	15-Adjacent to residential 
10—Adjacent to all other uses 	5 
Commercial/Office 	10 2 	20—Adjacent to residential 
10—Adjacent to all other uses 	15 2 	20—Adjacent to residential 
10—Adjacent to all other uses 	4 
Single-Family Residential 	25 	20 3 	20 	20 	4 
Multifamily (1 to 2 units) 	20 	5 	15 	25 	4 
Multifamily (3 to 4 units) 	25 	5 	15 	25 	5 
Multifamily (5+ units) 	25 	5 	15 	25 	5 
Transitional Area 
Mixed-Use 	15 2 	25—Adjacent to residential 
10—Adjacent to all other uses 	15 2 	25—Adjacent to residential 
10—Adjacent to all other uses 	5 
Commercial/Office 	35 2 	10 	25 2 	50 	4 
Single-Family Residential 	30 	20 3 	20 	20 	4 
Multifamily (1 to 2 units) 	25 	5 	15 	25 	4 
Multifamily (3 to 4 units) 	25 	5 	15 	25 	5 
Multifamily (5+ units) 	25 	5 	15 	25 	5 
 
Notes: 	1 	Includes landscape/multiuse buffer, one 90-degree or angle parking bay, two-way travel lane and walkway. 
	2 	Opportunity for a storefront zone to allow for seating areas, planters/planting areas, bicycle racks, temporary sale/display of merchandise, moveable sandwich boards, postal/freight collection boxes, public art, etc. 
	3 	Minimum of eight feet on any one side. 
	4 	Four stories shall not exceed 50 feet in height: five stories shall not exceed 60 feet in height as defined in section 5-134 Building Height. 
 
(3)	Building placement. 
a.	A minimum percentage of the net frontage length of the property along a site's principal street must consist of continuous building façade built up to the property line or sidewalk clear zone. This will allow the opportunity to create outdoor spaces. 
	U.S. Hwy. 17-92 	TOD Core 
Streets 	Pedestrian 
Priority Streets 	Local Streets 
Net Frontage 
(Minimum 
Percentage) 	0 	75 	50 	40 
 
Figure 8: 75 Percent Net Frontage Building Lengths (Source: City of Austin, 2009)
 
Figure 9: 50 Percent Net Frontage Building Lengths (source: City of Austin, 2009)
 
Figure 10: 40 Percent Net Frontage Building Lengths (Source: City of Austin, 2009)
 
(4)	Landscaping. 
a.	["Florida-Friendly".] All landscaping shall use "Florida-Friendly" plants and guiding principles. 
b.	[Irrigation.] All landscaping shall be irrigated and may be installed with moisture sensors beneath the root systems to properly gauge the watering requirements (i.e., irrometer). 
c.	[Materials, sizes.] The plant materials and sizes shall comply with section 5-9, Plant selection, of the LDC. 
d.	[Planting strips, planters.] Minimum six-foot-wide planting strips or planters shall be permitted along the building wall to accentuate the entranceway and building façade. 
Figure 11: Landscaping in Front of Building
 
e.	[Landscape/multiuse buffers.] Landscape/multiuse buffer shall be provided along the street front of U.S. Hwy. 17-92 with a minimum depth of 20 feet. The buffer shall contain one canopy tree or two understory trees for each 40 linear feet of buffer with a continuous 30- to 36-inch screen shrubs and at least 50 percent of the area shall be ground cover. Decorative pedestrian lights may be permitted in the buffer. 
Figure 12: Landscaping along US Hwy. 17-92
 
f.	Vehicular use areas. 
1.	A minimum buffer width of ten feet shall be required on the perimeter of vehicular use areas, except for the street fronts along U.S. Hwy. 17-92 [see requirements specified in subsection 5-133(b)(3)e.]. 
2.	The buffer shall contain the following: 
i.	Minimum one canopy tree for each 35 linear feet of buffer; 
ii.	Minimum one understory tree for each 50 linear feet of buffer; 
iii.	Continuous 30- to 36-inch-high screen shrubs. 
3.	A three-foot high wall compatible with the architecture of the building may be used with a maximum three-foot-wide landscape strip in front of the wall consisting of the following: 
i.	Minimum one understory tree for each 50 linear feet of streetwall; and/or 
ii.	Minimum 50 percent of the area shall be ground cover. 
Figure 13: Landscape Buffers and Streetwalls
 
4.	Planting areas within vehicular use areas shall equal not less than 20 percent of the gross area devoted to vehicular use. The perimeter landscaping shall not count toward meeting the required interior landscaping. 
5.	Interior planting areas may be located in tree islands, at the end of parking bays, or between rows of parking spaces. There shall be not more than ten contiguous parking spaces between planting areas. Such planting areas shall be landscaped with a canopy or understory tree and may be landscaped with other materials. Trees and other landscaping planted in the planter island areas shall be credited toward the landscaping requirements of the vehicular use area. Planting areas may also be located within driveway medians, provided the median is a minimum of ten feet wide. 
6.	Interior planting areas may be located to effectively accommodate stormwater runoff, as well as to provide shade in large expanses of paved areas. 
7.	Individual planting areas shall be not less than 400 square feet for medium and large trees. Individual planting areas for all other trees shall not be less than 180 square feet. 
8.	A continuous curb or other means of protection shall be provided to prevent injury to vegetation within the planting areas. 
9.	One shrub shall be installed for each 50 square feet of planting area. 
10.	One square foot of ground cover shall be installed for each five square feet of planting area. At the owner's option, grassed areas may be substituted for up to 50 percent of the square footage of ground cover required. 
11.	A fractional tree or shrub shall be rounded up to the next highest whole number. 
g.	Tree preservation. 
1.	All development shall comply with chapter 5, article IV, Tree Preservation, of the City of DeBary Land Development Code, with the exception of section 5-88 of article IV, which requires 15 percent of the overall development site to be set aside for tree preservation. 
2.	Within the TOD Overlay District, the requirements of section 5-88 are replaced with a minimum of 2.5 percent of the overall development site to be provided for tree preservation within the TOD core and 7.5 percent of the overall development site to be provided for tree preservation outside of the TOD Core. These set asides for tree preservation shall be calculated toward the 5 percent and 15 percent public/open space requirement for the TOD Core and Outside TOD Core areas respectively. Alternative tree preservation and open space requirements may be considered by the Development Review Committee during the site plan approval process on a case by case basis when other site enhancements of the development plan are demonstrated. 
h.	Industrial land use buffering. 
1.	All new development shall provide a 30 foot landscape buffer with a masonry wall along industrial zoned frontages that are not incorporated into the TOD Overlay District. Screening shall be accomplished by preserving native vegetation whenever possible. Buffering requirements shall conform with Industrial/Commercial criteria outlined in the Land Development Code. 
2.	Parcels zoned industrial at the time that this code is adopted shall be exempt from buffering requirements. 
(5)	Stormwater facilities. 
a.	For application for a standard development, the following additional performance standards shall be used in the design of the project: 
1.	Closed basin criteria. See subsection 4-184.2.a. 
2.	Retention standards. The discharge hydrograph produced for the developed or redeveloped site shall not exceed, in terms of peak flow and total volume, the hydrograph produced by conditions existing before development or redevelopment for a 24-hour, 25-year frequency storm, unless the intent of this recharge provision will be met through detention of the difference between said volumes, in which case said volume difference may be released over not less than a 24-hour nor greater than a 72-hour period of time. However, the design standards for wet retention areas, when approved by the City Development Engineer, shall prevail. This requirement may be waived by the City Development Engineer for sites consisting predominately of poorly drained soils having permanently and naturally impaired recharge potentials. In addition, the cumulative impact of the outflow hydrograph on downstream flow shall be considered. Runoff rates and volumes resulting from the project, in excess of existing amounts, shall be accommodated on site. Off-site retention may be permitted if, in the opinion of the City Development Engineer, the recharge requirements of this division are met. 
b.	To the greatest extent practicable green infrastructure principles shall be employed in the site design to reduce stormwater impacts prior to collection and treatment, (i.e., pervious/semipervious pavement, rainwater collection and reuse, etc.). 
c.	The city's intent is that a centralized master stormwater system be created within the TOD Overlay District. The city will seek to create public-private partnerships to achieve these goals. The city may negotiate with a development project to incorporate a master retention element into the design, in return allowing additional development incentives as provided for within the article. 
d.	Within the TOD Overlay District, stormwater management facilities shall be designed to allow for conversion to a centralized master stormwater utility. 
e.	If a centralized master stormwater pond is not developed within the TOD Core, the stormwater management systems for developments along U.S. Hwy. 17-92 shall be located within the rear yard setbacks, unless they include a water feature and/or passive park or approved by the DRC upon hardship determination. 
(6)	Green infrastructure. 
a.	The purpose is to: 
1.	Reduce the negative impact of development on the natural environment, 
2.	Reduce development costs related to construction and the provision of utilities, and 
3.	Manage stormwater in a way that mimics natural stormwater management. 
b.	The following standards shall apply to the TOD Core and Outside TOD Core (except for single-family, duplex and townhouse developments). 
1.	Minimum 20 percent within TOD Core and ten percent outside the TOD Core of the required water quality volume (WQV) must be treated on site using green infrastructure facilities. Such facilities include, but [are] not limited, to the following: 
i.	Tree preservation and using drought-tolerant landscaping. 
ii.	Reduce impervious surface area by using permeable paving materials. 
iii.	Green vegetated roofs. 
iv.	Roof rainwater collection. 
v.	Bioretention or infiltration. 
2.	In cases where site specific circumstances limit the ability to treat the WQV on site using green infrastructure, the city may allow fee-in-lieu payments. 
3.	A developer or group of developers may propose a regional water quality structure that treats the stormwater from at least ten acres of previously untreated offsite land. 
Figure 14: Green Infrastructure Bioretention—Parking Lot (left) Rooftop Garden (right)
 
Porous Asphalt (left) Porous Concrete Pavers (right)
 
(7)	Private/public common open space and pedestrian amenities. 
a.	These standards shall apply to all development sites larger than two acres. 
b.	All new developments and redevelopments shall devote a minimum of five percent (TOD Core); ten percent (outside the TOD Core); and 20 percent (Transitional Areas) of the gross site area to one or more of the following types of common open space or pedestrian amenities: 
1.	A natural and undisturbed private common open space, for use of the residents, employees, and visitors to the development. Developments with primarily residential uses are encouraged to comply with this requirement. 
2.	A landscape area with a minimum depth and width of ten feet and a minimum total area of 200 square feet. The area shall include pedestrian amenities to support these places as gathering areas. 
3.	A playground, patio, or plaza with outdoor seating areas, provided the playground, patio, or plaza has a minimum depth and width of ten feet and a minimum total area of 300 square feet. The area shall include pedestrian amenities to support these places as gathering areas. 
4.	A combination of the above-listed amenities. 
5.	In cases of provable hardship, the DRC may approve a payment of money into a trust fund allocated towards parks and recreational facilities in lieu of construction of private/public common open spaces and pedestrian amenities. The payment shall be equal to the "just value" of the area required for the private/public common open space and pedestrian amenities based on the previous year's "just value" from the Volusia County property appraiser. 
6.	Provable hardship shall comply with the variance criteria pursuant to chapter 1, section 1-8 Variances of the City of DeBary Land Development Code. 
c.	To the maximum extent feasible, where significant natural and scenic resource assets exist on a property, the developer shall give priority to their preservation as private common open space. 
d.	Lands within the following areas shall not be counted towards private common open space or pedestrian amenities, unless approved by the DRC. 
1.	Private yards; 
2.	Public or private streets or rights-of-way; 
3.	Parking areas and driveways for dwellings; 
4.	Water quality and stormwater detention ponds; and 
5.	A required street tree/furniture zone. 
e.	Land set aside for private/public common open space or pedestrian amenities shall meet the following design criteria: 
1.	Common open space areas shall be located so as to be readily accessible and useable by residents or visitors in various locations of the development, unless the lands are sensitive natural resources and access should be restricted. 
2.	The lands shall be compact and contiguous unless the land shall be used as a continuation of an existing trail, or specific topographic features require a different configuration. An example of such topographic features would be the provision of a trail or private open area along a riparian corridor. 
3.	Where private/public common open space areas, trails, parks, or other public spaces exist adjacent to the tract to be subdivided or developed, the private common open space or pedestrian amenity shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be located to adjoin, extend, and enlarge the presently existing trail, park, or other open area land. 
f.	All common open space or pedestrian amenity areas shall be maintained by the owners of the development. 
Figure 15: Common Open Space
 
(8)	Transitional areas/compatibility. 
a.	Building transitions. 
1.	Façade and height transitions between buildings are key elements in creating and maintaining an attractive streetscape. Height and scale of new development and redevelopment shall be compatible with that of surrounding development. In order to accomplish appropriate facade transitions, and to maximize city streetscape aesthetics, the following transitional techniques shall be applied to new development and redevelopment when within 600 feet of an existing building. 
i.	Buildings shall be designed to provide transitional elements and architectural features (architectural style, scale, design details, construction materials and the like) that are architecturally compatible with adjacent structures. Buildings that are twice the height, or greater, than an adjacent structure shall also provide transitional elements and features that provide for transitional blending of heights. 
ii.	The pattern of placement, proportions and materials of windows and doors shall be harmonious with surrounding structures. 
iii.	The ratio of wall surface to openings and the ratio of width and height of windows and doors shall be consistent and compatible with surrounding structures. 
iv.	The above-noted requirements may be waived where the City Council determines that city aesthetics would be enhanced by a change in the pattern of development that has been previously established by adjacent structures. In such a case, the City Council shall determine the appropriate style and exterior materials for the new development or redevelopment. 
Figure 16: Building Transitions
 
b.	Green/open space transitions. 
1.	Public spaces and natural features can be used to provide a seamless buffer/transition from varying development activities and intensities, and maintaining an attractive streetscape, such as the following: 
i.	Green spaces, courts, squares, parks, plazas, and similar spaces that can also function as community gathering places; or 
ii.	Natural features including natural differences in topography (not retaining walls), water bodies, existing stands of trees and similar features. 
Figure 17: Green/Open Space Transitions
 
c.	Intensity transitions. 
1.	Site the less-intensive uses as transitions to lower-intensity, adjacent uses (i.e., neighborhood stores, bed and breakfast inns, community facilities, etc.). 
Figure 18: Intensity Transitions
 
d.	Landscaping and screening transitions. 
1.	Use landscape buffering and supplemental fences and walls. 
Figure 19: Landscaping and Screening Transitions
 
(9)	Off-street parking. 
a.	Parking requirements. 
1.	Maximum parking requirements for residential development shall supersede the minimum parking requirements for duplex and multifamily as outlined in section 3-129 of the Land Development Code. A minimum of 0.5 parking spaces per residential unit shall apply within the TOD Overlay District. 
	Parking Spaces Required (Maximum)* 
Land Uses 	TOD Core 	Outside TOD Core 	Transitional Area 
Multifamily Residential 	1.5 parking spaces per multifamily unit, plus 1 guest space per 10 units 	2 parking spaces per multifamily unit, plus 1 guest space per 8 units 	2 parking spaces per multifamily unit, plus 1 guest space per 6 units 
Residential Mixed Use (includes residential parking) 	1 parking space per 1,000 gross floor area 	1 parking space per 800 gross floor area 	1 parking space per 650 gross floor area 
Commercial/Retail 	1 parking space per 350 gross floor area 	1 parking space per 325 gross floor area 	1 parking space per 275 gross floor area 
Restaurant 	1 parking space per 250 gross floor area 	1 parking space per 200 gross floor area 	1 parking space per 150 gross floor area 
Office 	1 parking space per 350 gross floor area 	1 parking space per 300 gross floor area 	1 parking space per 250 gross floor area 
 
Note: Refer to section 3-129 of the LDC for handicapped parking requirements. 
b.	The minimum off-street parking requirement may be reduced as follows: 
1.	By one space for each on-street parking space located adjacent to the site. 
2.	By up to ten percent to preserve significant stands of trees or protected trees in addition to those required to be preserved by the LDC. 
3.	By ten spaces for every car/van pooling vehicle provided in a program that complies with the requirements prescribed by the DRC. 
4.	By one space for each shower facility with three or more lockers provided for employees in a nonresidential building. 
5.	By one space for each fully enclosed and lockable bicycle parking space. 
6.	By up to ten percent if parking spaces are leased or sold separately from occupied spaces. 
7.	By one space for every three electric car parking spaces. Electric car parking spaces shall be measured at least 7.5 feet in width by 18 feet in length with a recharge outlet and shall be identified or designated through the use of signage or pavement markings. 
8.	Motorcycle and scooter parking may substitute for up to five automobile spaces or five percent of the required parking spaces, whichever is less. For every four motorcycle parking spaces provided, the automobile parking requirement may be reduced by one space. Motorcycle and scooter parking spaces shall measure at least four feet in width by eight feet in length and shall be identified or designated through the use of signage or pavement markings. 
9.	In no case may the maximum off-street parking requirements for a project be increased by more than 50 percent and shall receive approval by the LDM. 
10.	On-street parking spaces may be counted toward the maximum number of parking spaces. 
c.	Off-street parking along U.S. Hwy. 17-92 may be located in the front, side, and rear yards subject to parking lot landscaping and setback requirements. Maximum one 90-degree or angle parking bay and a two-way travel lane along the street front and street side. Not more than 50 percent of required parking may be located between the front facade and the street on which the building fronts. 
Figure 20: Off-Street Parking along U.S. Hwy. 17-92
 
d.	Off-street parking shall be located in the rear yard along TOD Core streets, pedestrian priority streets and local streets, and shall not exceed one acre in size. Where feasible, ingress and egress from parking shall be from side streets or alleyways. 
Figure 21: Off-Street Parking along TOD Core Streets, Pedestrian Priority Streets and Local Streets
 
e.	Shared parking is strongly encouraged. On lots serving more than one use, the total number of spaces required may be reduced, provided that the applicant submits credible evidence to the satisfaction of the DRC that the peak parking demands of the uses do not coincide, and that the accumulated parking demand at any one time shall not exceed the total capacity of the facility. Such evidence must take into account the parking demand of residents, employees, customers, visitors, and any other users of the lot. It must also take into account parking demand on both weekends and weekdays, and both during the daytime and overnight. 
f.	Surface parking lots shall provide minimum six-foot-wide pedestrian walkways and connections to building entrance(s) or to the sidewalk system. 
g.	Parking structure. 
1.	Parking structures fronting a public street or public space shall be masked by a liner building a minimum of 30 feet deep. 
2.	The first 30 feet of depth of the liner building shall be occupied by office, residential or other non-parking commercial uses. 
3.	Liner buildings shall be at least two stories. 
4.	Liner buildings may be detached from or incorporated into parking structures. 
5.	When a liner building is not possible due to unusually shallow lot depth or unique topographical features, provide a landscaped seating area between the structure and the street. 
6.	The parking structure/liner buildings shall be designed to have similar façade treatments with respect to building materials and articulations to complement the architectural theme of the development. 
Figure 22: Parking Structures
 
h.	Bicycle parking. 
1.	Bicycle racks shall be provided on site at a ratio of one space for every 15 automobile parking spaces. 
2.	Bicycle parking shall not obstruct the sidewalk clear zone and shall be located in a well lighted, secure and visible location: 
i.	Within 50 feet of building entryways; or 
ii.	At employee entrances; or 
iii.	Within a building, or 
iv.	In a covered motor vehicle parking area. 
3.	Bicycle parking facilities shall either be lockable enclosures in which the bicycle is stored, or a secure, stationary rack, which supports the frame so the bicycle cannot easily be pushed or fall to one side. 
4.	Racks that require a user-supplied lock should accommodate locking the frame and both wheels using either a cable or U-shaped lock. 
5.	Bicycle parking spaces shall be at least six feet long and three feet wide, and overhead clearance in covered spaces shall be a minimum of seven feet. 
6.	A five-foot aisle for bicycle maneuvering, which may be provided with the required sidewalk clear zone, shall be provided and maintained beside or between each row of bicycle parking. 
7.	Bicycle racks or lockers shall be securely anchored. 
Figure 23: Bicycle Parking Design (Source: City of Austin, 2009)
 
(10)	Loading/delivery docks. 
a.	Each loading space shall be at least 12 feet wide by 35 feet long. 
b.	Loading and service dock areas shall be integrated into the building design or located to the rear or sides of a building, away from the main building entrance, or related high visibility areas. 
c.	No loading docks shall be located between a building and a residential development unless there is a minimum 60-foot setback between the loading dock and the residential development and that the setback includes a landscape buffer and masonry wall. 
d.	Loading spaces, their access drives and maneuvering areas shall be located and designed so that their use does not impede the normal use of parking spaces and access drives. 
e.	Loading and service docks shall be screened by the following: 
1.	Minimum six-foot to a maximum eight-foot-high masonry wall to be architecturally consistent with the style, colors, construction materials and finish of the building; and/or 
2.	Landscape consisting of a minimum five-foot-high evergreen hedge at least four feet in height when planted, to grow to five feet within one year; and minimum eight-foot-high understory/ canopy trees. 
Figure 24: Loading Areas
 
 
(11)	Exterior lighting. 
a.	An exterior building and site lighting master plan detailing areas and structures requiring illumination, lighting fixture styles, light source and light levels shall be included as part of site plan review. 
b.	Lighting shall be of the metal halide type, or other lighting that is uniform in color and intensity. 
c.	The following outdoor lighting applications shall be illuminated by fixtures that are both fully-shielded and full cutoff: 
1.	Street and pedestrian lighting; 
2.	Parking lots; 
3.	Pathways; 
4.	Recreational areas; and 
5.	Product display area lighting. 
Figure 25: Outdoor Lighting
 
d.	Building façade lighting may only be used to highlight specific architectural features such as principal entrances and towers. 
e.	Directional luminaries may be used to illuminate signs and flagpoles. Such luminaries shall be installed and aimed so that they illuminate only the specific object or area and do not shine directly onto neighboring properties, roadways, or distribute excessive light skyward. 
f.	Recessed lighting fixtures shall be required in order to conceal the actual source of the light so as to reduce glare and direct the light to specific areas while shielding other areas. 
g.	Backlighting of awnings/canopies is not permitted. 
h.	Pedestrian scale lighting fixtures no greater than 15 feet in height shall be provided along all sidewalks and walkways to provide ample lighting during nighttime hours. 
i.	Parking lot lighting shall be designed as follows: 
1.	Light poles shall be located only within landscaped strips, interior landscape islands, or terminal landscape islands. Light poles are not allowed in corridor buffers. 
2.	The maximum height of the light pole shall be 20 feet, including the base. 
3.	The minimum setback of the light source from the property line shall be a horizontal distance of ten feet. 
j.	Neon lighting is not permitted. 
k.	Ground-level light fixtures shall be of the burial vault type or shall be fully screened by landscaping materials. 
(12)	Screening of equipment and utilities. 
a.	Mechanical equipment located on the ground, such as air conditioning and heating units, satellite dishes, irrigation pumps, utilities' lift stations and the like shall be screened from public view. Screening shall, at a minimum, be at the same height as the equipment. Structural screening shall be architecturally integrated into the overall project design and shall be compatible, in terms of style, construction materials, colors, and finish, with the principal structure. Landscaping may be substituted for structural screening if plantings are compatible with the landscape plan for the project and are of such size and maturity as to be able to provide a fully opaque screen at time of planting. 
Figure 26: Screening of Equipment/Utilities
 
b.	Equipment and appurtenances mounted on rooftops shall be kept to a minimum. All exposed rooftop-mounted equipment and appurtenances shall be fully screened from view from any public right-of-way. All screening shall, at a minimum, be at the same height as the equipment and appurtenances. Screening shall be an integral part of the design of the building and shall be architecturally consistent with the style, colors, construction materials and finish of the building. 
Figure 27: Screening of Rooftop Equipment
 
c.	Trash containers. 
1.	Trash containers shall be placed at the side or rear of the building and/or centrally located in the parking lot at least 20 feet from any public street/walkway, pedestrian and public spaces and building entrances. 
2.	Enclosures shall be unobtrusive and conveniently located for trash disposal by tenants and collection by service vehicles. 
3.	Enclosures shall be located away from adjacent residential uses to minimize nuisances to neighboring properties. 
4.	Trash enclosures shall consist of a maximum seven-foot-high wall with similar finishes, materials, and details as the primary buildings within the project. A decorative door shall also be provided. 
Figure 28: Screening of Trash Containers
 
(13)	Signage. 
a.	Except as specifically listed below, all other signage and sign standards must comply with section 5, article II, Sign Regulations of the LDC, as amended. If there are discrepancies, the greater restriction shall apply. 
b.	Signs within the TOD Core and outside the TOD Core shall comply with the following standards: 
1.	Wall (building) signs. 
i.	Commercial uses (retail, office and restaurant): One sign per tenant space; area to be calculated at 0.5 square feet per linear foot of public street frontage with a maximum of 30 square feet. 
ii.	Second-floor commercial uses may also be permitted one second-floor wall sign per tenant space per public street frontage; area to be calculated at 0.25 square feet per linear foot of second floor frontage along that public street. 
iii.	Live-work and home occupations: One sign limited to an area of eight square feet maximum. 
iv.	May encroach a maximum of 12 inches on to a sidewalk while maintaining a vertical clearance of eight feet from the finished sidewalk. 
v.	Wall signs should not obscure windows, grill work, piers, pilasters, and ornamental features. Typically, wall signs should be centered on horizontal surfaces (i.e., over a storefront opening). 
vi.	Wall signs may be internally or externally lit. Cutoff fixtures shall be angled toward the face of the wall sign and shall complement the design of the building through style, material and color. 
Figure 29: Wall Signs
 
2.	Window signs. 
i.	Limited to 30 percent of the window area. 
ii.	The following shall be exempt from this limitation: 
• Addresses, closed/open signs, hours of operation, credit card logos, real estate signs, and now hiring signs. 
• Mannequins and storefront displays of merchandise sold. 
Figure 30: Window signs
 
3.	Blade signs. 
i.	Shall be permitted for all commercial uses only (retail, restaurant, and office). 
ii.	Maximum four square feet per sign face. 
iii.	May encroach a maximum of three feet over a public sidewalk/R-O-W. 
iv.	Blade signs may be attached to the building or hung under the soffit of an arcade or under a canopy/awning while maintaining a vertical clearance of eight feet from the finished sidewalk. 
Figure 31: Blade Signs
 
4.	Awning signs. 
i.	The character height shall not exceed two-thirds of the height of the face (vertical or near vertical part) of the awning. 
ii.	When possible, signs shall be horizontally and vertically centered on the face of the awning. 
Figure 31: Blade Signs
 
5.	Canopy signs. 
i.	The placement of this type of sign shall be limited to the canopy face length. 
ii.	No sign shall project beyond the perimeter of the canopy. 
iii.	The sign shall not exceed one square foot per lineal foot of canopy face length. 
Figure 33: Canopy Signs
 
6.	Menu board signs. 
i.	One menu board shall be allowed per street address. 
ii.	Menu boards shall not exceed eight square feet in size and shall be positioned so as to be adjacent to the restaurant or business listed on the board and information on the board shall advertise exclusively the goods and services of the business and be placed in a manner which is clearly visible to pedestrian traffic. 
iii.	Said menu boards shall not be placed in the city's right-of-way. 
iv.	All standing menu signs shall be removed at the end of each business day. 
v.	All wall menu signs shall be securely anchored to wall. 
Figure 34: Menu Board Signs
 
7.	Wayfinding signs. 
i.	All public wayfinding signs along state, county and city roads shall comply with the Federal Highway Administration, Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and all other local permitting agencies (FDOT and Volusia County). 
ii.	Internal development wayfinding signs may provide location maps, directions, general information and special notices to add liveliness of the development. The signs shall be designed to match the site architecture and be integrated into the layout of pedestrian circulation areas. The maximum size shall be eight square feet mounted on pedestrian light poles or individual decorative poles. 
Figure 35: Wayfinding Signs
 
(14)	Transit facilities. 
a.	Bus stops. 
1.	Bus stop needs and design shall be coordinated with VOTRAN. 
2.	In addition to VOTRAN requirements individual site plans shall consider the following: 
i.	Bus stops shall be evaluated for need every 660 feet from the final design site of the DeBary Commuter Rail Station. 
ii.	Bus stops may be accommodated via provision of additional property either on street adjacent to the right-of-way or via dedicated area within a off-street parking area. 
iii.	Bus stops shall incorporate a shelter area of no less than 24 square feet including seating. 
iv.	Reserved. 
v.	Bus stops shall comply with any architectural standards as established by the city. 
vi.	Bus stops within the TOD Core area shall include provision for secure bicycle parking in accordance with subsection 5-133(b)(9 h. 
(15)	Drive-through facilities. 
a.	Drive-throughs, walk-up windows, and ATMs accessory to banks, restaurants, and retail sales and service shall only be permitted along U.S. Hwy. 17-92 provided that: 
1.	Drive-through windows shall not be located between the front façade of the principal structure and the street. 
2.	Sight visibility shall be designed so as to not interfere with the circulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the site itself, and on the adjoining streets, alleys or sidewalks. 
3.	Drive-through lanes and vehicle stacking areas adjacent to public streets or sidewalks shall be separated from such streets or sidewalks by railings or hedges at least 36 inches in height. 
4.	Drive-through, ATMs and walk-up elements should be architecturally integrated into the building, rather than appearing to be applied or "stuck on" to the building. 
5.	Drive-through displays, ordering areas, walk-up windows, ATMs and parking canopies shall not serve as the singularly dominant feature on the site or as a sign or an attention getting device. 
6.	Entries and/or exits to drive-through facilities shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any intersection as measured from the edge of the drive closest to the intersection to the property line at the intersection. Shorter distances from road intersections may be approved if the DRC determines that public safety and/or the efficiency of traffic circulation are not being compromised. 
7.	Drive-through stacking lanes shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any single-family residential parcel. 
8.	All service areas, restrooms and ground-mounted equipment associated with the drive through shall be screened from public view. 
9.	Landscaping shall screen drive-through aisles from the public right-of-way and adjacent uses and shall be used to minimize the visual impacts of reader board signs and directional signs. 
Figure 36: Drive-Through Facilities
 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 2(Exh. A), 12-29-2010; Ord. No. 02-15 , § 2, (Exh. A), 8-26-2015)  
Sec. 5-134. - Building design standards. 
(a)	Purpose and intent. 
(1)	Ensure that buildings foster the creation of a human-scale environment. 
(2)	Ensure that trees or manmade shading devices are used alongside roadways and connecting roadside sidewalks to businesses to encourage pedestrian activity by providing a sheltered and comfortable walking environment. 
(3)	Ensure that buildings provide an interesting and engaging visual experience at the pedestrian level. 
(4)	Ensure that the design and construction of ground-floor building space near transit, at visible intersections, and along key streets that lead to transit, accommodates for active pedestrian-oriented uses even though these types of uses may not be supported by current market conditions. 
(b)	Building entrances. 
(1)	Primary customer and/or resident entrances shall face the principal street and connect directly to the sidewalk clear zone along the principal street. Supplemental customer and/or resident entrances are encouraged on any other building frontage. 
(2)	Building entrances shall be provided for each separate ground floor commercial tenant space along the elevation facing the principal street. 
(3)	Entryways shall be differentiated from the remainder of the façade through at a minimum, the use of color, change in materials, application of architectural features (arches, columns, colonnades, etc.), setbacks, offsets, level changes, and the like. 
(4)	Entryway design shall incorporate landscaping, landscape planters or wing walls with landscaped areas. 
(5)	Entryway areas shall be provided with structural or vegetative shading features and benches or other seating components. 
(6)	The first floor of all multi-story structures within the TOD Core shall be a minimum of 14 feet in height. 
(c)	Window glazing. 
(1)	Glazing provides interest for the pedestrian, connects the building exterior and interior, puts eyes on the street, promotes reusability, and provides a human-scale element on building facades. 
(2)	All mixed-use development, nonresidential development, and development along the principal street shall satisfy the following: 
Percentage of Window Glazing 
(Minimum Wall Area) 	U.S. Hwy. 17-92 	TOD Core 	Outside TOD Core 	Transitional Area 
Ground floor (between 2 and 10 feet) 	40 	80 	65 	40 
Upper Floors 	15 	35 	25 	15 
 
(3)	Development containing only residential units shall satisfy the following: 
Percentage of Window Glazing (Minimum Wall Area) 	Single-Family/Duplex 	Multifamily 
Ground Floor (between 2 and 10 feet) 	15 	20 
Upper Floors 	10 	20 
 
(4)	The window glazing shall be clear or lightly tinted low-e glass. 
Figure 37: Window Glazing
 
(d)	Building façade articulation. 
(1)	To provide visual interest and create community character and pedestrian scale, a building shall comply with the following façade articulation requirements. 
a.	A single building mass with more than one tenant shall be varied by height and width so that it appears to be divided into distinct massing elements and architectural details can be viewed from a pedestrian scale. 
b.	Buildings shall be designed and built in tri-partite architecture so that they have a distinct base, middle, and top. 
Figure 38: Architectural Elements (Source: City of North Richmond Hills, 2009)
 
c.	No uninterrupted length of any façade shall exceed 100 horizontal feet. 
d.	Façades greater than 100 horizontal feet shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least two feet and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the façade. 
Figure 39: Building Articulation
 
e.	Building façades shall include a repeating pattern that shall include no less than three of the elements listed below. At least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than 30 feet, either horizontally or vertically. 
i.	Color change; 
ii.	Texture change; 
iii.	Material module change; 
iv.	Expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than 12 inches in width, such as an offset, reveal, or projecting rib. 
f.	At intersections, buildings located on corner lots shall utilize architectural embellishments to emphasize street intersections as points of interest in the TOD Overlay District. Maximum building heights shall be permitted to exceed by 25 percent for approximately 25 percent of the building frontage along each street façade. 
Figure 40: Architectural Embellishments at Intersections (Source: City of North Richmond Hills, 2009)
 
(e)	Exterior materials and colors. 
(1)	Exterior building materials and colors contribute significantly to the visual impact of a building on a community, which, in turn, individually and collectively reflect upon the visual character and quality of a community. In order to project an image of high-quality city aesthetics, building materials and colors shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.	All buildings shall be faced with materials that exhibit a durable, high quality appearance. 
b.	Materials shall be of a low-maintenance type, retaining a consistent, clean appearance. 
c.	Generally accepted exterior facing materials shall relate to the mass of the structure based on square footage as follows: 
1.	For all structures, the following materials shall be acceptable on all facades that are or will be exposed to the general public: 
i.	Brick; 
ii.	Exposed aggregate; 
iii.	Stone; 
iv.	Cellulose fiber-reinforced cement building boards; 
v.	Stucco, if used, shall be flat finish, "knocked-down," or sand finish; 
vi.	E.I.F.S. (exterior insulation and finish system). 
Figure 41: Exterior Materials From left: Stone and textured Stucco; Brick and Siding; Various bricks; Textured stucco with E.I.F.S.
 
2.	Two wall materials may be combined on any façade, up to four walls, horizontally. The visually heavier façade material must be below and can cover the first third of the overall wall height only. 
3.	Exterior colors shall not be specifically limited, but shall be consistent with earth tones, warm tones and muted hues. The selection of pastels shall be limited to those colors having a minimum white content of 90 percent. Other colors, excluding fluorescents, may be permitted as accent colors, not to exceed 20 percent of the surface area of any one elevation. 
4.	The requirement for earth tones and pastels shall not apply to colors commonly found in natural materials such as brick or stone, unless such material has been artificially colored in a manner which would be contrary to the intent of these regulations. 
5.	A color or color scheme which is directly inherent to a unique recognized architectural style or exterior artwork, but not otherwise in compliance with this section, may be permitted through the development plan approval process. 
6.	Approval for change of exterior design required. Any exterior change of any nonresidential structure or multifamily structure shall require review and approval by the DRC. Such changes shall include, but not be limited to, colors, materials, roof finishes and signage. The purpose of such approval shall be to ensure that any exterior change is consistent with the intent and requirements of this article. 
7.	Building materials and colors shall be consistent around the entire building. 
8.	Exposed metal building sidings shall not be permitted. 
(f)	Building height. 
(1)	Vertical distance measured from the finished grade, along the front of the structure, to the highest point of a flat roof or to the average distance between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
Figure 42: Building Heights Left: Height for Flat Roofs Right Height for Pitched Roofs
 
(2)	The maximum building height shall be in accordance to subsection 5-133(b)(2), Setbacks and building heights. 
 
(g)	Roof design and materials. 
(1)	Roof features shall be in scale with the building mass and complement the character of the structure, adjacent developments and neighborhoods. Roofs shall be constructed of durable, high-quality materials in order to enhance the appearance and attractiveness of the community. Roofs shall incorporate the design elements and materials listed below: 
a.	The design of roof structures shall be flat with a parapet wall, hip roof, or gable roof. The parapet wall and cornice may extend a maximum of 42 inches above the maximum height of the building or 60 inches if required to enclose rooftop equipment and include decorative brackets. Parapet edges or slopes may use concrete tiles or terra cotta. If the roof surface is visible, hipped or gabled, the material shall be metal standing seam or "V" crimp metal, shingle or tile. 
b.	Roofs shall be designed to be of such height, bulk and mass so as to appear structural even when the design is nonstructural. 
Figure 44: Roof Structures. Left: Parapet Roof. Top Right: Hip Roof. Bottom Right: Gable Roof.
 
(h)	Fences and walls. 
(1)	Design and construction quality of fences and nonbuilding walls are important visual reflections of community character and quality. In order to promote quality site aesthetics, fence and wall design and construction shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.	Metal picket fencing located between the building and the street right-of-way shall not exceed three feet in height. Metal picket fencing may be installed on top of a knee wall in proportionate scale (i.e., one-third or one-half), not to exceed a total height of three feet. May be used to delineate outdoor patios/eating areas. 
b.	Walls located along the street front exceed three feet in height to prevent potential hiding places and to provide natural surveillance of "eyes on the street." 
c.	Metal picket fencing and opaque walls along the side and rear yards shall not exceed six feet in height. Metal picket fencing may be installed on top of a knee wall in proportionate scale (i.e., one-third or one-half), not to exceed a total height of six feet. 
d.	Fences and walls located along the street shall be set back at least three feet from the property line. 
e.	Fences and walls greater than 30 feet in length shall have columns, pilasters or offsets at least every 30 feet. 
f.	Chain link and vinyl fencing is not permitted, unless screened from view from public rights-of-way, parking lots, and adjacent properties. If foliage is used for screening, the foliage must screen the fence from view within 720 days of installation of the fence. Wood fencing shall not be permitted under any circumstances. 
Figure 45: Fences and Walls
 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 2(Exh. A), 12-29-10; Ord. No. 02-15 , § 2, (Exh. A), 8-26-2015)  
Sec. 5-135. - Definitions. 
Building height. Vertical distance measured from the finished grade, along the front of the structure, to the highest point of a flat roof or to the average distance between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
Civic buildings. For purposes of this TOD regulating plan, civic building shall consist of: college or university facilities, community recreation (public), cultural services, local utility services, parks and recreation services, postal services, public educations facilities and transportation terminals. 
Florida friendly landscaping. Describes landscaping practices which include nine guiding principles that help to preserve Florida's natural resources and protect the environment-www.swfwmd.state.fl.us/yards/ or www.floridayards.org/ 
Full cutoff. A luminaire light distribution where zero candela intensity occurs at or above an angle of 90 above nadir. Additionally, the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 10 (ten percent) at or above a vertical angle of 80 above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. 
Fully-shielded light fixture. A lighting fixture constructed in such a manner that the light source is not visible when viewed from the side and all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the luminaire, is projected below the horizontal as determined by photometric test or certified by the manufacturer. Any structural part of the light fixture providing this shielding must be permanently affixed. 
Glazing. The panes or sheets of glass or other nonglass material made to be set in frames, as in windows or doors. 
Gross floor area. The area within the perimeter of the outside walls of a building as measured from the inside surface of the exterior walls, with no deduction for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns, or other interior features. 
Hardscape. Paving surface of walkways/sidewalks usually consisting of poured concrete, concrete pavers and/or brick. 
Impervious surface. Percentage of the lot that may be covered by impervious materials, including buildings, pavement and other surfaces that are not permeable to water. It is calculated by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces by the total lot area. 
Internal block. One or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land bounded by streets, railroads, or subdivision boundary lines. 
Intermodal facilities. A place where interface occurs between transportation systems including transit connections, choices and coordination of various modes. Such facilities shall include, but are not limited to, intercity bus connections, transit shelters, greenways/pedestrianways, bicycle lanes, multimodal centers, kiss and ride drop-offs, park and ride lots, etc. 
Joint use driveway. A driveway connecting two or more contiguous sites to the public/private street systems. 
LDC. City of DeBary Land Development Code. 
Light fixture. The complete lighting assembly (including the lamp, housing, reflectors, lenses and shields), less the support assembly (pole or mounting bracket); a light fixture. 
Liner building. A liner building is a specialized building, parallel to the street, which is designed to conceal an area such as a parking lot or loading dock. Liner buildings may include commercial, office or residential uses. 
Live/work. Allows professionals, entrepreneurs, artists and others to occupy joint living and work quarters. 
Lot coverage. Percentage of the lot that may be covered by a building and is calculated by dividing the total of building footprint area by the total lot area. Do[es] not include parking or other paved surfaces. 
Mixed-use building. A building containing more than one type of use. This may include, but is not limited to, a combination of residential, commercial, light manufacturing, office, and/or civic land uses. 
Opaque wall. A wall that is not see-through, nontransparent. 
Outside TOD Core. Properties between approximately one-fourth mile and one-half mile of the DeBary Commuter Rail Station. 
Overlay district. An overlay district can serve as an opt-in, incentive-based district that overlays but does not supersede existing zoning or land use districts. 
Pedestrian-oriented business or use. A business or use which is commonly accessed by pedestrians from the street sidewalk and has a high customer use rate. 
Principal building. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located. 
Principal entrance. The place of ingress and egress most frequently used by the public. 
Principal street. In this document, the principal street of a lot or site is the street with the highest priority/level of transit service that is adjacent to the lot or site. Street priorities are as follows: 
• US Hwy. 17-92 
• TOD Core streets; 
• Pedestrian priority streets; 
• Local streets. 
Shaded sidewalk. For the purposes of this regulating plan shall be either a sidewalk with street trees at 30-foot intervals or a sidewalk covered with weather-protection materials such as awnings. 
Sidewalk. Pedestrian pathway that includes the street tree/furniture and sidewalk clear zone. 
Sidewalk clear zone. That portion of the sidewalk that is maintained free of any obstructions to allow for the passage of pedestrians. 
Storefront zone. Portion of the front yard set back to allow for seating areas, planters/planting areas, bicycle racks, temporary sale/display of merchandise, moveable sandwich boards, postal/freight collection boxes, public art, etc. 
Story. That portion of a building, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above the floor of such story. 
Streetscape. Term used to describe the natural and built fabric of the street. 
Street Tree/Furniture Zone. That portion of the sidewalk located between the curb line and the sidewalk clear in which the following elements may be located. 
• Street trees/grates, planting strips, raised planters; 
• Street light standards; 
• Street signs/pedestrian wayfinding signs; 
• Transit stops; 
• Postal/freight collection boxes; 
• Parking meters; 
• Utility boxes/public phones/fire protection; 
• Seating; 
• Trash receptacles; 
• Bicycle racks. 
TOD core. Properties within approximately one-fourth mile of the DeBary Commuter Rail Station. 
Transit oriented development. Land use planning concept that promotes mix of residential, commercial, office and public uses, all within a comfortable walking distance to maximize access to public transportation, and incorporates features to encourage transit ridership. Examples of transit-supportive land uses include, but are not limited to, the following: apartments; live-work units; townhouses; single-family houses; affordable housing; lodging; retail stores; restaurants; banks; private offices/professional businesses; government offices; medical centers; high schools and post secondary institutions; child-care centers; libraries; recreational and cultural facilities; theatres; public spaces; and other facilities. 
Transitional area. Properties beyond approximately one-half mile of the DeBary Commuter Rail Station. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 2(Exh. A), 12-29-2010) 
