CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF FORT WALTON BEACH, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FORT WALTON BEACH, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Mike Anderson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Scott Smith 
Diane Keller 
John Mead 
Mike Holmes 
Amy Jamieson 
MG Moran 
Dick Rynearson 
City Council 
____________ 
Michael Beedie 
City Manager 
____________ 
Hayward Dykes 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kim Barnes 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FORT WALTON BEACH, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Dick Rynearson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Nick Allegretto 
Mike Holmes 
Amy Jamieson 
Nathan Kelley 
Kirby Locklear 
MG Moran 
David Schmidt 
City Council 
____________ 
Michael Beedie 
City Manager 
____________ 
Hayward Dykes 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kim Barnes 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were furnished electronically by the City of Fort Walton Beach. The source of each section is included in the Table of Historical Notes and References following each chapter. The absence of a section in the table indicates that the section remains unchanged from the original codification. The text and tables of this Code were furnished electronically by the City of Fort Walton Beach. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the chapter, section, and subsection. Thus, section 6.04.050 is subsection .050, located in section 6.04 of chapter 6. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and sections are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Kayla Jewell, Editor, and Aline True, Quality Control Supervisor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Kim Barnes, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and indexes. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida.  
VOLUME I - CHARTER  
TITLE I. - ESTABLISHMENT 
 
Section 1. - Municipality established. 
The present municipality of the City of Fort Walton is hereby abolished and in the place of the same municipality there is hereby created and established a municipality under the name of Fort Walton Beach within the territorial boundaries of the said City of Fort Walton as now established or as there may hereafter be established, the said Fort Walton Beach to succeed to and take the place of the abolished City of Fort Walton. The municipal corporation hereby established and created shall have perpetual succession, may use a common seal, may contract and be contracted with, and may sue and be impleaded in all matters whatsoever.  
Section 2. - Validation of ordinances, property rights, liabilities, etc. 
All laws, by-laws, resolutions and ordinances lawfully passed and in force in the City of Fort Walton under its former charter, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, shall remain in force until repealed or altered in accordance with the provisions of this act. All rights, actions, prosecutions, contracts, and power and property of every description which were vested in it are vested in it under the charter herein provided for, as though there had been no change in form of government, and no neglect or liability, either in favor of or against the city, and no suit or prosecution of any kind, shall be affected by such change, unless expressly provided by the terms of this act.  
TITLE II. - LEGISLATIVE 
 
Section 3. - Creation and composition of council. 
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in a council of seven members who are elected at-large. The term of all councilmembers shall be for four (4) years, and an election shall be held each two (2) years for the purpose of electing members of the council as the terms expire. Until such elected members of the council shall take office, the present members of the council of the City of Fort Walton Beach shall continue in office until the expiration of their present terms of office. Members of the council shall be qualified electors of the city, and have resided in the city for at least six (6) months prior to qualifying for an elected office of the City of Fort Walton Beach with the Okaloosa County Supervisor of Election, and shall not hold any other city, state or federal office, except that of notary public or member of the state militia or member of the reserve forces of the United States. A member of the council ceasing to possess any of the qualifications specified in this section or convicted of crime, while in office, shall immediately forfeit his office.  
Section 4. - Limit on number of terms for city council and mayor. 
No person shall be elected to the office of city council or mayor of the City of Fort Walton Beach for more than two consecutive full terms.  
Section 5. - Filling vacancies in the city council or in the office of mayor. 
(a)  In the event a vacancy occurs on the city council, or in the office of mayor, after election of a person to fill the office concerned, the position shall be filled as follows: 
(1)  If a person elected has not yet been sworn into office, the office shall not be filled until that person would ordinarily have been sworn in. The council taking its seat at the time that person would have been sworn in shall determine the successor, by majority vote. 
(2)  If the person elected has been sworn into office, and if more than sixty (60) days remain before the next primary election to be held within the City of Fort Walton Beach, then that vacancy shall be filled by a vote of the majority of the council then sitting. 
(3)  Prior to any appointment by council, nominations shall be accepted during at least the two (2) general meetings following creation of the vacancies. The city council shall appoint the person to fill the vacancy at the third regular meeting after the vacancy is created. Voting will be confined only to those persons who were nominated and discussed at either or both the public meetings at which nominations were accepted. 
(4)  If fewer than sixty (60) days remain before the next primary election, no successor shall be appointed unless no one qualifies to run for the vacant position. 
(b)  All vacancies which occur on the city council, or in the office of mayor, shall be filled by majority vote of the council, but only until the next election held in the city. 
(c)  Whether or not the seat becoming vacant has been sworn into office, the appointment by a majority of the council shall be for a period extending only until the beginning of the first regular meeting after a successor is chosen by election as provided herein. That seat shall be open for qualification in the next election beginning sixty (60) days before the first primary and ending thirty (30) days before the first primary. Those candidates qualifying for that position shall run in a nonpartisan election. The candidate who receives a majority of the votes cast shall be elected to that position. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, then the two (2) candidates with the highest number of votes will participate in a runoff to be held at the next primary election, or if none, at the general election. The winner of that election shall fill the balance of the term of the seat in which the vacancy occurred.  
Section 6. - Regular and special meetings of council. 
On the first day of July, 1956, and thereafter on the first day of April in the years in which there are elections of councilmembers, the council shall meet in the council chamber of the city hall, and the newly elected members shall assume the duties of office. Thereafter the council shall meet at such times as may be prescribed by resolution. Special meetings shall be called by the clerk upon written request of the mayor, city manager or three members of the council. Any such notice shall state the subject or subjects to be considered. All meetings of the council and of the committees thereof shall be open to the public, and rules of the council shall provide that the citizens of the city shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any such meetings in regard to any matter considered thereat. Notice may be waived by written waiver signed by all members.  
Section 7. - Election of mayor and mayor pro tem; general duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city at large every four (4) years. The mayor pro tem shall be chosen by and from the members of the council. In addition to the powers conferred on the mayor by this charter, the mayor shall also have the rights, privileges and immunities of a member of the council except that the mayor shall have the right to cast a deciding vote should any issue before the members of the city council end in a tie vote. The mayor shall be subject to the same prohibitions against interfering with or suggesting to the city manager. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall also have the power and perform the duties conferred and imposed by the charter and the ordinances of the city. The mayor shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for serving civil processes, and by the governor for purpose of military law. In time of public danger or emergency the mayor shall, if so authorized and directed by vote of the council, take command of the police, maintain order and enforce the law.  
Section 8. - General powers and rules of council. 
The council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its members and, in such cases, shall have power to subpoena witnesses and compel the production of all pertinent books, records and papers, but the decision of the council, in any case, shall be subject to review by the courts. The council shall determine its own rules and order of business and keep a journal of its proceedings. It shall have power to compel the attendance of absent members, may punish its members for disorderly behavior, and, by vote of not less than six (6) members, may expel a member for disorderly conduct or the violation of its rules, but no member shall be expelled unless notified of the charges and given an opportunity to be heard in their own defense.  
Section 9. - Quorum; compelling attendance of members. 
A majority of the members elected to the council shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time to compel the attendance of absent members, in such manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance. No member shall be excused from voting, except on matters involving the consideration of their own official conduct, or when their financial interests are involved.  
Section 10. - Investigations of transactions of departments and officials. 
The council, the mayor or any committee, duly authorized and appointed by council or the mayor to do so, may investigate the financial transactions of any office or department of the city government and the official acts of any city official, and by similar investigation may secure information upon any matter relating to the city's business. In conducting such investigations the council, the mayor or any committee duly appointed may require the attendance of witnesses and production of books, papers, electronic files and other evidence, and for that purpose may issue subpoenas which shall be signed by the presiding officer of the council, the mayor or the chairperson of such committee, as the case may be, which may be served and executed by any police officer.  
TITLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Section 11. - City manager; acting manager; assistant manager; appointment, qualifications and salary. 
The council is hereby authorized to appoint from time to time a city manager who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government, who shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments, and who may be the head of the department or departments as the council may by ordinance provide. The city manager shall be chosen on the basis of their executive and administrative qualifications. The city manager may or may not be a resident of the City of Fort Walton Beach or the State of Florida. No member of the city council shall be appointed city manager. The city manager shall receive such salary as may be fixed by council. The council is further empowered to appoint or designate an acting city manager from time to time and also to appoint or designate an assistant city manager from year to year or from time to time and either shall receive such salary as the council shall see fit. The city council shall have the authority to provide the duties of the post of assistant city manager or the acting city manager when the city manager is absent and cannot himself designate or prescribe the duties of the assistant city manager or the acting city manager, as the case may be. In case of sickness or absence of the city manager, or in the case of a vacancy in said office, the city council may appoint another person, not a member of the city council, to act for the city manager during the absence or sickness, or during such vacancy, and the person so appointed may, during the absence, sickness or vacancy of the city manager, act and perform all the duties of the city manager, and all such acts of the person so appointed shall be as valid as though performed by the city manager. The council is limited to the appointment of an acting city manager to two consecutive terms of ninety (90) days each at the end of which time it shall be mandatory that the council appoint a fulltime city manager who meets the qualifications hereinabove set forth.  
Section 12. - City manager; responsibility; powers of appointment and removal. 
The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city in his or her charge, and to that end, subject to such civil service provisions as may be provided for by ordinance and except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager shall have the power to appoint and remove all officers and employees in the administrative service of the city, and the manager may authorize the head of a department or office responsible to him or her to appoint and remove, with the same limitations, subordinates in such department or office. Appointments made by or under the authority of the city manager shall be on the basis of the executive and administrative ability and of the training and experience of the appointee in the work which he or she is to perform. All such appointments shall be without definite terms unless for temporary service not to exceed sixty (60) days.  
Section 13. - Removal of officers and employees. 
Officers and employees appointed by the city manager, or under his or her authorization, may be removed by the city manager, or by the officer by whom appointed, at any time.  
Section 14. - Council not to interfere in appointments or removals; violation a misdemeanor; forfeiture of office. 
Neither the council, nor any of its committees or members, shall direct or request the appointment of any person to or removal from office by the city manager or any of his or her subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with that portion of the administrative service for which the manager is responsible solely through the manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city either publicly or privately. Any violation of the provisions of this section by a member of the council shall be a misdemeanor, conviction of which shall immediately cause the forfeiture of the office of the member so convicted.  
Section 15. - Duties of manager. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to act as chief conservator of the peace within the city; to supervise the administration of the affairs of the city; to see that the ordinances of the city and laws of the state are enforced; to make recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the city as may seem desirable; to keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city; to prepare and submit to the council the annual budget estimate; to prepare and submit to the council such reports as may be required by that body; and to perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or required by ordinance or resolution of the council.  
Section 16. - Manager's and officer's right to participate in council meetings. 
The city manager, the directors of all departments, and such other officers of the city as may be designated by vote of the council, shall be entitled to take part in all discussions of the council relating to their respective departments and offices.  
Section 17. - Administrative departments. 
There shall be such departments, boards and authorities as may be established by ordinance for the purposes of carrying out the legal, financial, public safety, public service and welfare functions of the city. The council may change any department, board, authority or office by ordinance and may prescribe, distribute or discontinue the functions and duties of departments, boards, authorities and offices so established, with the exception of the police or fire department, which shall require either a unanimous vote of the council or require a public referendum to discontinue. Additional functions and duties may be assigned by ordinance to departments, boards and authorities established by this charter, and departments, boards and authorities may be discontinued or the functions thereof changed by ordinance.  
Section 18. - Departments to be supervised by a director. 
At the head of each department there shall be a director who shall have the supervision and control thereof. Each director, with the consent of the manager, shall have power to prescribe rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter and the ordinances passed pursuant thereto, for the conduct of the officers and employees of the department of which he or she is in charge and for the custody of the books, papers, electronic files and property under its control. The city manager may act as the director of any one or more departments if the city council should so provide by ordinance.  
TITLE IV. - FINANCE PROCEDURES 
 
Section 19. - Surety bonds required of officers and employees. 
The council of the City of Fort Walton Beach shall fix the amount of the bond of all officers required by resolution or ordinance to give bond, and all officers, clerks and employees of whom bond is required by the council shall, before entering upon their respective duties, give bond with surety to be approved by the council, conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices, which bond, unless otherwise specifically provided by this charter, shall be payable to said city, and in such penalty as the council may by resolution prescribe. The council shall accept as surety on any official bond a good solvent surety company authorized to do business in the State of Florida. The premium on any such bond shall be paid by the city, unless otherwise specifically provided, and such bond shall be preserved by the city clerk.  
Section 20. - City officers; appointment and compensation. 
The city council shall appoint the city clerk and the city attorney. All other officers and employees shall be selected by the city manager. The council shall fix, by resolution, the compensation of the city manager, the mayor, the city clerk, and the city attorney. The city manager shall fix the salaries or compensation of all other officers and employees.  
Section 21. - Consolidation of offices and departments. 
The city council shall have the right to combine the functions of various departments and of various offices and to provide that one officer may perform the duties of one or more officers and may hold one or more offices.  
Section 22. - Emoluments other than regular compensation prohibited; exception. 
No member of the council or officer or employee of the city shall directly or indirectly receive from the city any compensation, emolument or other thing of value for any service rendered by them or other than the regular compensation to be paid as fixed by the terms of their employment by law or ordinance, nor shall they accept any frank, free ticket, pass or service, directly or indirectly, from any person, firm or corporation, upon terms more favorable than are granted to the public generally. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor. Such prohibitions of free service shall not apply to police officers or firefighters in uniform or wearing their official badge when the same is provided by ordinance.  
TITLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Section 23. - Oath of office. 
Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of their office, take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation, to be filed and kept in the office of the council, that he or she will support, protect and defend the constitution and laws of the United States and of the State of Florida, and in all respects discharge the duties of their office.  
Section 24. - Continuance of present officers. 
All persons holding office in or employed by the city, at the time this charter goes into effect, shall continue in such office or employment and in the performance of their duties until provisions shall have been otherwise made in accordance with the provisions of this charter for the performance or discontinuance of the duties of any such office or employment. When such provisions shall have been made the term of any such officer shall end.  
Section 25. - Elections. 
(a)  Except as modified or altered by the charter of the City of Fort Walton Beach, or by ordinances adopted from time to time, the provisions of general law of the State of Florida pertaining to state and local elections, registrations, manner of voting, qualifications of electors, duties of election officers, canvassing returns and the general holding and management of elections, shall apply. In addition, the council may provide detail for such elections more specifically by ordinance enacted from time to time. 
(b)  Any qualified elector of the city may become a candidate for any elective office by filing with the supervisor of elections a petition in the form as prescribed by that officer, together with a filing fee which shall be established by ordinance, but which may not exceed the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(c)  All ballots and other forms necessary for accomplishment of the function of the supervisor of elections shall be the responsibility of the office of the supervisor of elections. 
(d)  After the first election which, pursuant to the provisions of this charter, the council shall provide for by ordinance, the subsequent elections shall be provided for by ordinance and the times of such elections shall be fixed so as to assure the elections being held from time to time before the expiration of the terms of office of the incumbents.  
Section 26. - Property rights, obligations, ordinances, etc., continued. 
(a)  Property taxes, claims, etc. All property rights, uncollected taxes due, claims, judgments, decrees and choses in action held and owned by the City of Fort Walton, abolished by this charter, shall pass to and be vested in the municipality created by this charter. 
(b)  Obligations and contracts. No liability, obligation or contract of the said municipality of any nature whatsoever, including bonds and other outstanding indebtedness heretofore issued, shall be impaired or affected by this charter, but such debts, obligations and contracts shall pass to and be binding upon the new municipality which is hereby organized and created. 
(c)  Ordinances. The ordinances of the present City of Fort Walton, Okaloosa County, State of Florida, shall be and hereby are declared to be the ordinances of the City of Fort Walton Beach, hereby organized and established, until altered, amended, modified or repealed by the city council, except insofar as said ordinances may be modified, altered, amended or repealed by the provisions of this charter.  
Section 27. - Offices and employment continued. 
All officers and employees of the City of Fort Walton shall continue in their respective offices and employment, after the effective date of this charter, until they are replaced by election or appointment in accordance with the provisions of this charter.  
Section 28. - Construction. 
(a)  Powers cumulative with state law. The enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall not be termed or held to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied hereby, or applicable to the exercise thereof, which are now, or may hereafter be, possessed or enjoyed by cities under the constitution and general laws of this state, and such powers shall be cumulative and alternative powers to those herein granted and all the powers of the city, either expressed or implied, shall be exercised and embraced in the manner prescribed by this charter, or when not so prescribed, then in such manner as prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the council. 
(b)  Severability. If any section or part of a section of this charter is invalid or unconstitutional, the same shall not be held to invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section of this charter, unless it clearly appears that such other section or part of a section is willingly and necessarily dependent upon the section which is unconstitutional or invalid.  
Section 29. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of law in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
Section 30. - Effective date. 
This act shall take effect immediately upon its becoming a law.  
Section 31. - Police jurisdiction over navigable waters. 
The City of Fort Walton Beach is authorized to exercise police jurisdiction over all navigable water within a distance of one-half (½) mile of the present city limits of the City of Fort Walton Beach, provided, however, that no such distance shall extend beyond the half-way portion of any said body of water. This charter shall not be construed to annex any portions of water at the present time or any future date.  
Section 32. - Acquisition of recreational tracts. 
The City of Fort Walton Beach is authorized to acquire property on Santa Rosa Island outside the city limits of the City of Fort Walton Beach for recreational purposes, regardless of whether such lands are contiguous to the present city limits, by passage of an ordinance of the city council without regard to any general or special law of the state now existing.  
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
1.01 - CODE DESIGNATION, CITATION 
The Ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida," and may be so cited.  
1.02 - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 
 
1.02.01 - Generally. 
The construction of this Code, and of all Ordinances, the rules and definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council, or to any section of this Code which contains express provisions excluding such construction, or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto.  
1.02.02 - Liberal Construction. 
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the City Council may be fully carried out. The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed so as to affect its purposes. Terms used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall have the meanings prescribed by the Statutes of the State for the same terms.  
1.02.03 - Greater Restriction Applies; Text Controls. 
In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
In case of any difference of meaning or implication between text and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control.  
1.02.04 - Catchlines of Sections. 
The catch lines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
1.02.05 - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.  
1.02.06 - Ordinances Not Affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the Ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any Ordinance, and all such Ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect as if set out at length in this Code: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City, any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the City. 
(2)  Establishing positions, classifying employees and setting salaries, not inconsistent with this Code. 
(3)  Any right of franchise granted by any Ordinance to any person. 
(4)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City. 
(5)  Dealing with appropriations. 
(6)  Levying or imposing taxes. 
(7)  Prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles, or loading zones, not codified in this Code. 
(8)  Which is an amendment to the zoning map, which rezones specific property or which adopts or amends the comprehensive plan. 
(9)  Establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the City or providing for local improvements and assessing taxes. 
(10)  Printed in the Charter accompanying this Code. 
(11)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City. 
(12)  Extending or contracting or otherwise relating to the boundaries of the City. 
(13)  Adopted for purposes which have been consummated. 
(14)  Which is temporary, although general in effect. 
(15)  Which is special, although permanent in effect.  
1.02.07 - Continuation of Existing Ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those of Ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.  
1.02.08 - Code Does Not Affect Prior Offenses, Rights. 
Nothing in this Code or the Ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any Ordinance of the City in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.  
1.02.09 - Definitions. 
City. The word "City" shall mean the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida. 
City Manager. The words City Manager shall mean the City Manager of the City of Fort Walton Beach or the designee of the City Manager, if applicable. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by Ordinance, the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. 
The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions . Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  And indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
2.  Or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
3.  Either ... or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
Council. The term "Council" or "City Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida. 
County. The term "County" shall mean Okaloosa County, Florida. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or some other County officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty. 
F.A.C. The abbreviation "F.A.C." shall mean the Florida Administrative Code, as amended. 
F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." shall mean the latest edition of Florida Statutes, as amended. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Includes. The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Land and real estate. "Land" and "real estate" include rights and easements of an incorporeal nature. 
Law. "Law" means all applicable laws of the United States of America, the State of Florida and the City of Fort Walton Beach. "Law" includes all applicable County Ordinances. 
May. The word "may" shall be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
May not. The phrase "may not" states a prohibition. 
Must. The word "must" shall be construed as being mandatory and not permissive. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officer, agent, etc. Whenever the term "City Manager" or the title or designation of any other officer of the City is used, it shall include the authorized representative of the department charged by the City with the regulation and enforcement of the provisions of this Code and all other Ordinances relative to the jurisdiction of such department. 
Owner. "Owner," when applied to property, includes a part owner, joint owner or tenant in common of the whole or any part of such property. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to individuals, children, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups and legal entities or combinations thereof. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. "Premises," when used as applicable to property, extends to and includes land and buildings. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. Any place to or upon which the public resorts or travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by the City or any agency of the State or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom or by invitation, express or implied. 
Publish. To print in a newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality the entire document or a brief summary thereof with a listing of places where copies have been filed and times when they are available for inspection. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time. In all cases where provision is made for an act to be done or notice to be given within a reasonable time, it shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice. 
Residence. Residence means an abode in which a person permanently resides. 
Shall. The word "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb-line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" may include a mark when the person cannot write, his or her name being written near it, and being witnessed by a person who writes his or her own name as a witness. 
State. The term "state" shall mean the State of Florida. 
Street, highway and alley. "Street," "highway" and "alley" mean the entire width subject to an easement for public right-of-way, or owned in fee by the City, County or State, or every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The word "alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from a property. 
Tenant and occupant. "Tenant" and "occupant," as applied to buildings or land, shall extend and be applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or any part of, a building or land, alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written, in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" may include typewriting, printing on paper, and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year unless a fiscal year is indicated.  
1.03 - AMENDMENTS TO CODE 
 
1.03.01 - Effect of Repeal of Ordinances. 
The repeal of an Ordinance shall not revive any Ordinance in force before or at the time the Ordinance repealed took effect. 
The repeal of an Ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the Ordinance repealed.  
1.03.02 - Effect of New Ordinances. 
All Ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent Ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from such Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent Ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent Ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent Ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted by the City Council.  
1.03.03 - Amendments to Adopted Provisions. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows: ________." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. Additions and deletions may be shown with underlined and struck-through type.  
1.03.04 - Additions of New Provisions. 
If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code, is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Ordinances, City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered ________, which said section reads as follows: ________." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. Such additions may be indicated with underlined type.  
1.03.05 - Repeal of Provisions. 
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed may be specifically repealed by section, chapter or chapter number, as the case may be.  
1.04 - SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE, CODE UPDATES 
 
1.04.01 - Supplementation of Code. 
By contract or by City personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of Ordinances passed by the City Council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest Ordinance included in the supplement.  
1.04.02 - Exclusion of Repealed Provisions. 
In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.  
1.04.03 - Discretion of Codifier. 
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, non-substantive changes in Ordinances and parts of Ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. 
For example, the codifier may: organize the Ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subsection numbers; change the words "this Ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this title," "this chapter," "this section," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ________ to ________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the Ordinance incorporated into the Code); and make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of Ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of Ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
1.04.04 - Alterations of Code. 
No person shall change or amend, by addition or deletion, any part of this Code, or insert or delete a page or portion thereof, or alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented.  
1.04.05 - Five-Year Review of Code. 
At least every five (5) years from the date of adoption of this Code, there shall be a complete review of the Code to ensure internal consistency, and consistency, preemption, or repeal of provisions by state law and other Ordinances of the City.  
1.05 - VIOLATIONS OF CODE 
 
1.05.01 - Violations. 
"Violation of this Code" means: doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by Ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by Ordinance; failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by Ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by Ordinance; or failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by Ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by Ordinance.  
1.05.02 - General Penalty, Continuing Violations. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or for imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory Ordinance. 
In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of license or permits.  
1.05.03 - Failure to Perform Official Duty. 
"Violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a City officer or City employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section.  
1.05.04 - Revocation or Suspension of License Permit or Franchise. 
The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise, the imposition of civil fines or other administrative actions.  
1.05.05 - Continuing Violations. 
Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief.  
1.05.06 - Complicity in Violations. 
Every person concerned in the commission of an offense under this Code, whether he directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted, indicted, tried and on conviction shall be punished as if he had directly committed such offense.  
1.05.07 - Aiding and Abetting. 
Whenever any act is prohibited by a provision of this Code or by any adopted rule or regulation, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding or abetting of another person to do such act.  
1.05.08 - Code Enforcement Order Mitigation Procedures. 
Definitions. 
Satisfaction of Order. A legal document, as approved by the City Attorney, and the process by which the City acknowledges and confirms that a violator has satisfied all obligations of a Code Enforcement Order imposing a fine. 
Release of Order. A legal document, as approved by the City Attorney, and the process by which the City acknowledges and confirms that the City is releasing the violator from some of the obligations of a Code Enforcement Order imposing a fine while other obligations of the order have been satisfied by the violator. 
Satisfaction of Lien. A legal document, as approved by the City Attorney, and the process by which the City acknowledges and confirms that a violator has satisfied all obligations of a code enforcement order imposing a fine that has been filed in the public records of Okaloosa County. The City shall file a satisfaction of lien in the public records of Okaloosa County. 
Release of Lien. A legal document, as approved by the City Attorney, and the process by which the City acknowledges and confirms that the City is releasing the violator from some of the obligations of a Code Enforcement Order imposing a fine that has been filed in the public records of Okaloosa County, while other obligations of the order have been satisfied by the violator. The City shall file a release of lien in the public records of Okaloosa County. 
Mitigation Schedule. A schedule of suggested mitigation percentages, as approved by the city council and amended by resolution if needed, that shall be considered during review of an application for release of an order imposing a fine or release of lien, and that may ensure an equitable, expeditious, and effective method of gaining compliance with the code. The following is the city's suggested mitigation percentage schedule: 
Fine Amount 	% of Fine Amount to be Paid 
$1,000 to $20,000 	10% of the fine amount* 
$20,001—$40,000 	15% of the fine amount* 
$40,001—and over 	20% of the fine amount* 
 
* The fine amount to be paid in a mitigated settlement may be reduced to 10 percent of the Just Market Value of the property as established by the Okaloosa County Property Appraiser in cases where the suggested amount exceeds 10 percent of the certified Just Market Value. 
Satisfaction of Order or Lien. 
(1)  At any time that a violator/property owner has satisfied all obligations of a Code Enforcement Order, the Mayor, upon request provided by the violator and a statement of compliance provided by the Code Inspector, shall execute a Satisfaction of Order or Lien, whichever is applicable. 
(2)  The City Clerk will record any Satisfaction of Lien in the public records of Okaloosa County, Florida, and provide a copy of the recorded document to the property owner. 
Release of Lien. If a certified copy of a Code Enforcement Board order has been recorded in the public records and the property that was in violation has been brought into compliance with the code, the violator/property owner may apply to the City for a release of lien as follows: 
(1)  The violator/property owner shall apply for a release of lien in writing that includes, at a minimum, 
a.  the address of the subject property, 
b.  the date the subject property was brought into compliance, 
c.  the factual bases for the request for Release of Lien, 
d.  the terms upon which the violator/property owner believes a Release of Lien should be granted, 
e.  a statement of compliance by the code inspector, and 
f.  the amount of the release in fines sought by the violator/property owner. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the application for release of lien, the City Manager shall review the request to determine if review by the City Council is appropriate or if the case can be settled by the City Manager. If the request is not consistent with the suggested mitigation schedule or exceeds $20,000.00, it will be scheduled for the next available Council meeting and Staff will prepare a recommendation to the City Council. If the request is consistent with the suggested mitigation schedule and the settlement amount is less than $20,000.00, the City Manager can settle the case according to guidelines in this section. 
(3)  If the property subject to the request is also the subject of a foreclosure proceeding filed by the City against the property and property owner in violation, the City Manager shall issue a written denial of the request that includes name, address and telephone number of the foreclosure attorney and advised the applicant the that matter must be considered as a settlement of the litigation. 
(4)  The City Manager shall consider request for Release of Lien at pursuant to the following criteria: 
a.  The City Manager may take action based solely upon the sworn application and comments of the petitioner, and the recommendation of the City Staff. 
b.  The City Manager may reduce the amount of the lien consistent with the mitigation schedule or continue the lien in its full amount. 
c.  The City Manager will consider the following in determining whether to approve or deny a request for Release of Lien: 
1.  the gravity of the violation; 
2.  the time in which it took the violator/property owner to come into compliance; 
3.  the accrued amount of the code enforcement fines/lien as compared to the County's Property Appraiser's stated value of the property before exemptions; 
4.  any previous code violations; and 
5.  consistency with the suggested mitigation schedule. 
d.  If the City Manager approves a Release of Lien settlement, the City Attorney shall review the Release of Lien prior to the Mayor executing the release and the City Clerk shall have the release recorded in the public records of Okaloosa County, Florida, and provide a copy to the property owner. 
(5)  When the request cannot be settled by the City Manager, The City council shall consider the request for Release of Lien at a public meeting pursuant to the following criteria: 
a.  The City Council may take action based solely upon the sworn application and comments of the applicant, and the recommendation of the City Manager. 
b.  The City Council may reduce the amount of the lien, waive the full amount of the lien or continue the lien in its full amount. 
c.  The City Council shall consider the following in determining whether to approve or deny an application for Release of Lien: 
1.  The gravity of the violation 
2.  The time in which it took the violator/property owner to come into compliance 
3.  The accrued amount of the Code Enforcement fines/lien as compared to the County's Property Appraiser's stated value of the property before exemptions 
4.  Any previous Code Violations and 
5.  The mitigation schedule. 
d.  If the City Council approves a release of lien, the Mayor shall execute such release and the City Clerk shall have the release recorded in the public records of Okaloosa County, Florida, and provide a copy to the property owner. 
Waiver or Reduction of Administrative Fees or Costs. The City Council may consider a waiver or reduction of administrative fees or costs that were originally imposed in the Code Enforcement Order or for subsequent remedial actions taken by the City. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 2, 1-26-16) 
CHAPTER 1 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
2005 Code Section 	1992 Code Section 	State Law References/Other Historical Notes 
1.01 	1-1 	Code 1985, § 202.01(a) 
1.02.01 	1-2, ¶ 1 	Ch. 1, F.S. 
1.02.02 	1-2, ¶ 2 	Code 1985, § 202.02 
1.02.03 	1-2, ¶¶ 3-4 	Code 1985, § 202.02 
1.02.04 	1-3 	Code 1985, § 202.02 
1.02.05 	1-11 	Code 1985, § 202.08 
1.02.06 	1-12 	Code 1985, § 202.06 
1.02.06 	1-13 	Code 1985, § 202.06 
1.02.08 	1-14 	Code 1985, § 202.06 
1.02.09 	1-2, ¶5 	Code 1985, § 202.02 
1.03.01 	1-4 	Code 1985, § 202.04 
1.03.02 	1-5(a) 	Code 1985, § 202.03 
1.03.03 	1-5(b) 	Code 1985, § 202.03 
1.03.04 	1-5© 	Code 1985, § 202.03 
1.03.05 	1-5(d) 	Code 1985, § 202.03 
1.04.01 	1-6(a) 	Code 1985, § 202.03 
1.04.02 	1-6(b) 	Code 1985, § 202.03 
1.04.03 	1-6© 	Code 1985, § 202.03 
1.04.04 	1-7 	Code 1985, § 202.06 
1.04.05 		Ord. 1676 (22-11-05) 
1.05.01 	1-8(a) 	Code 1985, § 202.99(a), (b) 
1.05.02 	1-8© 	Code 1985, § 202.99(a), (b); Ord. 1676 (22-11-05) 
1.05.03 	1-8(b) 	Code 1985, § 202.99(a), (b) 
1.05.04 	1-8(d) 	Code 1985, § 202.99(a), (b) 
1.05.05 	1-8(e) 	Code 1985, § 202.99(a), (b) 
1.05.06 	1-9(a) 	Code 1985, §§ 202.02(33) 
1.05.07 	1-9(b) 	Code 1985, §§ 202.99© 
	1-10 	Repealed, Ord. 1676 (22-11-05) [Legally preempted as § 943.25(13), F.S., does not exist.] 
1.05.08 		Ord. 1793 (5-12-09), Ord. 1899 (9-23-14) 
  
CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION  
2.00 - GENERAL 
 
2.00.01 - Repealed.  
2.00.02 - City Seal. 
The following seal is hereby officially adopted by the city: 
 
A color photo is provided to assist in the selection of colors and shades of the logo adopted by the City. The photo does not portray the true colors; therefore, the following Pantone Matching System (PMS) colors and shades are provided to assist in the color selection: Outer border: Orange 151; Letters and numbers: Solid Reflex Blue; Water: Reflex Blue-screen 40%; Sky: Reflex Blue-screen 20%, or Blue 291; Sun: Orange 151-screen 40%; Sand: White; Ship: Blank-light screen at 10-20%; Sea oats: Gold 121; Grass and base of sea oats: Gold 121 mixed to obtain darker shade of gold; Birds, airplanes and borders: Black.  
2.00.03 - Collection of Attorneys' Fees in Actions for Damages. 
The City shall be entitled to collect reasonable attorneys' fees in any civil action when the city prevails in any suit for the collection of damages for injury to City property.  
2.00.04 - Assessment of Attorneys' Fees and Costs for Lease of City Property. 
When City property is leased for less than its fair market value, the lessee shall be assessed all attorneys' fees and all other costs associated with the preparation and recording of the lease.  
2.00.05 - City Excess Real Property. 
The City Manager may, from time to time recommend to the City Council the disposal of City real property which is unneeded for immediate or foreseeable future development/use requirements of the City. The City Manager shall submit a report and recommendation to the City Council for review and determination whether the parcel is unneeded for the immediate and future development/use requirements of the City and should be declared excess. No property shall be considered as unneeded for the immediate and future development/use requirements of the City if the City has any existing or projected development/use for the property. The term development/use as used herein excludes utilization for public utilities purposes which may be reserved to the City upon disposal of the property. 
2.00.051  Disposition Procedures: Upon the City Council determining the parcel to be excess real property, the City Manager shall proceed with the procedures set forth below to dispose of such excess real property. 
The City Manager shall secure one independent appraisal of the property by appraisers qualified to conduct appraisals for the State of Florida by general law. 
Any City real property declared to be surplus by the City Council may be disposed of in a manner declared by the City Council, including but not limited to sealed bid, auction and negotiated sale. 
The City Manager shall cause written notice of intent to dispose of property to be sent to abutting property owners, if any, and advertised twice in the legal advertisement section in a newspaper having general circulation within the City; advising the date by which proposals or offers must be received. 
Once a contract for sale has been negotiated to the satisfaction of the City Manager and proposed purchaser, the City Manager shall cause said contract to be submitted to the City Council for its review and approval. 
2.00.052  Contract for Sale; Council Review and Approval: The City Council shall review any proposed contract for sale and make a determination as to whether said contract is approved or disapproved. 
The City Council shall approve by Ordinance the conveyance of any land of the City. At any time before the City Council approves any contract for sale, the City reserves the right to reject all offers, proposals or negotiated contracts for sale for excess real property. 
Once the City Council approves a contract for sale of excess real property, the subject property may then be sold according to the terms of said contract. Award shall be made based upon consideration of best price and utilization of the property and development for uses benefiting the City and its citizens, in the exclusive discretion of the City Council. 
2.00.053  Authority of City Employees: No action or statement by any City employee shall be construed to be official action on behalf of the City in confirming any contract for sale, as the contract may only be confirmed by the City Council. 
Persons interested in purchasing property, which in order to facilitate the proposed development requires rezoning, are advised that it is the City Council that is empowered with the ultimate authority to rezone property. No employee of the City can guarantee the rezoning of the property in question. 
Persons interested in purchasing property, which in order to facilitate the proposed development requires a variance, are advised that it is the Board of Adjustment that is empowered with the authority to grant variances. No employee of the City can guarantee the success of an application for a variance. 
2.00.054  Conditions Imposed: The City Council may require the proposed purchaser submit detailed site plans of proposed development in order to ensure that the property is developed in a manner that is consistent with the surrounding neighborhood, to which plans the purchaser shall be bound. 
The City Council recognizes that each parcel of property is unique unto itself. In order to ensure each proposed purchase for development significantly contributes to the surrounding neighborhood and general needs of the City, the City Council reserves the right to place restrictions and covenants in the deed of conveyance which will guarantee accommodation of the City's public utilities provisions and the public's interest in proper and timely development of the property consistent with City Development Standards. All restrictions and conditions imposed shall be covenants running with the land, violation of which shall result in reversion of title to the City.  
2.00.06 - Voluntary Annexation Process. 
The City Council is authorized to annex property pursuant to the provisions of this section and Florida Statutes in order to establish an orderly and equitable process for expanding the territorial limits of the City consistent with the planning and service areas of the City as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan and to ensure the provision of sound urban services to newly annexed areas. 
2.00.061  Application: An application for voluntary annexation shall be filed in a form prescribed by the Development Administrator and shall include information required and, where applicable, a fee; as from time to time may be established by Resolution of City Council; and the following: A copy of the warranty deed or other proof of ownership, or as appropriate a signed and sworn disclosure-of-interest form; if development is to be initiated prior to the effective date of the annexation and where such development is for a use other than a detached single-family dwelling, then requisite site plans, plats, and engineering plans shall be submitted together with the petition or annexation agreement; a proposed future land use map (FLUM) designation and zoning category; the terms of a proposed annexation agreement, if any. 
2.00.062  Standards for Annexation: In considering whether to annex a particular parcel of property, the City shall consider, in addition to those requirements of general law, the extent to which: the proposed annexation will impact City services; the proposed annexation is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; the future land use map (FLUM) designation and zoning category as proposed, is appropriate; the proposed or existing development, if any, is consistent with City regulations; the terms of the proposed annexation agreement, if any, promotes the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
2.00.063  Staff Review and Recommendation: Upon receipt of an application, City staff shall review the application in accordance with the standards in this section and submit a recommendation on a proposed annexation ordinance and agreement, if any, to the City Council. 
2.00.064  City Council Decision: The City Council shall consider the recommendation of the City staff and after a public hearing with public notice as prescribed by Florida Statutes, approve or disapprove the annexation ordinance. An adopted annexation ordinance shall be filed with the Clerk of the Circuit Court and the Chief Administrative Officer of Okaloosa County and with the Department of State within seven (7) days after adoption. 
The ordinance must include a map, which clearly shows the annexed area and a complete legal description of that area by metes and bounds. 
2.00.065  Impact Fees: The voluntary annexation of property by the City Council shall not be effective until the applicable impact fees have been paid to the City. 
(Ord. No. 1967 , § 2, 1-24-17)  
2.01 - CITY COUNCIL 
 
2.01.01 - Robert's Rules of Order. 
Council meetings shall be conducted pursuant to Robert's Rules of Order, except to the extent that they conflict with the City Charter or the laws of the State.  
2.01.02 - Public Access to Local Officials. 
As used in this section, the term "local public official" means any elected or appointed public official holding a County or Municipal office who recommends or takes quasi-judicial action as a member of a Board or Commission. 
As used in this section, the term "ex parte" means any communication, in any form, that is received by any method by the public official outside of a meeting or public hearing of the body of which the public official is a member. 
2.01.021  Access Allowed: Any person not otherwise prohibited by statute, charter provision, or ordinance may discuss with any local public official the merits of any matter on which action may be taken by any Board or Commission on which the local public official is a member. 
2.01.022  Procedures to Remove Presumption: These procedures shall be followed to remove the presumption of prejudice arising from ex parte communications with local public officials. 
(1)  The substance of any ex parte communication with a local public official which relates to quasi-judicial action pending before the official is not presumed prejudicial to the action if the subject of the communication and the identity of the person, group, or entity with whom the communication took place is disclosed and made a part of the record before final action on the matter. 
(2)  A local public official may read a written communication from any person. However, a written communication that relates to quasi-judicial action pending before a local public official shall not be presumed prejudicial to the action, and such written communication shall be made a part of the record before final action on the matter. 
(3)  Local public officials may conduct investigations and site visits and may receive expert opinions regarding quasi-judicial action pending before them. Such activities shall not be presumed prejudicial to the action if the existence of the investigation, site visit, or expert opinion is made a part of the record before final action on the matter. 
(4)  Disclosure made pursuant to subparagraphs (1), (2), and (3) must be made before or during the public meeting at which a vote is taken on such matters, so that persons who have opinions contrary to those expressed in the ex parte communication are given a reasonable opportunity to refute or respond to the communication. This subsection does not subject local public officials to part III of chapter 112, F.S., for not complying with this paragraph. 
2.01.023  Third-Parties: In a quasi-judicial proceeding on local government land use matters, a person who appears before the decision making body who is not a party or party intervenor: shall be 
(1)  Allowed to testify before the decision making body, 
(2)  Subject to control by the decision making body; and 
(3)  May be requested to respond to questions from the decision making body; but need not be sworn as a witness; 
(4)  Is not required to be subject to cross-examination; and 
(5)  Is not required to be qualified as an expert witness. 
The decision making body shall assign weight and credibility to such testimony as it deems appropriate. 
A party or party intervenor in a quasi-judicial proceeding on local government land use matters, upon request by another party or party intervenor, shall be 
(1)  Sworn as a witness, 
(2)  Shall be subject to cross-examination by other parties or party intervenors, and 
(3)  Shall be required to be qualified as an expert witness, as appropriate.  
2.01.03 - Regular Meetings. 
Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the second (2 nd ) and fourth (4 th ) Tuesdays of each month, or on other days in the month as determined by the City Council, at 6:00 p.m.  
2.01.04 - Special Committees. 
The Council may appoint such special committees of the Council as are required for the proper disposition of Council's function in the City government.  
2.01.05 - Elections. 
The office of the County Supervisor of Elections is hereby appointed as the office with responsibility to conduct City elections. 
It shall likewise be the responsibility of such office to serve as the Registrar for voters in the City and for qualification of the various candidates for office. 
The county Supervisor of Elections shall promulgate such regulations as he considers being consistent with this Chapter and with the State Elections Code, including, specifically, the following: 
(1)  The registration of qualified electors shall be available at the City Hall and may be conducted elsewhere within the City limits, including the County Courthouse or the County Courthouse Annex, or elsewhere as may be provided by general law. 
(2)  The qualification of candidates for election to office within the City may be conducted within the City limits or at the County Courthouse Annex, as permitted by State law and as determined by the County Supervisor of Elections. 
(3)  The qualification fee, as set forth in this chapter, shall be collected by the County Supervisor of Elections and shall, at the conclusion of the period permitted for qualification, be returned to the office of the City Clerk. 
2.01.051.  Preparation, Use of Forms and Procedures: The County Supervisor of Elections is hereby authorized to prepare and utilize such forms and procedures as are necessary to effect the intent of this chapter. 
2.01.052.  Council Seat Designations; Election at Large: Seats on the Council shall be numbered one (1) to seven (7) and all seats shall be held by persons elected to those seats by the electors at large as at-large representatives. 
In all elections, each person qualifying as a candidate shall qualify at-large and shall run for a specific seat by its designated number. 
2.01.053.  Terms: Members of the Council and the Mayor shall serve for four-(4) year terms. 
Seats one (1) through four (4) of the Council, inclusive, shall be elected during the calendar year 1983, pursuant to the terms and on the dates set forth in this chapter. 
Seats five (5) through seven (7) and the office of Mayor shall be elected during the calendar year 1985 on the dates and in the manner provided in this chapter. 
2.01.054.  Dates of Elections: Elections for members of the Council and for Mayor shall be held on the second Tuesday in March of each election year. 
The candidate for a particular office who receives the highest number of votes cast shall be elected to that office. In case two or more persons receive an equal and highest number of votes for the same office, such persons shall draw lots to determine who shall be elected to the office. Duly elected Municipal Officers shall take office on April first (1 st ) next after the election. 
2.01.055.  Qualifying Dates and Fees: The qualifying dates for election to the offices of Councilmember and the Mayor shall commence at any time after 12:00 noon of the first day for qualifying, which shall be the fiftieth (50 th ) day prior to the date of the scheduled first City election, which is further defined as not the runoff election, but not later than 12:00 noon of the forty-sixth (46 th ) day prior to the date of the first primary. A qualifying fee of $25.00 shall be paid to the County Supervisor of Elections to qualify for election to the Council and as Mayor.  
2.02 - BOARDS & COMMITTEES, GENERAL 
 
2.02.01 - Robert's Rules of Order. 
All Agencies, Authorities, Boards, Commissions and Committees established by the City shall operate under Robert's Rules of Order in conducting their meetings.  
2.02.02 - Terms of Members. 
The appointment of any member of any City Agency, Authority, Board, Commission or Committee, except for the Local Planning Agency (LPA), Board of Adjustment (BOA), and Code Enforcement Board, shall be for a term of 48 months, which term shall commence at a time to be specified by Council at the time of the appointment. 
The Council may, from time to time, establish temporary committees appointed for a specific term. Terms of appointments to newly created City Agencies, Authorities, Boards, Commissions or Committees may be staggered to provide for continuity. Any appointment for any vacancy on any City Agency, Authority, Board, Commission or Committee shall fill the unexpired term of the appointment.  
2.02.03 - Dual Office Holding Prohibited. 
No person, excluding the Mayor, Council members and employees of the City, shall serve simultaneously as a member of more than one (1) Agency, Authority, Board, Commission or Committee of the City. 
Upon appointment of a person, subject to this limitation, to an Agency, Authority, Board, Commission or Committee, such new appointment shall effect the termination of that member's term as a member of the Agency, Authority, Board, Commission or Committee on which he previously served.  
2.02.04 - Vacancies. 
Vacancies on any Agency, Authority, Board, Commission or Committee, except for the Local Planning Agency, Board of Adjustment, or Code Enforcement Board, shall occur when a member has four (4) unexcused absences within any calendar year. 
It shall be the duty of the Chair of each Agency, Authority, Board, Commission or Committee, to report to the Council a member who has exceeded the maximum absences allowed. The report of the Chair, with a certificate of mailing notice to the absentee member, shall constitute evidence that the vacancy has occurred and shall be authorization for the Council to appoint another member for the unexpired term. 
An absence shall be excused only for reasons of death in the immediate family, serious illness, or out-of-town business.  
2.02.05 - Notice of Misconduct; Action by Council. 
A majority of the members of any Agency, Authority, Board, Commission or Committee may report to the Council any member of such Agency, Authority, Board, Commission or Committee who has committed misconduct, indiscretion or other activities which deal with the competency or qualifications of any member of such Agency, Authority, Board, Commission or Committee, or who, for health reasons, may be unable to continue to serve. 
Upon the receipt of such notice, the Council, after notice to such member, may hold hearings to determine whether such conduct is sufficient to remove the member from the member's appointment. Should the Council determine that the member has committed the conduct as specified or is unable, for health reasons, to continue service, it shall determine that a vacancy has occurred in such appointment.  
2.02.06 - Information Required of Candidates for Appointment. 
Any candidate for appointment or re-appointment to an Agency, Authority, Board, Commission or Committee shall file with the City Clerk his or her name, residence address, mailing address, occupation and any other pertinent information. The City Clerk shall maintain a file of candidate applicant forms for future reference.  
2.04 - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
2.04.01 - Establishment; Membership. 
Pursuant to section 163.356 & 163.357, F.S., there is created a Community Redevelopment Agency. Members of the Community Redevelopment Agency shall be the seven (7) City Council members who occupy seats one through seven (1—7). The term of office shall coincide with the term of each City Council member.  
2.04.02 - Powers. 
The Community Redevelopment Agency shall have all of the powers and authority granted to community redevelopment agencies pursuant to Chapter 163 Intergovernmental Programs, Part III Community Redevelopment, F.S. subject to the limitations provided in this chapter.  
2.04.03 - Rules of Procedure, Bylaws. 
The Agency shall formulate and may amend its own rules of procedure and written bylaws, so long as the rules and bylaws are not inconsistent herewith. 
A majority of its entire membership shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but less than a quorum may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent members. 
All action shall be taken by vote of at least a majority present and voting. It shall hold meetings as deemed necessary and shall provide in its bylaws for holding special meetings. All meetings shall be given public notice and shall be open to the public.  
2.04.04 - Fund Accounting, Budget Duties. 
The Agency shall provide for the proper accounting of all funds collected or derived by the Agency, and the authorization for the proper disbursement thereof for reasonable and necessary operating expenses, to the Finance Director. 
The agency or its designee shall requisition supplies, equipment, insurance and fidelity and surety bonds in accordance with the appropriations therefore duly made in the annual budget of the Agency, as approved by the Council.  
2.04.05 - Agency Staff. 
The City staff is hereby designated as the staff for the Community Redevelopment Agency.  
2.04.06 - Redevelopment Trust Fund. 
There is hereby established in accordance with section 163.387, F.S., a Redevelopment Trust Fund (the "Fund") for the Community Redevelopment Agency. 
2.04.061  Appropriation to Agency: The funds allocated to and deposited into the fund are hereby appropriated to the Agency to finance City Community Redevelopment projects, as authorized by a Redevelopment Plan approved by resolution of the Council. 
The Agency shall utilize the funds and revenues paid into and earned by the fund for all and every Community Redevelopment purpose delegated to it, as contained in the Plan for Redevelopment when adopted, and as provided by law. Such fund shall exist for the duration of the projects. 
2.04.062  Tax Increment: There shall be paid into the fund, and all taxing authorities as defined in § 163.340(2), F.S., hereby appropriate, commit and set over for payment into the fund, a sum equal to that increment in the income, proceeds, revenues and funds derived from, or held in connection with, the undertaking and carrying out of Community Redevelopment projects of the Agency within the Redevelopment Area designated by the City. 
Such increment shall be determined and appropriated annually and shall be an amount equal to the difference between: the amount of ad valorem taxes levied each year by the City on taxable real property contained within the geographic boundaries of the projects; and the amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by and for the City upon the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the projects as shown upon the assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by the City, last equalized prior to the effective date of the ordinance approving the Community Redevelopment Plan. 
2.04.063  Conditions of Funding: All taxing authorities as defined in § 163.340(2), F.S., will annually appropriate to the fund the sum referred to in this section at the beginning of the fiscal year of the City. The fund shall receive the tax increment described in this section only as, if and when such taxes may be collected by the City. 
The obligation of all taxing authorities as defined in § 163.340(2), F.S., to annually appropriate to the fund shall commence immediately on June 9, 1981, and continue until all loans, advances and indebtedness, if any, and interest thereon incurred by the Agency as a result of the project have been paid and only to the extent that the tax increment referred to accrues. 
2.04.064  Computation of Tax Increment: The tax increment shall be computed by using the assessed value of taxable property in the Redevelopment Area for the appropriate year for the original area and the expansion area as the base and, in each subsequent year, using the assessed value of property in the Redevelopment Area for that year as the second factor in determining the amount of the tax increment in that year. 
2.04.065  Agency Direction: The Agency is hereby directed to establish and set up the fund and to develop and promulgate rules, regulations and criteria whereby the fund may be promptly and effectively administered, including the establishment and maintenance of books and records and the adoption of procedures whereby the agency may, expeditiously and without undue delay, utilize such funds for their allocated statutory purpose. 
2.04.066  Treatment of Fund: All funds of the Agency shall be received, held, disbursed and secured like other public funds by the appropriate fiscal Officers of the City. 
The funds of the Agency shall be maintained under a separate account, shall be used only for purposes authorized in this Chapter and as authorized by general law and shall be disbursed in accordance with the rules and procedures established for disbursement for other City funds. 
The Agency may pay the City as an operating expense a reasonable amount for the services rendered by the City to it at its request. 
2.04.067  Agency Fund Responsibilities: The Agency shall accept full responsibility for the receipt, custody, disbursement, accountability, management and proper application of all moneys paid into the fund.  
2.04.07 - Issuance of Revenue and Development Bonds. 
All bond issues for the purpose of financing the undertaking of any Community Redevelopment project shall be subject to authorization by the Council and in accordance with § 163.385, F.S.  
2.04.08 - Improvement, Development of District. 
The Community Redevelopment Agency shall undertake and carry out the improvement and development of the Community Redevelopment District pursuant to the authority granted to it by the Land Development Code and the Community Redevelopment Plan, as amended.  
2.04.09 - City Manager Duties. 
The City Manager shall submit an annual budget of the Community Redevelopment Agency to the Council pursuant to the budget schedule of the City, as it may from time to time exist, or upon such special schedules for submission as the Council may prescribe. 
The City Manager may employ a Director to actively supervise and administer the affairs of the Agency and the Municipal District in accordance with the policies, rules and regulations established by the City. The Director shall report to and work under the supervision of the City Manager.  
2.04.10 - Legal Counsel. 
The City Attorney shall act as the legal counsel for the Community Redevelopment Agency. Upon approval by the Council, the Agency may employ other legal counsel from time to time as may be necessary.  
2.04.11 - Termination; Property and Powers. 
Should the Community Redevelopment Agency cease to exist or operate, for any reason, all its property, of any kind, shall forthwith become the property of the City, subject to the outstanding obligations of the Agency, and the City shall use this property to the maximum extent then practical for effectuating the purposes of this Chapter and shall succeed to and exercise all powers of the Agency insofar as such exercise is not in conflict with or inconsistent with the City Charter or other law applicable to the City.  
2.05 - DRUG NUISANCE ABATEMENT BOARD 
 
2.05.01 - Establishment. 
There is hereby created and established a Drug Nuisance Abatement Board consisting of seven (7) members. The City Council shall serve as the ex officio members of the Drug Nuisance Abatement Board. The presence of four (4) or more members shall constitute a quorum. Members shall serve without compensation.  
2.05.02 - Powers. 
The Board shall hear evidence relating to the existence of drug-related public nuisances on premises located in the City and after considering all evidence, the Board may declare the place or premises to be a public nuisance and may enter an order immediately prohibiting: 
(1)  The maintaining of the nuisance; 
(2)  The operating or maintaining of the place or premises; or 
(3)  The conduct, operation, or maintenance of any business or activity on the premises which is conducive to such nuisance. 
As used in this chapter, "operator" shall mean tenant, lessee or person having control or possession of the premises. 
Public nuisance shall mean any place or premises within the city which has been used on more than two (2) occasions as the site of the unlawful sale or delivery of controlled substances as defined in Chapter 893, F.S.  
2.05.03 - Procedures. 
Any employee, Officer or resident of the City may file a complaint with the Board regarding the existence on premises located in Fort Walton Beach of a public drug nuisance, after giving not less than three (3) days' written notice of such complaint to the owner and operator of the place or premises complained of at his or her last known address. 
2.05.031  Service of Notice; Hearing: The Drug Nuisance Abatement Board, through its Clerk, shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be sent by certified mail or hand delivered to the owner of the premises complained of at his or her last known address at least fourteen (14) days prior to the scheduled hearing. If an attempt to reach the owner by hand delivery or certified mail is unsuccessful, notice of the hearing may be by publication as provided in Chapter 49, F.S. 
2.05.032  Contents of notice: The notice of hearing shall include: 
1.  A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing; 
2.  A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held; 
3.  A reference to the particular sections of the statutes and ordinances involved; 
4.  A short and plain statement summarizing the incidents complained of. 
2.05.033  Conduct of Hearings: The Chairman of the Board may call hearings of the Board. Hearings may also be called by written notice signed by at least four (4) members of the Board. The Board, at a hearing, may set a future hearing date. 
The Board shall convene as the demand necessitates. The Board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings and all hearings shall be open to the public. The City shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required for the proper performance of the Board's duties. 
The City Attorney shall serve as legal counsel to represent the Drug Nuisance Abatement Board. From time to time, an attorney may be employed by the City Manager to represent the City by preparing and presenting cases before the board. 
2.05.034  Presentation of Evidence: All parties shall have an opportunity to present evidence and argument on all issues involved, to conduct cross-examination and submit rebuttal evidence, and to be represented by Counsel. 
When appropriate, the general public may be given an opportunity to present oral or written communications. If the Agency proposes to consider such material, then all parties shall be given an opportunity to cross-examine or challenge or rebut it. The Board may consider any evidence, including evidence of the general reputation of the place or premises. 
All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. Orders of the Board shall be based on competent and substantial evidence. 
2.05.035  Order of the Board: All orders of the Board shall be, by motion, approved by a majority of those members present and voting, except that at least four (4) members of the Board must vote in order for the action to be official. 
An order shall expire after one (1) year or at such earlier time as stated in the order. The Board shall retain jurisdiction to modify its orders prior to the expiration of such orders. 
2.05.036  Appeals: An aggrieved party, including the City Administration, may appeal a Final Administrative Order of the Drug Nuisance Abatement Board to the Circuit Court of the First Judicial Circuit. Such appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the Board. An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the date of the written order appealed from.  
2.05.04 - Rights Reserved. 
When any nuisance, as defined in section 823.05, F.S., exists, the City Attorney or any citizen of the County may sue in the name of the State on his or her relation to enjoin the nuisance, the person or persons maintaining it, and the owner or agent of the building or ground on which the nuisance exists. This division does not restrict the right of any person, the Board or the City to proceed under section 60.06, F.S., against any public nuisance.  
2.06 - FIRE FIGHTERS RETIREMENT FUND BOARD 
 
2.06.01 - Establishment. 
The City's Firefighters' Retirement Fund Board of Trustees shall consist of five (5) members and be solely responsible for administering the Firefighters' Trust Fund. 
The membership composition, appointments, and succession shall be governed by chapter 175, F.S., as amended. The Trustees shall, by a majority vote, elect from their number a Chair and a Secretary. 
The Secretary of the Board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of the Board. The Trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by Florida law.  
2.06.02 - Powers and Duties. 
The Board of Trustees shall meet at least quarterly each year. The powers and duties of the Board of Trustees shall derive from those enumerated in chapter 175, F.S., as amended.  
2.06.03 - Firefighters' Pension Trust Fund. 
(a)  Definitions. As used herein, unless otherwise defined or required by the context, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning indicated: 
Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions with interest at the rate of three percent (3%) per annum. For those members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the plan, any payment representing the amount attributable to member contributions based on the applicable member contribution rate, and any payment representing interest and any required actuarially calculated payments for the purchase of such credited service, shall be included in accumulated contributions, without the crediting of interest of three percent (3%) per annum. 
Actuarial Equivalent means a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon the RP 2000 Combined Healthy Unisex Mortality Table and an interest rate equal to the investment return assumption set forth in the last actuarial valuation report approved by the board. This definition may only be amended by the City pursuant to the recommendation of the board using assumptions adopted by the board with the advice of the plan's actuary, such that actuarial assumptions are not subject to City discretion. 
Average Final Compensation shall mean one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the average salary of the five (5) best years of the last ten (10) years of credited service prior to retirement, termination, or death, or the career average as a full-time Firefighter, whichever is greater. A year shall be twelve (12) consecutive months. 
Beneficiary means the person or persons entitled to receive benefits hereunder at the death of a member who has or have been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect, or if no person so designated is living, at the time of death of the member, the beneficiary shall be the estate of the member. 
Board means the Board of Trustees, which shall administer and manage the plan herein provided and serve as Trustees of the fund. 
Child means natural or legally adopted children of a member. 
City means City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida. 
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time, and any subsequent laws. 
Credited Service means the total number of years and fractional parts of years of service as a Firefighter with member contributions, when required, omitting intervening years or fractional parts of years when such member was not employed by the City as a Firefighter. A member may voluntarily leave his accumulated contributions in the fund for a period of five (5) years after leaving the employ of the City pending the possibility of being reemployed as a Firefighter, without losing credit for the time that he was a member of the plan. If a vested member leaves the employ of the City, the accumulated contributions will be returned only upon written request. If a former member who is not vested is not reemployed as a Firefighter with the City within five (5) years, his accumulated contributions, if one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, shall be returned. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed within five (5) years, his accumulated contributions, if more than one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00), will be returned only upon the written request of the member and upon completion of a written election to receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount on forms designed by the board. Upon return of a member's accumulated contributions, all rights and benefits under the plan are forfeited and terminated. Upon any reemployment, a Member shall not receive credit for the years and fractional parts of years of service for which accumulated contributions were withdrawn from the fund, unless the member repays into the fund the withdrawn contributions, with interest as determined by the board, within ninety (90) days after reemployment. 
The years or fractional parts of a year that a member performs "Qualified Military Service" consisting of voluntary or involuntary "service in the uniformed services" as defined in the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) (P.L.103-353), after separation from employment as a Firefighter with the City to perform training or service, shall be added to his years of credited service for all purposes, including vesting, provided that: 
A.  The member is entitled to reemployment under the provisions of USERRA. 
B.  The member returns to his employment as a Firefighter within one (1) year from the earlier of the date of his military discharge or his release from active service, unless otherwise required by USERRA. 
C.  The maximum credit for military service pursuant to this paragraph shall be five (5) years. 
D.  This paragraph is intended to satisfy the minimum requirements of USERRA. To the extent that this paragraph does not meet the minimum standards of USERRA, as it may be amended from time to time, the minimum standards shall apply. 
In the event a member dies on or after January 1, 2007, while performing USERRA Qualified Military Service, the beneficiaries of the member are entitled to any benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) as if the member had resumed employment and then died while employed. 
Beginning January 1, 2009, to the extent required by Section 414(u)(12) of the Code, an individual receiving differential wage payments (as defined under Section 3401(h)(2) of the Code) from an employer shall be treated as employed by that employer, and the differential wage payment shall be treated as compensation for purposes of applying the limits on annual additions under Section 415(c) of the Code. This provision shall be applied to all similarly situated individuals in a reasonably equivalent manner. 
Leave conversions of unused accrued paid time off shall not be permitted to be applied toward the accrual of credited service either during each plan year of a member's employment with the City or in the plan year in which the member terminates employment. 
Firefighter means any person employed solely in the Fire Department of the City who is certified as a Firefighter as a condition of employment in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 633.408, and whose duty it is to extinguish fires, to protect life and to protect property. The term includes all certified, supervisory, and command personnel whose duties include, in whole or in part, the supervision, training, guidance, and management responsibilities of full-time firefighters, part-time firefighters, or auxiliary firefighters but does not include part-time firefighters or auxiliary firefighters. 
Member means an actively employed Firefighter who fulfills the prescribed participation requirements. 
Plan means the City of Fort Walton Beach Municipal Firefighters' Pension Trust Fund as contained herein and all amendments thereto. 
Salary means the total cash compensation for services rendered to the City as a Firefighter, reportable on the member's W-2, including amounts "picked up" by the City pursuant to §414(h) of the Code and any other tax deferred, tax exempt or tax exempt items of income derived from elective employee payroll deductions or salary reductions, but excluding unused accumulated sick leave pay and vacation pay received as a lump sum payment upon termination of employment. Compensation in excess of the limitations set forth in Section 401(a)(17) of the Code as of the first day of the plan year shall be disregarded for any purpose, including employee contributions or any benefit calculations. The annual compensation of each member taken into account in determining benefits or employee contributions for any plan year beginning on or after January 1, 2002, may not exceed two hundred thousand ($200,000.00), as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17)(B). Compensation means compensation during the fiscal year. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. If the determination period consists of fewer than twelve (12) months, the annual compensation limit is an amount equal to the otherwise applicable annual compensation limit multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the short determination period, and the denominator of which is twelve (12). If the compensation for any prior determination period is taken into account in determining a member's contributions or benefits for the current plan year, the compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the applicable annual compensation limit in effect for that prior period. The limitation on compensation for an "eligible employee" shall not be less than the amount which was allowed to be taken into account hereunder as in effect on July 1, 1993. "Eligible employee" is an individual who was a member before the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995. 
Spouse the member's or retiree's spouse under applicable law at the time benefits become payable. 
Masculine gender. The masculine gender, where used herein, unless the context specifically requires otherwise, shall include both the feminine and masculine genders. 
(b)  Membership. 
(1)  Conditions of Eligibility. 
a.  All Firefighters as of December 31, 1986, and all future Firefighters, shall become members of this plan as a condition of employment. 
b.  All future members shall be required to complete a medical examination as prescribed by the board. Based upon medical evidence of any pre-existing adverse health condition, resulting from the prescribed examination or other records or medical history, the board may declare any member ineligible for disability benefits hereunder, as related to such pre-existing condition. However, in such cases, as regards members as of the effective date, a disability benefit equal in amount to that which would have been payable under Chapter 175 shall be payable hereunder in lieu of all other disability benefits provided for in this Ordinance. 
A member may be declared ineligible for disability benefits only at the time of the board's acceptance of membership in the plan, or at a later date if the board establishes that a condition existed at the time of the member's employment, and such declaration shall be recorded on the member's record of membership, a copy of which shall be provided to the member. Each declaration must also be reflected in the minutes of the meeting of the board at which such declaration was formally adopted or established by the board. The procedures followed, and ruling made, regarding this matter shall be on a uniform, non-discriminatory basis, with all members, in similar situations being treated alike. 
(2)  Membership. Each member shall complete a form prescribed by the board providing the following information: 
a.  Acknowledgment of acceptance of the terms and conditions of the Pension plan, including an initialing of any declaration of ineligibility for disability benefits, and, 
b.  Designation of a beneficiary or beneficiaries, and, 
c.  A certified statement as to prior medical history. 
d.  A written release permitting the board to obtain and distribute all medical records to the board members, its attorney, and any medical professionals retained by the board. 
For purposes of all benefits hereunder, membership shall be considered to have been in effect from date of employment, even though officially accepted and approved by the board at a later date. 
(3)  Change in Designation of Beneficiary. A member may from time to time change his designated beneficiary by written notice to the board upon forms provided by the board. Upon such change the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefits under the plan shall cease. 
(c)  Board of Trustees. 
(1)  The sole and exclusive administration of and responsibility for the proper operation of the retirement plan and for making effective the provisions of this ordinance are hereby vested in a Board of Trustees consisting of five (5) Trustees, two (2) of whom, unless otherwise prohibited by law, shall be legal residents of the municipality, who shall be appointed by the Fort Walton Beach City Council, and two (2) of whom shall be full-time Firefighter members of the plan, who shall be elected by a majority of the Firefighters who are members of the plan. The fifth trustee shall be chosen by a majority of the previous four (4) trustees as provided for herein, and such person's name shall be submitted to the Fort Walton Beach City Council. Upon receipt of the fifth person's name, the Fort Walton Beach City Council shall, as a ministerial duty, appoint such person to the Board of Trustees as its fifth trustee. The fifth trustee shall serve a two (2) year term and have the same rights as each of the other four (4) trustees appointed or elected as herein provided and may succeed himself in office. Each resident trustee shall serve as Trustee for a period of two (2) years, unless sooner replaced by the Fort Walton Beach City Council at whose pleasure he shall serve, and may succeed himself as a Trustee. Each Firefighter trustee shall serve as Trustee for a period of two (2) years, unless he sooner leaves the employment of the City as a Firefighter or his position as Trustee, whereupon his successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the departing member. Each Firefighter may succeed himself in office. The Board of Trustees shall meet at least quarterly each year. Each Board of Trustees shall be a legal entity with, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained herein, the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature, and description. 
(2)  The Trustees shall by a majority vote elect a chairman and a secretary. The secretary of the board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of the board. The Trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by law. 
(3)  Each Trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on the board. Three (3) affirmative votes shall be necessary for any decision by the Trustees at any meeting of the board. A Trustee shall have the right to abstain from voting as the result of a conflict of interest provided he complies with the provisions of F.S. § 112.3143. 
(4)  The Board of Trustees shall engage such actuarial, accounting, legal, and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the pension plan. The compensation of all persons engaged by the Board of Trustees and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the pension plan shall be paid from the plan at such rates and in such amounts as the Board of Trustees shall agree. 
(5)  The duties and responsibilities of the Board of Trustees shall include, but not necessarily be limited by, the following: 
a.  To construe the provisions of the plan and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
b.  To determine all questions relating to eligibility and participation. 
c.  To determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder. 
d.  To establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit applications and all matters required to administer the plan. 
e.  To distribute to members at regular intervals information concerning the plan. 
f.  To receive and process all applications for participation and benefits. 
g.  To authorize all payments whatsoever from the plan, and to notify the disbursing agent, in writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the plan. 
h.  To have performed actuarial studies and at least biennial valuations, and make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the plan. 
i.  To perform such other duties as are specified in this Ordinance. 
(6)  The board shall be independent of the City to the extent required to accomplish the intent, requirements, and responsibilities provided for by law. 
(d)  Finances and Fund Management. Establishment and operation of fund. 
(1)  As part of the plan there is hereby established the fund, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the plan, including the assets of the prior City of Fort Walton Beach Municipal Firefighters' Retirement Fund. 
(2)  The actual custody and supervision of the plan (and assets thereof) shall be vested in the Board of Trustees. Payment of benefits and disbursements from the plan shall be made by the disbursing agent but only upon written authorization from the board. 
(3)  All funds and securities of the City of Fort Walton Beach Municipal Firefighters' Pension Trust Fund may be deposited by the Board of Trustees with the Finance Director of the municipality, acting in a ministerial capacity only, who shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as he is liable for the safekeeping of funds for the municipality. However, any funds and securities so deposited with the Finance Director of the municipality shall be kept in a separate fund by the Finance Director or clearly identified as such funds and securities of the City of Fort Walton Beach Municipal Firefighters' Pension Trust Fund. In lieu thereof, the Board of Trustees shall deposit the funds and securities of the City of Fort Walton Beach Municipal Firefighters' Pension Trust Fund in a qualified public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which depository with regard to such funds and securities shall conform to and be bound by all of the provisions of F.S. Chapter 280. In order to fulfill its investment responsibilities as set forth herein, the board may retain the services of a custodian bank, an investment advisor registered under Investment Advisors Act of 1940 or otherwise exempt from such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination of these, for the purposes of investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall have discretion, subject to any guidelines as prescribed by the board, in the investment of all plan assets. 
(4)  All funds and securities of the plan may be commingled in the plan, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the plan, including accurate current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
a.  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and aggregate account basis, and 
b.  Receipts and disbursements, and 
c.  Benefit payments, and 
d.  Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the City, and 
e.  All interest, dividends and gains (or losses) whatsoever, and 
f.  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(5)  An independent audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year of the City showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(6)  The Board of Trustees shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
a.  The Board of Trustees shall be vested with full legal title to said fund, subject, however, and in any event, to the authority and power of the Fort Walton Beach City Council to amend or terminate this Trust, provided that no amendment or plan termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this plan except for the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this plan. All contributions from time to time paid into the plan, and the income thereof, without distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its agent in the plan and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any portion of the fund. 
b.  All monies paid into or held in the pension plan shall be invested and reinvested by the board and the investment of all or any part of such funds shall be limited to: 
1.  Annuity and life insurance contracts of life insurance companies in amounts sufficient to provide, in whole or in part, the benefits to which all of the participants in the plan shall be entitled under the provisions of this plan and pay the initial and subsequent premium thereon. 
2.  Time or savings accounts of a national bank, a state bank or a savings/building and loan association insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in an amount not exceeding that insured. 
3.  Obligations of the United States or obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the government of the United States. 
4.  Stocks, commingled funds, mutual funds and bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, provided that: 
(a)  Except as provided in subparagraph (b), all individually held securities and all securities in a commingled or mutual fund must be issued or guaranteed by a corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized territory of the United States, or the District of Columbia. 
(b)  Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the assets of the fund at market value may be invested in foreign securities. 
(c)  The board shall not invest more than five percent (5%) of its assets in the common stock, capital stock, or convertible securities of any one (1) issuing company, nor shall the aggregate investment in any one (1) issuing company exceed five percent (5%) of the outstanding capital stock of that company; nor shall the aggregate of its investments in common stock, capital stock and convertible securities at market exceed seventy percent (70%) of the assets of the fund. 
5.  Real Estate. 
6.  Bonds issued by the State of Israel. 
c.  The Board of Trustees shall not invest more than twenty percent (20%) of its assets at cost in real estate. 
d.  The Board of Trustees may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the plan as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the plan. 
e.  No person or entity shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to his or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
f.  The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them unregistered and in form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the trust fund. 
g.  The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with the Trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other investments comprising the plan which it may deem to be to the best interest of the plan to exercise. 
h.  The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to secure any order of court for the exercise of any power contained herein. 
i.  Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required to perform either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as Trustee under this Ordinance, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the City, or any other entity, of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
j.  Any overpayments or underpayments from the plan to a member or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by the board. Overpayment shall be charged against payments next succeeding the correction. Underpayments shall be made up from the trust fund. 
k.  The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the plan to meet the payments and benefits herein provided for. 
l.  In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary party, and no member or other person having an interest in the plan shall be entitled to any notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be conclusive upon all persons. 
m.  Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times maintains continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent; provided further, that legal title to said plan shall always remain in the Board of Trustees. 
(e)  Contributions. 
(1)  Member Contributions. 
a.  Amount. Members of the pension plan shall be required to make regular contributions to the plan in the amount of eight percent (8%) of his salary. Member contributions withheld by the City on behalf of the member shall be deposited with the Board of Trustees immediately following each pay period. The contributions made by each member to the plan shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to §414(h) of the Code. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the members' gross income for Federal Income Tax purposes. For all other purposes of the plan, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
b.  Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
c.  Interest. Interest shall be credited to member contributions at the rate of three percent (3%) per annum. 
(2)  State Contributions. Any monies received or receivable by reason of laws of the State of Florida, for the express purpose of funding and paying for retirement benefits for Firefighters of the City shall be deposited in the trust fund comprising part of this plan immediately and under no circumstances more than five (5) days after receipt by the City. 
(3)  City Contributions. So long as this plan is in effect, the City shall make quarterly contributions to the trust fund in an amount equal to the required City contribution, as shown by the applicable actuarial valuation of the plan, determined in accordance with Part VII, of Chapter 112, Florida Statutes and the applicable regulations. The total cost for any year shall be defined as the total normal cost plus the additional amount sufficient to amortize the unfunded past service liability over not more than a thirty (30) year period. 
(4)  Other. Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the plan, but such deposits must be accounted for separately and kept on a segregated bookkeeping basis. Funds arising from these sources may be used only for additional benefits for members, as determined by the board, and may not be used to reduce what would have otherwise been required City contributions. 
(f)  Benefit Amounts and Eligibility. 
(1)  Normal Retirement Age and Date. A member's normal retirement age is the earlier of the attainment of age fifty-five (55) and the completion of ten (10) years of credited service or the completion of twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age. Each member shall become one hundred percent (100%) vested in his accrued benefit at normal retirement age. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date the member retires from the City after attaining normal retirement age. 
(2)  Normal Retirement Benefit. 
a.  A member retiring hereunder on or after his normal retirement date, and on or before January 1, 2000, shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on his retirement date and be continued thereafter during his lifetime, ceasing upon death, but with one-hundred twenty (120) monthly payments guaranteed in any event. The monthly retirement benefit shall equal two and one-half percent (2.50%) of average final compensation, for each year of credited service. 
b.  Each person who meets the eligibility requirements in subsection (1), above, is one hundred percent (100%) vested on January 1, 2000, and retires on or after that date, shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on his retirement date and be continued thereafter during his lifetime, ceasing upon death, but with one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments guaranteed in any event; and such person shall receive a retirement benefit commencing at normal retirement equal to three and one quarter percent (3.25%) of average final compensation for each year of credited service, but no greater than one hundred percent (100%) of average final compensation. 
c.  Each person who meets the eligibility requirements in subsection (1), above, and retires on or after January 1, 2000, but is not one hundred percent (100%) vested on that date, and all future plan members, shall receive a benefit commencing at normal retirement equal to three and one quarter percent (3.25%) of average final compensation for each year of credited service, but no greater than one hundred percent (100%) of average final compensation. 
(3)  Early Retirement Date. A member may retire on his early retirement date which shall be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the later of the attainment of age forty-five (45) and the completion of ten (10) years of credited service. 
(4)  Early Retirement Benefit. A member retiring hereunder on his early retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit calculated by determining his normal retirement benefit based upon his credited service to his normal retirement date, but reducing said amount by one-quarter percent (.25%) for each thirty (30) days that the early retirement date precedes the member's normal retirement date. In no event may the early retirement benefit exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the member's average final compensation. 
(5)  Cost of Living Adjustment. Commencing on January 1, 1993 and each January 1 thereafter, each pension payable to all service retirees, who have attained fifty-eight (58) years of age, current and future, shall be increased by an amount equal to three percent (3%). 
(6)  Required Distribution Date. The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the City. 
(g)  Pre-Retirement Death. 
(1)  Service Incurred. The beneficiary of a deceased member whose death was directly caused by the performance of his duty as a Firefighter shall receive the accrued benefit otherwise payable to the member equal to the monthly amount which would have been payable had the deceased member retired under early or normal retirement, or fifty percent (50%) of the member's average final compensation, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Non-Service Incurred. 
a.  Less Than Five (5) Years Credited Service. The beneficiary of a deceased member whose death was not directly caused by the performance of his duty as a Firefighter who was not receiving monthly benefit payments, and who had not yet attained five (5) years of credited service, shall receive twenty percent (20%) of average final compensation or refund of one-hundred percent (100%) of the member's accumulated contributions. 
b.  Five (5) or More Years Credited Service. The beneficiary of a deceased member whose death was not directly caused by the performance of his duties as a Firefighter who was not receiving monthly benefit payments, and who had attained five (5) or more years of credited service, shall receive the greater of forty percent (40%) of the member's average final compensation or otherwise payable to the member at early or normal retirement age, or a refund of one-hundred percent (100%) of the member's accumulated contributions. 
(3)  Duration of Benefit. Any monthly benefit payable under this section (g) shall terminate as follows: 
a.  If the death of the member is service-incurred and payable to the spouse, the benefit shall terminate upon his or her death. If the death of the member is not service-incurred and payable to the spouse, the benefit shall terminate upon his or her death or remarriage. 
b.  If payable to a child or children, upon attainment of age eighteen (18), or age twenty-three (23) if engaged in a full-time education. 
c.  If one hundred twenty (120) payments have not been made under this section, then the difference between one hundred twenty (120) payments and the number actually paid shall be paid to the member's estate. 
(h)  Disability. 
(1)  Disability Benefits On-Duty. Each member in the pension plan and who shall have become totally and permanently disabled while an active member of the Fort Walton Beach Fire Department to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a Firefighter which disability was directly caused by the performance of his duty as a Firefighter, shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to three percent (3%) of his average final compensation multiplied by the total years of credited service, but in no event shall the minimum amount paid to the member be less than fifty percent (50%) of the average final compensation of the member. Terminated persons, either vested or non-vested, are not eligible for disability benefits. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a member is terminated by the City for medical reasons, the terminated person may apply for a disability benefit if the application is filed with the board within thirty (30) days from the date of termination. If a timely application is received, it shall be processed and the terminated person shall be eligible to receive a disability benefit if the board otherwise determines that he is totally and permanently disabled as provided for above. 
Any condition or impairment of health of a member caused by tuberculosis, hypertension or heart disease shall be presumed to have been suffered in line of duty unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence, provided that such member shall have successfully passed a physical examination upon entering into such service, including cardiogram, which examination failed to reveal any evidence of such condition; and provided further, that such presumption shall not apply to benefits payable or granted in a policy of life insurance or disability insurance. 
(2)  Disability Benefits Off-Duty. Each member in the pension plan with ten (10) years or more credited service who shall have become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a Firefighter wherein such disability is not directly caused by the performance of his duties as a Firefighter shall be entitled to a monthly pension equal to three percent (3%) of his average final compensation multiplied by the total years of credited service, but in no event shall the amount paid to the member be less than twenty-five percent (25%) of his average final compensation. Terminated persons, either vested or non-vested, are not eligible for disability benefits. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a member is terminated by the City for medical reasons, the terminated person may apply for a disability benefit if the application is filed with the board within thirty (30) days from the date of termination. If a timely application is received, it shall be processed and the terminated person shall be eligible to receive a disability benefit if the board otherwise determines that he is totally and permanently disabled as provided for above. 
(3)  Conditions Disqualifying Disability Benefits. Each member who is claiming disability benefits shall establish, to the satisfaction of the Board, that such disability was not occasioned primarily by: 
a.  Excessive or habitual use of any drugs, narcotics or intoxicants. 
b.  Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots or civil insurrections. 
c.  Injury or disease sustained while committing a crime. 
d.  Injury or disease sustained while serving in any branch of the Armed Forces. 
e.  Injury or disease sustained after his employment as a member with the City of Fort Walton Beach shall have terminated. 
(4)  Physical Examination Requirement. A member shall not become eligible for disability benefits until and unless he undergoes a physical examination by a qualified physician or physicians and/or surgeon or surgeons, who shall be selected by the board for that purpose. 
Any member receiving disability benefits under provisions of this Ordinance may be periodically re-examined by a qualified physician or physicians and/or surgeon or surgeons who shall be selected by the board, to determine if such disability has ceased to exist. If, prior to the member's normal retirement date, the board finds that the retiree is no longer permanently and totally disabled, the board shall recommend to the City that the member be returned to the performance of duty as a member. In the event the retiree is ordered to return and shall refuse to comply with the order within thirty (30) days from the issuance thereof, he shall forfeit his right to all benefits under this plan. 
The cost of the physical examination and/or re-examination of the member claiming and/or receiving disability benefits shall be borne by the board of this pension plan. All other reasonable costs as determined by the board incident to the physical examination, such as but not limited to transportation, meals and hotel accommodations, shall be borne by the board. 
If the member recovers from disability and re-enters service as a member with the City, his service shall be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month for which he received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date he reentered the service of the City shall not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the plan. 
The board shall have the power and authority to make the final decisions regarding all disability claims. 
(5)  Disability Payments. The monthly benefit to which a member is entitled in the event of his disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the Board of Trustees determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date the board determined such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the first payment. The last payment shall be: 
a.  If the member recovers from the disability, the payment due next preceding the date of such recovery, or 
b.  If the member dies without recovering from his disability, the payment due next preceding his death or the 120th monthly payment, whichever is later. 
A disability retiree may select, at any time prior to the date benefit payments begin, an optional form of benefit as described in subsection (j)(1)b., which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of disability benefit. 
(i)  Vesting. If a member terminates his employment with the Fire Department, either voluntarily or by discharge, and is not eligible for any other benefits under this plan, he shall be entitled to the following: 
(1)  If the member has less than ten (10) years credited service upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a refund of his accumulated contribution or he may leave it deposited with the fund. 
(2)  If the member has more than ten (10) years of credited service upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a monthly retirement benefit equal to two and one-half percent (2.50%) of his average final compensation for each year of credited service payable commencing at his otherwise normal retirement date, or as reduced for early retirement as provided in section (f) of this ordinance, provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions and provided he survives to his normal retirement date. 
(j)  Optional Forms of Benefits. 
(1)  In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable in the event of normal or early retirement as specified herein, a Firefighter, upon written request to the Board of Trustees, may elect to receive a retirement income or benefit of equivalent actuarial value payable in accordance with one of the following options: 
a.  A retirement income of a monthly amount payable to the Firefighter for his lifetime only. 
b.  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the Firefighter during the lifetime of the Firefighter and following the death of the Firefighter, 100%, 75%, 66.66% or 50% of such monthly amount payable to a joint pensioner for his lifetime. Except where the retiree's joint pensioner is his spouse, the payments to the joint pensioner as a percentage of the payments to the Retiree shall not exceed the applicable percentage provided for in the applicable table in the Treasury regulations. (See Q & A-2 of 1.401(a)(9)-6) 
c.  If a member retires prior to the time at which social security benefits are payable, he may elect to receive an increased retirement benefit until such time as social security benefits shall be assumed to commence and a reduced benefit thereafter in order to provide, to as great an extent as possible, a more level retirement allowance during the entire period of retirement. The amounts payable shall be as recommended by the actuaries for the system, based upon the social security law in effect at the time of the member's retirement. 
(2)  The member, upon electing any option of this section, will designate the joint pensioner or beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the plan in the event of the member's death, and will have the power to change such designation from time to time. Such designation will name a joint pensioner or one (1) or more primary beneficiaries where applicable. A member may change his Beneficiary at any time. If a member has elected an option with a joint pensioner or beneficiary and the member's retirement income benefits have commenced, the member may thereafter change his designated joint pensioner or beneficiary, but only if the board consents to such change; provided however, in no event may a member change his or her joint pensioner or designated beneficiary more than twice after retirement benefits have commenced. In the absence of proof of good health of the joint pensioner being replaced, the actuary will assume that the joint pensioner has deceased for purposes of calculating the new payment. 
(3)  The consent of a Firefighter's joint pensioner or beneficiary to any such change shall not be required. The rights of all previously-designated beneficiaries to receive benefits under the plan shall thereupon cease. 
(4)  Upon change of a member's beneficiary or joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the board shall adjust the member's monthly benefit by application of actuarial calculations to insure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the member's then-current benefit. Any such member shall pay the actuarial recalculation expenses and shall make repayment of any overage of previously-paid pension benefits as a result of said recalculations. Each request for a change will be made in writing on a form prepared by the Board of Trustees and on completion will be filed with the Board of Trustees. In the event that no designated beneficiary survives the Firefighter, such benefits as are payable in the event of the death of the Firefighter subsequent to his retirement shall be paid as provided in section (k). 
(5)  Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
a.  If a Firefighter dies prior to his normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first occurs, no retirement benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under section (g). 
b.  If the designated beneficiary (or beneficiaries) or joint pensioner dies before the Firefighter's retirement under the plan, the option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the Firefighter upon his retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with the provisions of this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the Firefighter prior to his retirement and within ninety (90) days after the death of the beneficiary. 
c.  If both the retired Firefighter and the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by member die before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period certain and life thereafter, made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (1), the Board of Trustees may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be paid in a lump sum and in accordance with section (k). 
d.  If a Firefighter continues beyond his normal retirement date pursuant to the provisions of subsection (f)(1), and dies prior to his actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to the provisions of this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made, or a retirement benefit will be paid, under the option to a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by the Firefighter in the amount or amounts computed as if the Firefighter had retired under the option on the date on which his death occurred. 
e.  The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the City. 
(6)  A Firefighter may not change his retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his first retirement check. 
(7)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the board in its discretion, may elect to make a lump sum payment to a member or a member's beneficiary in the event that the total commuted value of the monthly income payments to be paid do not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000). Any such payment made to any person pursuant to the power and discretion conferred upon the board by the preceding sentence shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to such member and shall not be subject to review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons. 
(k)  Beneficiaries. 
(1)  Each member or retiree may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, designate a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the event of his death. Each designation may be revoked or changed by such member or retiree by signing and filing with the board a new designation-of-beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefits under the system shall cease. 
(2)  If a deceased member or retiree fails to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection (1), or if the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) named by a deceased member or retiree predecease the member or retiree, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the plan with respect to such deceased member or retiree shall be paid to the estate of the member or retiree and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(3)  Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(l)  Claims Procedures. 
(1)  The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written requests ("claims"), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person ("Claimant"), including members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(2)  The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth in Florida Statutes. 
(m)  Reports to Division of Retirement. Each year and no later than March 15th, the board shall file an annual report with the Division of Retirement containing the documents and information required by F.S. § 175. 
(n)  Roster of Retirees. The Secretary of the board shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under the provisions of this Ordinance in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the same shall cease to be paid. Additionally, the Secretary shall keep a record of all members employed by the municipality in such a manner as to show the name, address, date of employment and date such employment is terminated. 
(o)  Maximum Pension. 
(1)  Basic Limitation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this plan to the contrary, the member contributions paid to, and retirement benefits paid from, the plan shall be limited to such extent as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of Code Section 415 for a qualified retirement plan. Before January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the limits specified in Code Section 415(b), subject to the applicable adjustments in that section. On and after January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the dollar amount specified in Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) ($160,000), subject to the applicable adjustments in Code Section 415(b) and subject to any additional limits that may be specified in this plan. For purposes of this section, "limitation year" shall be the calendar year. 
For purposes of Code Section 415(b), the "annual benefit" means a benefit payable annually in the form of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) without regard to the benefit attributable to after-tax employee contributions (except pursuant to Code Section 415(n) and to rollover contributions (as defined in Code Section 415(b)(2)(A)). The "benefit attributable" shall be determined in accordance with Treasury Regulations. 
(2)  Adjustments to Basic Limitation for Form of Benefit. If the benefit under the plan is other than the annual benefit described in subsection (1), then the benefit shall be adjusted so that it is the equivalent of the annual benefit, using factors prescribed in Treasury Regulations. If the form of the benefit without regard to any automatic benefit increase feature is not a straight life annuity or a qualified joint and survivor annuity, then the preceding sentence is applied by either reducing the Code Section 415(b) limit applicable at the annuity starting date or adjusting the form of benefit to an actuarially equivalent amount (determined using the assumptions specified in Treasury Regulation Section 1.415(b)-1(c)(2)(ii)) that takes into account the additional benefits under the form of benefit as follows: 
a.  For a benefit paid in a form to which Section 417(e)(3) of the Code does not apply (generally, a monthly benefit), the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greater of: 
1.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any) payable to the member under the plan commencing at the same annuity starting date as the form of benefit to the member, or 
2.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the form of benefit payable to the member, computed using a five percent (5%) interest assumption (or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables described in Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Rulings 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code); or 
b.  For a benefit paid in a form to which Section 417(e)(3) of the Code applies (generally, a lump sum benefit), the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greatest of: 
1.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable, computed using the interest rate and mortality table, or tabular factor, specified in the plan for actuarial experience; 
2.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable, computed using a five and one half percent (5.5%) interest assumption (or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code); or 
3.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable (computed using the applicable interest rate for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(3) (the 30-year Treasury rate (prior to January 1, 2007, using the rate in effect for the month prior to retirement, and on and after January 1, 2007, using the rate in effect for the first day of the Plan Year with a one-year stabilization period)) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code), divided by 1.05. 
c.  The actuary may adjust the 415(b) limit at the annuity starting date in accordance with subsections a. and b. above. 
(3)  Benefits Not Taken into Account. For purposes of this section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account in applying these limits: 
a.  Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; 
b.  Any other benefit not required under §415(b)(2) of the Code and Regulations thereunder to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of Code Section 415(b)(1); and 
c.  That portion of any joint and survivor annuity that constitutes a qualified joint and survivor annuity. 
(4)  COLA Effect. Effective on and after January 1, 2003, for purposes of applying the limits under Code Section 415(b) (the "Limit"), the following will apply: 
a.  A member's applicable limit will be applied to the member's annual benefit in the member's first limitation year of benefit payments without regard to any automatic cost of living adjustments; 
b.  Thereafter, in any subsequent limitation year, a member's annual benefit, including any automatic cost of living increases, shall be tested under the then applicable benefit limit including any adjustment to the Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) dollar limit under Code Section 415(d), and the regulations thereunder; but 
c.  In no event shall a member's benefit payable under the System in any-limitation year be greater than the limit applicable at the annuity starting date, as increased in subsequent years pursuant to Code Section 415(d) and the regulations thereunder. 
Unless otherwise specified in the plan, for purposes of applying the limits under Code Section 415(b), a member's applicable limit will be applied taking into consideration cost of living increases as required by Section 415(b) of the Code and applicable Treasury Regulations. 
(5)  Other Adjustments in Limitations. 
a.  In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before age sixty-two (62), the limit prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the provisions of Code Section 415(b) of the Code, so that such limit (as so reduced) equals an annual straight life benefit (when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a one hundred sixty thousand dollar ($160,000) annual benefit beginning at age sixty-two (62). 
b.  In the event the member's benefit is based on at least fifteen (15) years of credited service as a full-time employee of the police or fire department of the City, the adjustments provided for in a. above shall not apply. 
c.  The reductions provided for in a. above shall not be applicable to disability benefits pursuant to susection (h), or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to subsection (g). 
d.  In the event the member's retirement benefit becomes payable after age sixty-five (65), for purposes of determining whether this benefit meets the limit set forth in subsection (1) herein, such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the benefit beginning at age sixty-five (65). This adjustment shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate. 
6.  Less than Ten (10) Years of Participation. The maximum retirement benefits payable under this section to any member who has completed less than ten (10) years of participation shall be the amount determined under subsection (1) of this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of participation and the denominator of which is ten (10). The reduction provided by this subsection cannot reduce the maximum benefit below 10% of the limit determined without regard to this subsection. The reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be applicable to pre-retirement disability benefits paid pursuant to subsection (h), or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to subsection (g). 
(7)  Participation in Other Defined Benefit Plans. The limit of this section with respect to any member who at any time has been a member in any other defined benefit plan as defined in Code Section 414(j) maintained by the City shall apply as if the total benefits payable under all City defined benefit plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one plan. 
(8)  Ten Thousand Dollar ($10,000) Limit; Less Than Ten Years of Service. Notwithstanding anything in this subsection (o), the retirement benefit payable with respect to a member shall be deemed not to exceed the limit set forth in this subsection if the benefits payable, with respect to such member under this System and under all other qualified defined benefit pension plans to which the City contributes, do not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000) for the applicable limitation year and for any prior limitation year and the City has not any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan in which the member participated 
(9)  Reduction of Benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or contributions to all plans, where required, shall be accomplished by first reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be determined by the board and the plan administrator of such other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures for defined contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be established by the board and the plan administrator for such other plans provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority pursuant to the agreement of the board and the plan administrator of all other plans covering such member. 
(10)  Service Credit Purchase Limits. 
a.  Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, if a member makes one or more contributions to purchase permissive service credit under the Plan, as allowed in subsections (u) and (v), then the requirements of this section will be treated as met only if: 
1.  The requirements of Code Section 415(b) are met, determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all such contributions as an annual benefit for purposes of Code Section 415(b), or 
2.  The requirements of Code Section 415(c) are met, determined by treating all such contributions as annual additions for purposes of Code Section 415(c). 
3.  For purposes of applying subparagraph 1., the plan will not fail to meet the reduced limit under Code Section 415(b)(2)(c) solely by reason of this subparagraph and for purposes of applying subparagraph (2) the Plan will not fail to meet the percentage limitation under Section 415(c)(1)(B) of the Code solely by reason of this subparagraph. 
b.  For purposes of this subsection the term "permissive service credit" means service credit: 
1.  Recognized by the plan for purposes of calculating a member's benefit under the plan, 
2.  Which such member has not received under the plan, and 
3.  Which such member may receive only by making a voluntary additional contribution, in an amount determined under the plan, which does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service credit. 
Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, such term may, if otherwise provided by the Plan, include service credit for periods for which there is no performance of service, and, notwithstanding clause b.2., may include service credited in order to provide an increased benefit for service credit which a member is receiving under the plan. 
(11)  Contribution Limits. 
a.  For purposes of applying the limits which are incorporated by reference and for purposes of this subsection (11), only and for no other purpose, the definition of compensation where applicable will be compensation actually paid or made available during a limitation year, except as noted below and as permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulations. Unless another definition of compensation that is permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulation, is specified by the plan, compensation will be defined as wages within the meaning of Code Section 3401(a) and all other payments of compensation to an employee by an employer for which the employer is required to furnish the employee a written statement under Code Sections 6041(d), 6051(a)(3) and 6052 and will be determined without regard to any rules under Code Section 3401(a) that limit the remuneration included in wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services performed (such as the exception for agricultural labor in Code Section 3401(a)(2). 
1.  However, for limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, compensation will also include amounts that would otherwise be included in compensation but for an election under Code Sections 125(a), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 402(k), or 457(b). For limitation years beginning after December 31, 2000, compensation will also include any elective amounts that are not includible in the gross income of the employee by reason of Code Section 132(f)(4). 
2.  For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2007, compensation for the limitation year will also include compensation paid by the later of 2½ months after an employee's severance from employment or the end of the limitation year that includes the date of the employee's severance from employment if: 
(a)  The payment is regular compensation for services during the employee's regular working hours, or compensation for services outside the employee's regular working hours (such as overtime or shift differential), commissions, bonuses or other similar payments, and, absent a severance from employment, the payments would have been paid to the employee while the employee continued in employment with the employer; or 
(b)  The payment is for unused accrued bona fide sick, vacation or other leave that the employee would have been able to use if employment had continued. 
3.  Back pay, within the meaning of Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2(g)(8), shall be treated as compensation for the limitation year to which the back pay relates to the extent the back pay represents wages and compensation that would otherwise be included under the definition of "Salary" in subsection (a), Definitions. 
b.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the board may modify a request by a Member to make a contribution to the plan if the amount of the contribution would exceed the limits provided in Code Section 415 by using the following methods: 
1.  If the law requires a lump sum payment for the purchase of service credit, the board may establish a periodic payment deduction plan for the member to avoid a contribution in excess of the limits under Code Sections 415(c) or 415(n). 
2.  If payment pursuant to subparagraph 1. will not avoid a contribution in excess of the limits imposed by Code Section 415(c), the board may either reduce the member's contribution to an amount within the limits of that section or refuse the member's contribution. 
c.  If the annual additions for any member for a limitation year exceed the limitation under Section 415(c) of the Code, the excess annual addition will be corrected as permitted under the Employee Plans Compliance Resolution System (or similar IRS correction program). 
d.  For limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 2009, a member's compensation for purposes of this subsection (11) shall not exceed the annual limit under Section 401(a)(17) of the Code. 
(12)  Additional Limitation on Pension Benefits. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary: 
a.  The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to a retiree who becomes a member of the plan and who has not previously participated in such plan, on or after January 1, 1980, shall not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of his average final compensation. However, nothing contained in this section shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension increases attributable to cost-of-living increases or adjustments. 
b.  No member of the plan shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to social security benefits or federal benefits under Chapter 1223, Title 10, U.S. Code. 
(13)  Effect of Direct Rollover on 415(b) Limit. If the plan accepts a direct rollover of an employee's or former employee's benefit from a defined contribution plan qualified under Code Section 401(a) which is maintained by the employer, any annuity resulting from the rollover amount that is determined using a more favorable actuarial basis than required under Code Section 417(e) shall be included in the annual benefit for purposes of the limit under Code Section 415(b). 
(p)  Commencement of Benefits. 
(1)  Unless the member otherwise elects, with such election being in writing and to the Trustees and specifying the form of retirement income and date on which the retirement income is to commence, the payment benefits under the plan to the member shall commence not later than the 60th day after the close of the plan year in which the latest of the following events occur: 
a.  The attainment by the member of age sixty-five (65); 
b.  The 10th anniversary of the date on which the member commenced participation in the plan; or 
c.  The termination of the member's service with the City. 
(2)  If the payment of a member's retirement income cannot begin on the date required under subsection (1) of this section because the Trustees either cannot ascertain the amount of the member's retirement income or cannot locate the member after making reasonable efforts to do so, the payment of the member's benefit shall begin not later than sixty (60) days after the date on which the amount can be ascertained or the member is located, whichever is applicable. Any such payment shall be made retroactive to a date which is not earlier than the date on which the payment of the member's benefit was scheduled to begin but which is not later than the date specified under subsection (1) of this section. 
(q)  Minimum Distribution of Benefits. 
(1)  General Rules. 
a.  Effective Date. Effective as of January 1, 1989, the plan will pay all benefits in accordance with a good faith interpretation of the requirements of Code Section 401(a)(9) and the regulations in effect under that section, as applicable to a governmental plan within the meaning of Code Section 414(d). Effective on and after January 1, 2003, the plan is also subject to the specific provisions contained in this section. The provisions of this section will apply for purposes of determining required minimum distributions for calendar years beginning with the 2003 calendar year. 
b.  Precedence. The requirements of this section will take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the plan. 
c.  TEFRA Section 242(b)(2) Elections. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section other than this subsection (1)c., distributions may be made under a designation made before January 1, 1984, in accordance with Section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the plan that related to Section 242(b)(2) of TEFRA. 
(2)  Time and Manner of Distribution. 
a.  Required Beginning Date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date which shall not be later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70 ½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the City. 
b.  Death of Member Before Distributions Begin. If the member dies before distributions begin, the member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed no later than as follows: 
1.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by a date on or before December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age seventy and one-half (70 ½), if later, as the surviving spouse elects. 
2.  If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then, distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
3.  If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
4.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this subsection (2)b., other than subsection (2)b.1., will apply as if the surviving spouse were the member. 
For purposes of this subsection (2)b., distributions are considered to begin on the member's required beginning date or, if subsection (2)b.4. applies, the date of distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (2)b.1. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member before the member's required beginning date (or to the member's surviving spouse before the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (2)b.1., the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. 
c.  Death After Distributions Begin. If the member dies after the required distribution of benefits has begun, the remaining portion of the member's interest must be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution before the member's death. 
d.  Form of Distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with this section. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code and Treasury regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual account described in Section 414(k) of the Code will be distributed in a manner satisfying the requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code and Treasury regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
(3)  Determination of Amount to be Distributed Each Year. 
a.  General Requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
1.  The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one (1) year. 
2.  The member's entire interest must be distributed pursuant to subsection (f), subsection (g), subsection (i), or subsection (j) (as applicable) and in any event over a period equal to or less than the member's life or the lives of the member and a designated beneficiary, or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the member or of the member and a designated beneficiary. The life expectancy of the member, the member's spouse, or the member's beneficiary may not be recalculated after the initial determination for purposes of determining benefits. 
b.  Amount Required to be Distributed by Required Beginning Date. The amount that must be distributed on or before the member's required beginning date (or, if the member dies before distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under subsection (g)) is the payment that is required for one (1) payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g., monthly. All of the member's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's required beginning date. 
c.  Additional Accruals After First Distribution Calendar Year. Any additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues. 
(4)  General Distribution Rules. 
a.  The amount of an annuity paid to a member's beneficiary may not exceed the maximum determined under the incidental death benefit requirement of Code Section 401(a)(9)(G), and effective for any annuity commencing on or after January 1, 2008, the minimum distribution incidental benefit rule under Treasury Regulation Section 1.401(a)(9)-6, Q&A-2. 
b.  The death and disability benefits provided by the plan are limited by the incidental benefit rule set forth in Code Section 401(a)(9)(G) and Treasury Regulation Section 1.401-1(b)(1)(I) or any successor regulation thereto. As a result, the total death or disability benefits payable may not exceed twenty-five (25%) of the cost for all of the members' benefits received from the retirement system. 
(5)  Definitions. 
a.  Designated beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the plan and is the designated beneficiary under Section 401(a)(9) of the Code and Section 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of the Treasury regulations. 
b.  Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin pursuant to subsection (g). 
(r)  Miscellaneous Provisions. 
(1)  Interest of Members in System. All assets of the fund are held in trust, and at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system with respect to retirees and members and their spouses or beneficiaries, shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(2)  No Reduction of Accrued Benefits. No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the City Council of the City of Fort Walton Beach which shall have the effect of reducing the then vested accrued benefits of members or a member's beneficiaries. 
(3)  Qualification of System. It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified public pension plan under the applicable provisions of the Code for a qualified plan under Code Section 401(a) and a governmental plan under Code Section 414(d), as now in effect or hereafter amended. Any modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of the Code as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other applicable provisions of the U.S. federal tax laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(4)  Use of Forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to reduce future City contributions. 
(5)  Prohibited Transactions. Effective as of January 1, 1989, a board may not engage in a transaction prohibited by Code Section 503(b). 
(6)  USERRA. Effective December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any other provision of this system, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service are governed by Code Section 414(u) and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, as amended. To the extent that the definition of "Credited Service" sets forth contribution requirements that are more favorable to the member than the minimum compliance requirements, the more favorable provisions shall apply. 
(7)  Vesting. 
a.  Member will be one hundred percent (100%) vested in all benefits upon attainment of the plan's age and service requirements for the plan's normal retirement benefit; and 
b.  A member will be one hundred percent (100%) vested in all accrued benefits, to the extent funded, if the plan is terminated or experiences a complete discontinuance of employer contributions. 
(8)  Electronic Forms. In those circumstances where a written election or consent is not required by the plan or the Code, an oral, electronic, or telephonic form in lieu of or in addition to a written form may be prescribed by the board. However, where applicable, the board shall comply with Treasury Regulations § 1.401(a)-21. 
(s)  Repeal or Termination of Plan. 
(1)  This ordinance establishing the plan and fund, and subsequent ordinances pertaining to said plan and fund, may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part; provided that if this or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefiting hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby. 
(2)  If this ordinance shall be repealed, or if contributions to the plan are discontinued, the board shall continue to administer the plan in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one (1) of the options provided for in this ordinance who are designated by any of said members. In the event of repeal, or if contributions to the plan are discontinued, there shall be full vesting one-hundred percent (100%) of benefits accrued to date of repeal and such benefits shall be nonforfeitable. 
(3)  The fund shall be distributed in accordance with the following procedures: 
a.  The board shall determine the date of distribution and the asset value required to fund all the nonforfeitable benefits after taking into account the expenses of such distribution. The board shall inform the City if additional assets are required, in which event the City shall continue to financially support the plan until all nonforfeitable benefits have been funded. 
b.  The board shall determine the method of distribution of the asset value, whether distribution shall be by payment in cash, by the maintenance of another or substituted trust fund, by the purchase of insured annuities, or otherwise, for each Firefighter entitled to benefits under the plan as specified in subsection c. 
c.  The board shall distribute the asset value as of the date of termination in the manner set forth in this subsection, on the basis that the amount required to provide any given retirement income is the actuarially computed single-sum value of such retirement income, except that if the method of distribution determined under subsection b. involves the purchase of an insured annuity, the amount required to provide the given retirement income is the single premium payable for such annuity. The actuarial single-sum value may not be less than the Firefighter's accumulated contributions to the plan, with interest if provided by the plan, less the value of any plan benefits previously paid to the Firefighter. 
d.  If there is asset value remaining after the full distribution specified in subsection c., and after the payment of any expenses incurred with such distribution, such excess shall be returned to the City, less return to the State of the State's contributions, provided that, if the excess is less than the total contributions made by the City and the State to date of termination of the plan, such excess shall be divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the City and the State. 
e.  The board shall distribute, in accordance with subsection b., the amounts determined under subsection c. 
If, after twenty-four (24) months after the date the plan terminated or the date the board received written notice that the contributions thereunder were being permanently discontinued, the City or the board of the fund affected has not complied with all the provisions in this section, the Florida Department of Management Services will effect the termination of the fund in accordance with this section. 
(t)  Domestic Relations Orders; Retiree Directed Payments; Exemption From Execution, Non-Assignability. 
(1)  Domestic relations orders. 
a.  Prior to the entry of any domestic relations order which affects or purports to affect the system's responsibility in connection with the payment of benefits of a retiree, the member or retiree shall submit the proposed order to the board for review to determine whether the system may legally honor the order. 
b.  If a domestic relations order is not submitted to the board for review prior to entry of the order, and the system is ordered to take action that it may not legally take, and the system expends administrative or legal fees in resolving the matter, the member or retiree who submits such an order will be required to reimburse the system for its expenses in connection with the order. 
(2)  Retiree directed payments. The board may, upon written request by a retiree or by a dependent, when authorized by a retiree or the retiree's beneficiary, authorize the system to withhold from the monthly retirement payment those funds that are necessary to pay for the benefits being received through the city, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the city, to make payment to insurance companies for insurance premiums as permitted by F.S. Chapter 175, and to make any payments for child support or alimony. 
(3)  Exemption from execution, non-assignability. Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, annuities, or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this ordinance and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this ordinance are hereby exempted from any state, county or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable. 
(u)  Pension Validity. The Board of Trustees shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore have been granted under any prior or existing law, or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally for any reason. Said board is empowered to purge the pension rolls of any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law or under this ordinance if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any pensioner who has heretofore under any prior or existing law or who shall hereafter under this ordinance be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. 
(v)  Military Service Prior To Employment. The time that a Firefighter serves or has served on active duty in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior to first and initial employment with the City Fire Department shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
a.  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed had he been a member of the plan for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
b.  Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any time prior to retirement. 
c.  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six (6) months of his request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one (1) lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
d.  The maximum credit under this section when combined with credited service purchased for prior fire service with an employer other than the City of Fort Walton Beach shall be five (5) years. 
e.  Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count for all purposes, except vesting and eligibility for not-in-line of duty disability benefits. 
(w)  Prior Fire Service. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, and except as provided for in subsection (1), the time that a member previously served as a full-time Firefighter with the City during a period of previous employment and for which period accumulated contributions were withdrawn from the fund, or the time that a member served as a Firefighter for any other municipal, county, state or special district fire department in the State of Florida shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
a.  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed had he been a member of the plan for the time for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
b.  Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any time prior to retirement. 
c.  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six (6) months of his request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one (1) lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
d.  The maximum credit under this section for service other than with the City of Fort Walton Beach when combined with credited service purchased for Military Service prior to employment shall be five (5) years of credited service and shall count for all purposes, except vesting and eligibility for not-in-line of duty disability benefits. There shall be no maximum purchase of credit for prior service with the City of Fort Walton Beach and such credit shall count for all purposes, including vesting. 
e.  In no event, however, may credited service be purchased pursuant to this section for prior service with any other municipal, county or special district fire department, if such prior service forms or will form the basis of a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan as set forth in subsection (o)(12)b. 
f.  For purposes of determining credit for prior service as a Firefighter as provided for in this section, in addition to service as a Firefighter in this State, credit may be given for federal, other state, county or municipal service if the prior service is recognized by the Division of State Fire Marshal, as provided under F.S. Chapter 633, or the Firefighter provides proof to the board that such service is equivalent to the service required to meet the definition of a Firefighter under subsection (1). 
(x)  Forfeiture of Pension. 
(1)  Any Firefighter who is convicted of the following offenses committed prior to retirement, or whose employment is terminated by reason of his admitted commission, aid or abetment of the following specified offenses shall forfeit all rights and benefits under this pension fund, except for the return of his accumulated contributions as of the date of his termination. Specified offenses are as follows: 
a.  The committing, aiding or abetting of an embezzlement of public funds; 
b.  The committing, aiding or abetting of any theft by a public officer or employee from his employer; 
c.  Bribery in connection with the employment of a public officer or employee; 
d.  Any felony specified in F.S. Chapter 838; 
e.  The committing of an impeachable offense; 
f.  The committing of any felony by a public officer or employee who, willfully and with intent to defraud the public or the public agency for which he acts or in which he is employed of the right to receive the faithful performance of his duty as a public officer or employee, realizes or obtains or attempts to obtain a profit, gain, or advantage for himself or for some other person through the use or attempted use of the power, rights, privileges, duties or position of his public office or employment position; or 
g.  The committing on or after October 1, 2008, of any felony defined in F.S. § 800.04, against a victim younger than sixteen (16) years of age, or any felony defined in F.S. Chapter 794, against a victim younger than eighteen (18) years of age, by a public officer or employee through the use or attempted use of power, rights, privileges, duties, or position of his or her public office or employment position. 
(2)  Conviction shall be defined as an adjudication of guilt by a court of competent jurisdiction; a plea of guilty or a nolo contendere; a jury verdict of guilty when adjudication of guilt is withheld and the accused is placed on probation; or a conviction by the Senate of an impeachable offense. 
(3)  Court shall be defined as any state or federal court of competent jurisdiction which is exercising its jurisdiction to consider a proceeding involving the alleged commission of a specified offense. Prior to forfeiture, the Board of Trustees shall hold a hearing on which notice shall be given to the member whose benefits are being considered for forfeiture. Said member shall be afforded the right to have an attorney present. No formal rules of evidence shall apply, but the member shall be afforded a full opportunity to present his case against forfeiture. 
(4)  Any member who has received benefits from the plan in excess of his accumulated contributions after his rights were forfeited shall be required to pay back to the fund the amount of the benefits received in excess of his accumulated contributions. The Board of Trustees may implement all legal action necessary to recover such funds. 
(5)  Conviction and Forfeiture; False, Misleading or Fraudulent Statements. 
a.  It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly make, or cause to be made, or to assist, conspire with, or urge another to make, or cause to be made, any false, fraudulent, or misleading oral or written statement or withhold or conceal material information to obtain any benefit from the plan. 
b.  A person who violates subsection a. commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
c.  In addition to any applicable criminal penalty, upon conviction for a violation described in subsection a., a member or beneficiary of the plan may, in the discretion of the board, be required to forfeit the right to receive any or all benefits to which the person would otherwise be entitled under the plan. For purposes of this subsection, "conviction" means a determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld. 
(y)  Indemnification. 
(1)  To the extent not covered by insurance contracts in force from time to time, the City shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless members of the board from all personal liability for damages and costs, including court costs and attorneys' fees, arising out of claims, suits, litigation, or threat of same, herein referred to as "claims", against these individuals because of acts or circumstances connected with or arising out of their official duty as members of the board. The City reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to settle or not settle the claim at any time, and to appeal or to not appeal from any adverse judgment or ruling, and in either event will indemnify, defend and hold harmless any members of the board from the judgment, execution, or levy thereon. 
(2)  This section shall not be construed so as to relieve any insurance company or other entity liable to defend the claim or liable for payment of the judgment or claim, from any liability, nor does this section waive any provision of law affording the City immunity from any suit in whole or part, or waive any other substantive or procedural rights the City may have. 
(3)  This section shall not apply nor shall the City be responsible in any manner to defend or pay for claims arising out of acts or omissions of members of the board which constitute felonies or gross malfeasance or gross misfeasance in office. 
(z)  Direct Transfers of Eligible Rollover Distributions; Elimination of Mandatory Distributions. 
(1)  Rollover distribution. 
a.  General. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
b.  Definitions. 
1.  Eligible rollover distribution: An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include any distribution that is one (1) of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten (10) years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the Code and the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income. Effective January 1, 2002, any portion of any distribution which would be includible in gross income as after-tax employee contributes will be an eligible rollover distribution if the distribution is made to an individual retirement account described in section 408(a); to an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b); to a qualified defined contribution plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible; or on or after January 1, 2007, to a qualified defined benefit plan described in Code Section 401(a) or to an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of the distribution that is includible in gross income and the portion of the distribution that is not so includible. 
2.  Eligible retirement plan: An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Code; an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of the Code; an annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the Code; effective January 1,2002, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by an eligible employer described in Section 457(e)(1)(A) of the Code and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan; effective January 1, 2002, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Code; or a qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the Code; or effective January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA described in Section 408A of the Code that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. This definition shall apply in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse. 
3.  Distributee: A distributee includes an employee or former employee. It also includes, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse. Effective January 1, 2007, it further includes a nonspouse beneficiary who is a designated beneficiary as defined by Code Section 401(a)(9)(E). However, a nonspouse beneficiary may rollover the distribution only to an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity established for the purpose of receiving the distribution and the account or annuity will be treated as an "inherited" individual retirement account or annuity. 
4.  Direct rollover: A direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(2)  Rollovers or Transfers into the Fund. On or after January 1,2002, the plan will accept, solely for the purpose of purchasing credited service as provided herein, permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans, member rollover cash contributions and/or direct cash rollovers of distributions made on or after January 1, 2002, as follows: 
a.  Transfers and direct rollovers or member rollover contributions from other plans. The plan will accept either a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a member contribution of an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code, from an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the Code or from an eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state. The plan will also accept legally permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans. 
b.  Member Rollover Contributions from IRAs. The system will accept a member rollover contribution of the portion of a distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or 408(b) of the Code that is eligible to be rolled over. 
(3)  Elimination of Mandatory Distributions. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, in the event this plan provides for a mandatory (involuntary) cash distribution from the plan not otherwise required by law, for an amount in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), such distribution shall be made from the plan only upon written request of the member and completion by the member of a written election on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount. 
(aa)  Deferred Retirement Option Plan. 
(1)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions apply: 
a.  DROP: The Fort Walton Beach Firefighters' Pension Trust Fund Deferred Retirement Option Plan. 
b.  DROP Account: The account established for each DROP participant under subsection (3). 
(2)  Participation. 
a.  Eligibility to Participate. In lieu of terminating his employment as a Firefighter, any member who is eligible for normal retirement under the plan may elect to defer receipt of such service retirement pension and to participate in the DROP. 
b.  Election to Participate. A member's election to participate in the DROP must be made in writing in a time and manner determined by the board at least thirty (30) days in advance and participation must begin within twelve (12) months after member reaches normal retirement or within twelve (12) months from the date that this provision become adopted, if later. 
c.  Period of Participation. A member who elects to participate in the DROP under subsection (2)b., shall participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed 36 months beginning at the time his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. An election to participate in the DROP shall be irrevocable and shall constitute an irrevocable election to resign from the service of the City not later than the date provided for in the previous sentence. Under no circumstances may a member continue employment with the City as a firefighter after participating in the DROP for the permissible period of DROP participation. A member may participate only once. 
d.  Termination of Participation. 
1.  A member's participation in the DROP shall cease at the earlier of: 
(a)  The end of his permissible period of participation in the DROP as determined under subsection (2)c.; or 
(b)  Termination of his employment as a Firefighter. 
2.  Upon the member's termination of participation in the DROP, pursuant to subsection (a) above, all amounts provided for in subsection (3)b., including monthly benefits or interest, shall cease to be transferred from the plan to his DROP Account. Any amounts remaining in his DROP Account shall be paid to him in accordance with the provisions of subsection (4) when he terminates his employment as a Firefighter. 
3.  A member who terminates his participation in the DROP under this subsection (2)d. shall not be permitted to again become a participant in the DROP. 
e.  Effect of DROP Participation on the plan. 
1.  A member's credited service and his accrued benefit under the plan shall be determined on the date his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. The member shall not accrue any additional credited service or any additional benefits under the plan (except for any supplemental benefit payable to DROP participants or any additional benefits provided under any cost-of-living adjustment for retirees in the plan) while he is a participant in the DROP. After a member commences participation, he shall not be permitted to again contribute to the plan, the City shall not continue to contribute to the plan on his behalf for future accruals, nor shall he be eligible for disability or pre-retirement death benefits. 
(2)  No amounts shall be paid to a member from the plan while the member is a participant in the DROP. If a member's participation in the DROP is terminated other than by terminating his employment as a Firefighter, no amounts shall be paid to him from the plan until he terminates his employment as a Firefighter. Amounts transferred from the plan to the member's DROP Account shall be paid directly to the member only on the termination of his employment as a Firefighter. 
(3)  Funding. 
a.  Establishment of DROP Account. A DROP Account shall be established for each member participating in the DROP. A member's DROP Account shall consist of amounts transferred to the DROP under subsection (3)b., and earnings or interest on those amounts. 
b.  Transfers From Retirement Plan. 
1.  As of the first day of each month of a member's period of participation in the DROP, the monthly retirement benefit he would have received under the plan had he terminated his employment as a Firefighter and elected to receive monthly benefit payments thereunder shall be transferred to his DROP Account, except as otherwise provided for in subsection (2)d.2. A member's period of participation in the DROP shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of subsections (2)c. and (2)d., but in no event shall it continue past the date he terminates his employment as a Firefighter. 
2.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2)d.2., during a member's participation in the DROP, the Member's monthly retirement benefit will be paid into the DROP account. The member's DROP account will increase in value at a rate equal to one-half percent (50%) of the assumed rate of return on pension fund investments during the immediately preceding plan year. The interest rate on the DROP account will be established by the pension board as of February 1 each year. The interest rate may be adjusted up or down during a member's participation in the DROP, which will result in a change in the prospective interest rate credit on the member's DROP account. 
3.  A member's DROP Account shall only be credited with interest and monthly benefits while the member is a participant in the DROP. A member's final DROP account value for distribution to the member upon termination of participation in the DROP shall be the value of the account at the end of the month immediately preceding termination of participation plus any monthly periodic additions made to the DROP account subsequent to the end of the previous month and prior to distribution. 
(4)  Distribution of DROP Accounts on Termination of Employment. 
a.  Eligibility for Benefits. A member shall receive the balance in his DROP Account in accordance with the provisions of this subsection upon his termination of employment as a Firefighter. Except as provided in subsection (4)d., no amounts shall be paid to a member from the DROP prior to his termination of employment as a Firefighter. 
b.  Form of Distribution. 
1.  Distribution of the member's DROP Account shall be made in a cash lump sum payment, subject to the direct rollover provisions set forth in subsection (4)f. Elections under this paragraph shall be in writing and shall be made in such time or manner as the board shall determine. 
2.  If a member dies before his benefit is paid, his DROP Account shall be paid to his Beneficiary in such optional form as his beneficiary may select. If no beneficiary designation is made, the DROP Account shall be distributed to the member's estate. 
c.  Date of Payment of Distribution. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (4), distribution of a member's DROP Account shall be made as soon as administratively practicable following the member's termination of employment. Distribution of the amount in a member's DROP account will not be made unless the member completes a written request for distribution and a written election, on forms designed by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or a rollover of the lump sum amount. 
d.  Proof of Death and Right of Beneficiary or Other Person. The board may require and rely upon such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive the value of a deceased member's DROP Account as the board may deem proper and its determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive payment shall be conclusive. 
e.  Distribution Limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of subsection (4), all distributions from the DROP shall conform to the "Minimum Distribution of Benefits" provisions as provided for herein. 
f.  Direct Rollover of Certain Distributions. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the DROP to the contrary a distributee may elect to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid in a direct rollover as otherwise provided under the plan in subsection (y). 
(5)  Administration of DROP. 
a.  Board Administers the DROP. The general administration of the DROP, the responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the DROP and the responsibility of overseeing the investment of the DROP's assets shall be placed in the board. The members of the board may appoint from their number such subcommittees with such powers as they shall determine; may adopt such administrative procedures and regulations as they deem desirable for the conduct of their affairs; may authorize one or more of their number or any agent to execute or deliver any instrument or make any payment on their behalf; may retain counsel, employ agents and provide for such clerical, accounting, actuarial and consulting services as they may require in carrying out the provisions of the DROP; and may allocate among themselves or delegate to other persons all or such portion of their duties under the DROP, other than those granted to them as Trustee under any trust agreement adopted for use in implementing the DROP, as they, in their sole discretion, shall decide. A Trustee shall not vote on any question relating exclusively to himself. 
b.  Individual Accounts, Records and Reports. The board shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, records showing the operation and condition of the DROP, including records showing the individual balances in each member's DROP Account, and the board shall keep, or cause to be kept, in convenient form such data as may be necessary for the valuation of the assets and liabilities of the DROP. The board shall prepare or cause to be prepared and distributed to members participating in the DROP and other individuals or filed with the appropriate governmental agencies, as the case may be, all necessary descriptions, reports, information returns, and data required to be distributed or filed for the DROP pursuant to the Code and any other applicable laws. 
c.  Establishment of Rules. Subject to the limitations of the DROP, the board from time to time shall establish rules for the administration of the DROP and the transaction of its business. The board shall have discretionary authority to construe and interpret the DROP (including but not limited to determination of an individual's eligibility for DROP participation, the right and amount of any benefit payable under the DROP and the date on which any individual ceases to be a participant in the DROP). The determination of the board as to the interpretation of the DROP or its determination of any disputed questions shall be conclusive and final to the extent permitted by applicable law. The board shall also oversee the investment of the DROP'S assets. 
d.  Limitation of Liability. 
1.  The Trustees shall not incur any liability individually or on behalf of any other individuals for any act or failure to act, made in good faith in relation to the DROP or the funds of the DROP. 
2.  Neither the board nor any Trustee of the board shall be responsible for any reports furnished by any expert retained or employed by the board, but they shall be entitled to rely thereon as well as on certificates furnished by an accountant or an actuary, and on all opinions of counsel. The board shall be fully protected with respect to any action taken or suffered by it in good faith in reliance upon such expert, accountant, actuary or counsel, and all actions taken or suffered in such reliance shall be conclusive upon any person with any interest in the DROP. 
(6)  General Provisions. 
a.  The DROP Is Not a Separate Retirement Plan. Instead, it is a program under which a member who is eligible for normal retirement under the System may elect to accrue future retirement benefits in the manner provided in this section for the remainder of his employment, rather than in the normal manner provided under the plan. Upon termination of employment, a member is entitled to a lump sum distribution of his or her DROP Account balance or may elect a rollover. The DROP Account distribution is in addition to the member's monthly benefit. 
b.  Notional Account. The DROP Account established for such a member is a notional account, used only for the purpose of calculation of the DROP distribution amount. It is not a separate account in the System. There is no change in the System's assets, and there is no distribution available to the member until the member's termination from the DROP. The Member has no control over the investment of the DROP Account. 
c.  No Employer Discretion. The DROP benefit is determined pursuant to a specific formula which does not involve employer discretion. 
d.  IRC Limit. The DROP Account distribution, along with other benefits payable from the System, is subject to limitation under Internal Revenue Code Section 415(b). 
e.  Amendment of DROP. The DROP may be amended by an ordinance of the City at any time and from time to time, and retroactively if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend in whole or in part any or all of the provisions of the DROP. However, except as otherwise provided by law, no amendment shall make it possible for any part of the DROP's funds to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under the DROP. No amendment shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the balance of the DROP Account of any member. 
f.  Facility of Payment. If the board shall find that a member or other person entitled to a benefit under the DROP is unable to care for his affairs because of illness or accident or is a minor, the board may direct that any benefit due him, unless claim shall have been made for the benefit by a duly appointed legal representative, be paid to his spouse, a child, a parent or other blood relative, or to a person with whom he resides. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of the liabilities of the DROP for that benefit. 
g.  Information. Each Member, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit shall be payable to him or on his account under the DROP, shall file with the board the information that it shall require to establish his rights and benefits under the DROP. 
h.  Prevention of Escheat. If the board cannot ascertain the whereabouts of any person to whom a payment is due under the DROP, the board may, no earlier than three (3) years from the date such payment is due, mail a notice of such due and owing payment to the last known address of such person, as shown on the records of the board or the City. If such person has not made written claim therefor within three (3) months of the date of the mailing, the board may, if it so elects and upon receiving advice from counsel to the DROP, direct that such payment and all remaining payments otherwise due such person be canceled on the records of the DROP. Upon such cancellation, the DROP shall have no further liability therefor except that, in the event such person or his beneficiary later notifies the board of his whereabouts and requests the payment or payments due to him under the DROP, the amount so applied shall be paid to him in accordance with the provisions of the DROP. 
i.  Written Elections, Notification. 
1.  Any elections, notifications or designations made by a member pursuant to the provisions of the DROP shall be made in writing and filed with the board in a time and manner determined by the board under rules uniformly applicable to all employees similarly situated. The board reserves the right to change from time to time the manner for making notifications, elections or designations by members under the DROP if it determines after due deliberation that such action is justified in that it improves the administration of the DROP. In the event of a conflict between the provisions for making an election, notification or designation set forth in the DROP and such new administrative procedures, those new administrative procedures shall prevail. 
2.  Each member or retiree who has a DROP Account shall be responsible for furnishing THE Board with his current address and any subsequent changes in his address. Any notice required to be given to a member or retiree hereunder shall be deemed given if directed to him at the last such address given to the board and mailed by registered or certified United States mail. If any check mailed by registered or certified United States mail to such address is returned, mailing of checks will be suspended until such time as the member or retiree notifies the board of his address. 
j.  Benefits Not Guaranteed. All benefits payable to a member from the DROP shall be paid only from the assets of the member's DROP Account and neither the City nor the board shall have any duty or liability to furnish the DROP with any funds, securities or other assets except to the extent required by any applicable law. 
k.  Construction. 
1.  The DROP shall be construed, regulated and administered under the laws of Florida, except where other applicable law controls. 
2.  The titles and headings of the subsections in this section are for convenience only. In the case of ambiguity or inconsistency, the text rather than the titles or headings shall control. 
l.  Forfeiture of Retirement Benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP participants from the application of any forfeiture provisions applicable to the PLAN. DROP participants shall be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits. 
m.  Effect of DROP Participation on Employment. Participation in the DROP is not a guarantee of employment and DROP participants shall be subject to the same employment standards and policies that are applicable to employees who are not DROP participants. 
(bb)  Supplemental Benefit Component for Special Benefits; Chapter 175 Share Accounts. 
There is hereby established an additional plan component to provide special benefits in the form of a supplemental retirement, termination, death and disability benefits to be in addition to the benefits provided for in the previous sections of this plan, such benefit to be funded solely and entirely by Chapter 175, Florida Statutes, premium tax monies for each plan year which are allocated to this supplemental component as provided for in F.S. § 175.351. Amounts allocated to this supplemental component ("Share Plan") shall be further allocated to the members and DROP participants in a manner to be agreed upon. 
(Ord. No. 1837 , §§ 1—27, 2-22-2011; Ord. No. 1885 , §§ 1, 2, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 1914 , §§ 1—3, 3-24-2015; Ord. No. 1959 , §§ 1—7, 12-13-2016)  
2.08 - HOUSING AUTHORITY 
 
2.08.01 - Declaration of Need. 
The Council hereby declares that there is a need for a Housing Authority in the City to eliminate unsanitary or unsafe inhabited dwelling accommodations which exist in the City and to eliminate the shortage of safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations in the City available to persons of low income, at rentals they can afford.  
2.08.02 - Powers. 
The Housing Authority shall have the powers delegated and limitations imposed in Chapter 421, F.S., as amended.  
2.08.03 - Establishment. 
There is hereby established in and for the City the Housing Authority of Fort Walton Beach, referred to in this division as the Housing Authority or the Authority, in accordance with chapter 421, F.S., as amended.  
2.08.04 - Membership; Terms. 
The Housing Authority shall consist of seven (7) Commissioners. The terms of members serving upon the adoption of Resolution 89-51, passed October 24, 1989, shall be unchanged. Of the two (2) new members appointed, one shall serve for two (2) years and one for four (4) years.  
2.09 - POLICE OFFICERS' RETIREMENT FUND BOARD 
 
2.09.01 - Establishment. 
The City's Police Officers' Retirement Fund Board of Trustees shall consist of five (5) members and be solely responsible for administering the Police Officers Trust Fund. The membership composition, appointments, and succession shall be governed by chapter 185, F.S., as amended. 
The trustees shall, by a majority vote, elect from their number a Chair and a Secretary. The Secretary of the Board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of the Board. The Trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by Florida law.  
2.09.02 - Powers, Duties. 
The Board of Trustees shall meet at least quarterly each year. The powers and duties of the board of trustees shall derive from those enumerated in chapter 185, F.S., as amended.  
2.09.03 - Police Officers' Retirement Fund. 
(a)  Definitions. As used herein, unless otherwise defined or required by the context, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning indicated: 
Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions with interest at the rate of three percent (3%) per annum. Interest accrues only during periods when a member is accruing credited service. For those members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the system, any payment representing the amount attributable to member contributions based on the applicable member contribution rate, and any payment representing interest and any required actuarially calculated payments for the purchase of such credited service, shall be included in accumulated contributions without the crediting of interest of three percent (3%) per annum. 
Actuarial equivalent means a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon the RP 2000 Combined Healthy Unisex Mortality Table and an interest rate equal to the investment return assumption set forth in the last actuarial valuation report approved by the board. This definition may only be amended by the City pursuant to the recommendation of the board using assumptions adopted by the board with the advice of the plan's actuary, such that actuarial assumptions are not subject to City discretion. 
Average final compensation means one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the average salary of the highest five (5) years out of the last fifteen (15) years of credited service prior to retirement prior to retirement, termination, or death, or the career average as a full-time Police Officer, whichever is greater. A year shall be twelve (12) consecutive months. 
Beneficiary means the person or persons entitled to receive benefits hereunder at the death of a member who has or have been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect, or if no person so designated is living, at the time of death of the member, the beneficiary shall be the estate of the member. 
Board means the Board of Trustees, which shall administer and manage the system herein provided and serve as trustees of the fund. 
City means City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida. 
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. 
Credited Service means the total number of years and fractional parts of years of service as a Police Officer with member contributions, when required, omitting intervening years or fractional parts of years when such member was not employed by the City as a Police Officer. A member may voluntarily leave his accumulated contributions in the fund for a period of five (5) years after leaving the employ of the Police Department pending the possibility of being reemployed as a Police Officer, without losing credit for the time that he was a member of the System. If a vested member leaves the employ of the Police Department, his accumulated contributions will be returned only upon his written request. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed as a Police Officer with the Police Department within five (5) years, his accumulated contributions, if one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, shall be returned. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed within five (5) years, his accumulated contributions, if more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), will be returned only upon the written request of the member and upon completion of a written election to receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount on forms designated by the Board. Upon return of a member's accumulated contributions, all of his rights and benefits under the System are forfeited and terminated. Upon any reemployment, a Police Officer shall not receive credit for the years and fractional parts of years of service for which he has withdrawn his accumulated contributions from the fund, unless the Police Officer repays into the fund the contributions he has withdrawn, with interest, as determined by the board, within ninety (90) days after his reemployment. 
The years or fractional parts of a year that a member performs "Qualified Military Service" consisting of voluntary or involuntary "service in the uniformed services" as defined in the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) (P.L.103-353), after separation from employment as a Police Officer with the City, shall be added to his years of credited service for all purposes, including vesting, provided that: 
A.  The member is entitled to reemployment under the provisions of USERRA. 
B.  The member returns to his employment as a Police Officer within one (1) year from the earlier of the date of his military discharge or his release from active service, unless otherwise required by USERRA. 
C.  The maximum credit for military service pursuant to this paragraph shall be five (5) years. 
D.  This paragraph is intended to satisfy the minimum requirements of USERRA. To the extent that this paragraph does not meet the minimum standards of USERRA, as it may be amended from time to time, the minimum standards shall apply. 
In the event a member dies on or after January 1, 2007, while performing USERRA Qualified Military Service, the beneficiaries of the member are entitled to any benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) as if the member had resumed employment and then died while employed. 
Beginning January 1, 2009, to the extent required by Section 414(u)(12) of the Code, an individual receiving differential wage payments (as defined under Section 3401(h)(2) of the Code) from an employer shall be treated as employed by that employer, and the differential wage payment shall be treated as compensation for purposes of applying the limits on annual additions under Section 415(c) of the Code. This provision shall be applied to all similarly situated individuals in a reasonably equivalent manner. 
Leave conversions of unused accrued paid time off shall not be permitted to be applied toward the accrual of credited service either during each plan year of a member's employment with the City or in the plan year in which the member terminates employment. 
Fund means the trust fund established herein as part of the system. 
Member means an actively employed Police Officer who fulfills the prescribed membership requirements. Benefit improvements which, in the past, have been provided for by amendments to the system adopted by City ordinance, and any benefit improvements which might be made in the future shall apply prospectively and shall not apply to members who terminate employment or who retire prior to the effective date of any ordinance adopting such benefit improvements, unless such ordinance specifically provides to the contrary. 
Plan year means the twelve (12) month period beginning October 1 and ending September 30 of the following year. 
Police Officer means an actively employed full-time person, employed by the City, including his initial probationary employment period, who is certified as a Police Officer as a condition of employment in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 943.1395, who is vested with authority to bear arms and make arrests, and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of the penal, traffic, or highway laws of the State of Florida. 
Retiree means a member who has entered retirement status. 
Retirement means a member's separation from City employment with eligibility for immediate receipt of benefits under the system. 
Salary means the total cash remuneration paid to the Police Officer for services rendered to the City as a Police Officer. For service earned on or after July 1, 2011, salary shall not include more than three hundred (300) hours of overtime per calendar year. Provided however, in any event, payments for overtime in excess of three hundred (300) hours per year accrued as of July 1, 2011 and attributable to service earned prior to the July 1, 2011, may still be included in salary for pension purposes even if the payment is not actually made until on or after July 1, 2011. Compensation in excess of the limitations set forth in Section 401(a)(17) of the Code as of the first day of the plan year shall be disregarded for any purpose, including employee contributions or any benefit calculations. The annual compensation of each member taken into account in determining benefits or employee contributions for any plan year beginning on or after January 1, 2002, may not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17)(B). Compensation means compensation during the fiscal year. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. If the determination period consists of fewer than twelve (12) months, the annual compensation limit is an amount equal to the otherwise applicable annual compensation limit multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the short determination period, and the denominator of which is twelve (12). If the compensation for any prior determination period is taken into account in determining a member's contributions or benefits for the current plan year, the compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the applicable annual compensation limit in effect for that prior period. The limitation on compensation for an "eligible employee" shall not be less than the amount which was allowed to be taken into account hereunder as in effect on July 1, 1993. "Eligible employee" is an individual who was a member before the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995. 
Spouse means the member's or retiree's spouse under applicable law at the time benefits become payable. 
System means the City of Fort Walton Beach Police Officers' Retirement Fund as contained herein and all amendments thereto. 
Masculine gender. The masculine gender, where used herein, unless the context specifically requires otherwise, shall include both the feminine and masculine genders. 
(b)  Membership. 
(1)  Conditions of Eligibility. All Police Officers as of December 31, 1986, and all future new Police Officers, shall become members of this system as a condition of employment. 
(2)  Designation of Beneficiary. Each Police Officer shall complete a form prescribed by the board designating a beneficiary or beneficiaries. 
(c)  Board of Trustees. 
(1)  The sole and exclusive administration of and responsibility for the proper operation of the system and for making effective the provisions of this ordinance is hereby vested in a Board of Trustees. The board is hereby designated as the plan administrator. The board shall consist of five (5) Trustees, two (2) of whom, unless otherwise prohibited by law, shall be legal residents of the City, who shall be appointed by the Fort Walton Beach City Council, and two (2) of whom shall be members of the system, who shall be elected by a majority of the Police Officers who are members of the system. The fifth Trustee shall be chosen by a majority of the previous four (4) Trustees as provided for herein, and such person's name shall be submitted to the Fort Walton Beach City Council. Upon receipt of the fifth person's name, the Fort Walton Beach City Council shall, as a ministerial duty, appoint such person to the Board of Trustees as its fifth Trustee. The fifth Trustee shall have the same rights as each of the other four (4) Trustees appointed or elected as herein provided and shall serve a four (4) year term unless he sooner vacates the office. Each resident Trustee shall serve as Trustee for a period of four (4) years, unless he sooner vacates the office or is sooner replaced by the Fort Walton Beach City Council at whose pleasure he shall serve. Each Member Trustee shall serve as Trustee for a period of four (4) years, unless he sooner leaves the employment of the City as a Police Officer or otherwise vacates his office as Trustee, whereupon a successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the departing Trustee. Each Trustee may succeed himself in office. The board shall establish and administer the nominating and election procedures for each election. The board shall meet at least quarterly each year. The board shall be a legal entity with, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained herein, the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature, and description. 
(2)  The Trustees shall, by a majority vote, elect a Chairman and a Secretary. The Secretary of the board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of the board. The Trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by law. 
(3)  Each Trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on the board. Three (3) affirmative votes shall be necessary for any decision by the Trustees at any meeting of the board. A Trustee shall abstain from voting as the result of a conflict of interest and shall comply with the provisions of F.S. § 112.3143. 
(4)  The board shall engage such actuarial, accounting, legal, and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the system shall be paid from the fund at such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. In the event the board chooses to use the City's legal counsel, actuary or other professional, technical or other advisors, it shall do so only under terms and conditions acceptable to the board. 
(5)  The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
a.  To construe the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
b.  To determine all questions relating to eligibility and membership. 
c.  To determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder. 
d.  To establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit applications and all matters required to administer the system. 
e.  To distribute to members, at regular intervals, information concerning the system. 
f.  To receive and process all applications for benefits. 
g.  To authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund, and to notify the disbursing agent, in writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the system and fund. 
h.  To have performed actuarial studies and valuations, at least as often as required by law, and make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the System. 
i.  To perform such other duties as are required to prudently administer the system. 
(d)  Finances and Fund Management. Establishment and operation of fund. 
(1)  As part of the plan there is hereby established the fund, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the plan, including the assets of the prior City of Fort Walton Beach Police Officers' Retirement Fund. 
(2)  The actual custody and supervision of the plan (and assets thereof) shall be vested in the Board of Trustees. Payment of benefits and disbursements from the plan shall be made by the disbursing agent but only upon written authorization from the board. 
(3)  All funds and securities of the City of Fort Walton Beach Police Officers' Retirement Fund may be deposited by the Board of Trustees with the Finance Director of the municipality, acting in a ministerial capacity only, who shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as he is liable for the safekeeping of funds for the municipality. However, any funds and securities so deposited with the Finance Director of the municipality shall be kept in a separate fund by the Finance Director or clearly identified as such funds and securities of the City of Fort Walton Beach Police Officers' Retirement Fund. In lieu thereof, the Board of Trustees shall deposit the funds and securities of the City of Fort Walton Beach Police Officers' Retirement Fund in a qualified public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which depository with regard to such Funds and securities shall conform to and be bound by all of the provisions of F.S. Chapter 280. In order to fulfill its investment responsibilities as set forth herein, the board may retain the services of a custodian bank, an investment advisor registered under Investment Advisors Act of 1940 or otherwise exempt from such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination of these, for the purposes of investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall have discretion, subject to any guidelines as prescribed by the board, in the investment of all plan assets. 
(4)  All funds and securities of the plan may be commingled in the plan, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the plan, including accurate current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
a.  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and aggregate account basis, and 
b.  Receipts and disbursements, and 
c.  Benefit payments, and 
d.  Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the City, and 
e.  All interest, dividends and gains (or losses) whatsoever, and 
f.  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(5)  An independent audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year of the City showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(6)  The Board of Trustees shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
a.  The Board of Trustees shall be vested with full legal title to said fund, subject, however, and in any event, to the authority and power of the Fort Walton Beach City Council to amend or terminate this Trust, provided that no amendment or plan termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this plan except for the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this plan. All contributions from time to time paid into the plan, and the income thereof, without distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its agent in the plan and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any portion of the fund. 
b.  All monies paid into or held in the pension plan shall be invested and reinvested by the board and the investment of all or any part of such funds shall be limited to: 
1.  Annuity and life insurance contracts of life insurance companies in amounts sufficient to provide, in whole or in part, the benefits to which all of the participants in the plan shall be entitled under the provisions of this plan and pay the initial and subsequent premium thereon. 
2.  Time or savings accounts of a national bank, a state bank or a savings/building and loan association insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in an amount not exceeding that insured. 
3.  Obligations of the United States or obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the government of the United States. 
4.  Stocks, commingled funds, mutual funds and bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, provided that: 
(a)  Except as provided in subparagraph (b), all individually held securities and all securities in a commingled or mutual fund must be issued or guaranteed by a corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized territory of the United States, or the District of Columbia. 
(b)  Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the assets of the fund at market value may be invested in foreign securities. 
(c)  The board shall not invest more than five percent (5%) of its assets in the common stock, capital stock, or convertible securities of any one issuing company, nor shall the aggregate investment in any one issuing company exceed five percent (5%) of the outstanding capital stock of that company; nor shall the aggregate of its investments in common stock, capital stock and convertible securities at market exceed seventy percent (70%) of the assets of the fund. 
5.  Real Estate. 
c.  The Board of Trustees shall not invest more than twenty percent (20%) of its assets at cost in real estate. 
d.  The Board of Trustees may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the plan as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the plan. 
e.  No person or entity shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to his or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
f.  The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as Trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them unregistered and in form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the Trust Fund. 
g.  The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with the Trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other investments comprising the plan which it may deem to be to the best interest of the plan to exercise. 
h.  The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to secure any order of court for the exercise of any power contained herein. 
i.  Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required to perform either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as Trustee under this Ordinance, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the City, or any other entity, of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
j.  Any overpayments or underpayments from the plan to a member or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by the board. Overpayment shall be charged against payments next succeeding the correction. Underpayments shall be made up from the Trust Fund. 
k.  The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the plan to meet the payments and benefits herein provided for. 
l.  In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary party, and no member or other person having an interest in the plan shall be entitled to any notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be conclusive upon all persons. 
m.  Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times maintains continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent; provided further, that legal title to said plan shall always remain in the Board of Trustees. 
(e)  Contributions. 
(1)  Member Contributions. 
a.  Amount. Each member of the system shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of five percent (5%) of his salary. Member contributions withheld by the City on behalf of the member shall be deposited with the board immediately after each pay period. The contributions made by each member to the fund shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to §414(h) of the Code. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the members' gross income for Federal Income Tax purposes. For all other purposes of the system, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
b.  Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
(2)  State Contributions. Any monies received or receivable by reason of laws of the State of Florida, for the express purpose of funding and paying for retirement benefits for Police Officers of the City shall be deposited in the fund comprising part of this System immediately and under no circumstances more than five (5) days after receipt by the City. 
(3)  City Contributions. So long as this system is in effect, the City shall make quarterly contributions to the fund in an amount equal to the required City contribution, as shown by the applicable actuarial valuation of the system. 
(4)  Other. Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the fund, but such deposits must be accounted for separately and kept on a segregated bookkeeping basis. Funds arising from these sources may be used only for additional benefits for members, as determined by the board, and may not be used to reduce what would have otherwise been required City contributions. 
(f)  Benefit Amounts and Eligibility. 
(1)  Normal Retirement Age and Date. A member's normal retirement age is the earlier of the attainment of age fifty-five (55) and the completion of ten (10) years of credited service or the completion of thirty (30) years of credited service, regardless of age. Each member shall become one hundred percent (100%) vested in his accrued benefit at normal retirement age. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date the member retires from the City after attaining normal retirement age. 
(2)  Normal Retirement Benefit. A Member retiring hereunder on or after his normal retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following his retirement and be continued thereafter during member's lifetime, ceasing upon death, but with one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments guaranteed in any event. The monthly retirement benefit shall equal: 
a.  For those members who retire on or before April 5, 1999, two and one-half percent (2.5%) of average final compensation for each year of credited service, not to exceed thirty (30) years of credited service. An employee shall not contribute to the plan after attaining thirty (30) years of credited service, and the period of average final compensation shall be those years immediately prior to the actual retirement date. 
b.  For those members who retire after April 5, 1999, two and three-fourths percent (2.75%) of average final compensation for each year of credited service, up to a maximum of seventy-five percent (75%) of average final compensation. A member shall contribute one-half of one percent (.5%) of compensation as defined in this section to the plan after accruing the maximum benefit percentage, and the period of average final compensation shall be those years immediately prior to the actual retirement date. 
c.  The normal retirement for a member who retires under this section shall in no event be less than two percent (2%) of average final compensation for each year of credited service. 
(3)  Early Retirement Date. A member may retire on his early retirement date which shall be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the attainment of age fifty (50) and the completion of ten (10) years of credited service or the completion of twenty-five (25) years of credited service, regardless of age. Early retirement under the system is retirement from employment with the City on or after the early retirement date and prior to the normal retirement date. 
(4)  Early Retirement Benefit. A member retiring hereunder on his early retirement date may receive either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit payable in the same form as for normal retirement as follows: 
a.  A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on what would have been his normal retirement date had he continued employment as a Police Officer and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement on his normal retirement date except that credited service and average final compensation shall be determined as of his early retirement date; or 
b.  An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on his early retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The benefit payable shall be as determined in paragraph a. above, reduced by six percent (6%) for each year by which the commencement of benefits precedes the date which would have been the member's normal retirement date had he continued employment as a Police Officer. 
(5)  Required Distribution Date. The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the City. 
(6)  Cost of Living Adjustment. Each April 1st, the monthly amount payable to a retiree, normal and early service retirees, his joint pensioner or beneficiary, if applicable, is adjusted in accordance with the CPI increase during the previous calendar year. The cost-of-living adjustment (increase or decrease, whichever is applicable) shall not exceed three percent (3%) and no cost-of-living adjustment can reduce the retirement income payments below the base amount payable. 
(g)  Pre-Retirement Death. 
(1)  Prior to Vesting or Eligibility for Retirement. The beneficiary of a deceased member who was not receiving monthly benefits or who was not yet vested or eligible for early or normal retirement shall receive a refund of one hundred percent (100%) of the member's accumulated contributions. 
(2)  Deceased Members Vested or Eligible for Retirement with Spouse as Beneficiary. This subsection (2) applies only when the member's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary. The spouse beneficiary of any member who dies and who, at the date of his death was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement, shall be entitled to a benefit as follows: 
a.  If the member was vested, but not eligible for normal or early retirement, the spouse beneficiary shall receive a benefit payable for ten (10) years, beginning on the date that the deceased member would have been eligible for early or normal retirement, at the option of the spouse beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. The spouse beneficiary may also elect to receive an immediate benefit, payable for ten (10) years, which is actuarially reduced to reflect the commencement of benefits prior to the early retirement date. 
b.  If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement, the spouse beneficiary shall receive a benefit payable for ten (10) years, beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death or at the deceased member's otherwise early or normal retirement date, at the option of the spouse beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. 
c.  A spouse beneficiary may not elect an optional form of benefit, however, the board may elect to make a lump sum payment pursuant to subsection (j)(7). 
d.  A spouse beneficiary may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in a. or b. above, elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions. 
e.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, in any event, distributions to the spouse beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by a date selected pursuant to the above provisions in this section that must be on or before December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age seventy and one-half (70½). 
f.  If the surviving spouse beneficiary commences receiving a benefit under subsection a. or b. above, but dies before all payments are made, the actuarial value of the remaining benefit will be paid to the spouse beneficiary's estate in a lump sum. 
(3)  Deceased Members Vested or Eligible for Retirement with Non-Spouse Beneficiary. This subsection applies only when the member's spouse is not the beneficiary or is not the sole designated beneficiary, but there is a surviving beneficiary. The beneficiary of any member who dies and who, at the date of his death was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement, shall be entitled to a benefit as follows: 
a.  If the member was vested, but not eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary will receive a benefit payable for ten (10) years. The benefit will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. The benefit will be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation and actuarially reduced to reflect the commencement of benefits prior to the normal retirement date. 
b.  If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary will receive a benefit payable for ten (10) years, beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death. The benefit will be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced for early retirement, if applicable. 
c.  A beneficiary may not elect an optional form of benefit, however the board may elect to make a lump sum payment pursuant to subsection (j)(7). 
d.  A beneficiary, may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in a. or b. above, elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions. 
e.  If a surviving beneficiary commences receiving a benefit under subsection a. or b. above, but dies before all payments are made, the actuarial value of the remaining benefit will be paid to the surviving beneficiary's estate by December 31 of the calendar year of the beneficiary's death in a lump sum. 
f.  If there is no surviving beneficiary as of the member's death, and the estate is to receive the benefits, the actuarial equivalent of the member's entire interest must be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
g.  The Uniform Lifetime Table in Treasury Regulations § 1.401(a)(9)-9 shall determine the payment period for the calendar year benefits commence, if necessary to satisfy the regulations. 
(h)  Disability. 
(1)  Disability Benefits In-Line of Duty. Any member who shall become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a Police Officer, which disability was directly caused by the performance of his duty as a Police Officer, shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to two and three-quarters percent (2.75%) of his average final compensation multiplied by the total years of credited service, but in any event the minimum amount paid to the member shall be not less than fifty percent (50%) of the average final compensation of the member. Terminated persons, either vested or non-vested, are not eligible for disability benefits. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a member is terminated by the City for medical reasons, the terminated person may apply for a disability benefit if the application is filed with the board within thirty (30) days from the date of termination. If a timely application is received, it shall be processed and the terminated person shall be eligible to receive a disability benefit if the board otherwise determines that he is totally and permanently disabled as provided for above. 
(2)  In-Line of Duty Presumptions. 
a.  Presumption. Any condition or impairment of health of a member caused by hypertension or heart disease shall be presumed to have been suffered in line of duty unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence, provided that such member shall have successfully passed a physical examination upon entering into such service, including cardiogram, which examination failed to reveal any evidence of such condition; and provided further, that such presumption shall not apply to benefits payable or granted in a policy of life insurance or disability insurance. 
b.  Additional Presumption. The presumption provided for in this paragraph b. shall apply only to those conditions described in this paragraph b. that are diagnosed on or after January 1, 1996. 
1.  Definitions. As used in this subsection (2)b., the following definitions apply: 
(a)  "Body fluids" means blood and body fluids containing visible blood and other body fluids to which universal precautions for prevention of occupational transmission of blood-borne pathogens, as established by the Centers for Disease Control, apply. For purposes of potential transmission of meningococcal meningitis or tuberculosis, the term "body fluids" includes respiratory, salivary, and sinus fluids, including droplets, sputum, and saliva, mucous, and other fluids through which infectious airborne organisms can be transmitted between persons. 
(b)  "Emergency rescue or public safety member" means any member employed full time by the City as a police officer, paramedic, emergency medical technician, law enforcement officer, or correctional officer who, in the course of employment, runs a high risk of occupational exposure to hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis and who is not employed elsewhere in a similar capacity. However, the term "emergency rescue or public safety member" does not include any person employed by a public hospital licensed under F.S. Chapter 395, or any person employed by a subsidiary thereof. 
(c)  "Hepatitis" means hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis non-A, hepatitis non-B, hepatitis C, or any other strain of hepatitis generally recognized by the medical community. 
(d)  "High risk of occupational exposure" means that risk that is incurred because a person subject to the provisions of this subsection, in performing the basic duties associated with his employment: 
i.  Provides emergency medical treatment in a non-health-care setting where there is a potential for transfer of body fluids between persons; 
ii.  At the site of an accident, fire, or other rescue or public safety operation, or in an emergency rescue or public safety vehicle, handles body fluids in or out of containers or works with or otherwise handles needles or other sharp instruments exposed to body fluids; 
iii.  Engages in the pursuit, apprehension, and arrest of law violators or suspected law violators and, in performing such duties, may be exposed to body fluids; or 
iv.  Is responsible for the custody, and physical restraint when necessary, of prisoners or inmates within a prison, jail, or other criminal detention facility, while on work detail outside the facility, or while being transported and, in performing such duties, may be exposed to body fluids. 
(e)  "Occupational exposure," in the case of hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, means an exposure that occurs during the performance of job duties that may place a worker at risk of infection. 
2.  Presumption. Any emergency rescue or public safety member who suffers a condition or impairment of health that is caused by hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, that requires medical treatment, and that results in total or partial disability or death shall be presumed to have a disability suffered in the line of duty, unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence; however, in order to be entitled to the presumption, the member must, by written affidavit as provided in F.S. § 92.50, verify by written declaration that, to the best of his knowledge and belief: 
(a)  In the case of a medical condition caused by or derived from hepatitis, he has not: 
i.  Been exposed, through transfer of bodily fluids, to any person known to have sickness or medical conditions derived from hepatitis, outside the scope of his employment; 
ii.  Had a transfusion of blood or blood components, other than a transfusion arising out of an accident or injury happening in connection with his present employment, or received any blood products for the treatment of a coagulation disorder since last undergoing medical tests for hepatitis, which tests failed to indicate the presence of hepatitis; 
iii.  Engaged in unsafe sexual practices or other high-risk behavior, as identified by the Centers for Disease Control or the Surgeon General of the United States or had sexual relations with a person known to him to have engaged in such unsafe sexual practices or other high-risk behavior; or 
iv.  Used intravenous drugs not prescribed by a physician. 
(b)  In the case of meningococcal meningitis, in the ten (10) days immediately preceding diagnosis he was not exposed, outside the scope of his employment, to any person known to have meningococcal meningitis or known to be an asymptomatic carrier of the disease. 
(c)  In the case of tuberculosis, in the period of time since the member's last negative tuberculosis skin test, he has not been exposed, outside the scope of his employment, to any person known by him to have tuberculosis. 
3.  Immunization. Whenever any standard, medically recognized vaccine or other form of immunization or prophylaxis exists for the prevention of a communicable disease for which a presumption is granted under this section, if medically indicated in the given circumstances pursuant to immunization policies established by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of the U.S. Public Health Service, an emergency rescue or public safety member may be required by the City to undergo the immunization or prophylaxis unless the member's physician determines in writing that the immunization or other prophylaxis would pose a significant risk to the member's health. Absent such written declaration, failure or refusal by an emergency rescue or public safety member to undergo such immunization or prophylaxis disqualifies the member from the benefits of the presumption. 
4.  Record of Exposures. The City shall maintain a record of any known or reasonably suspected exposure of an emergency rescue or public safety member in its employ to the disease described in this section and shall immediately notify the member of such exposure. An emergency rescue or public safety member shall file an incident or accident report with the City of each instance of known or suspected occupational exposure to hepatitis infection, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis. 
5.  Required medical tests; preemployment physical. In order to be entitled to the presumption provided by this section: 
(a)  An emergency rescue or public safety member must, prior to diagnosis, have undergone standard, medically acceptable tests for evidence of the communicable disease for which the presumption is sought, or evidence of medical conditions derived therefrom, which tests fail to indicate the presence of infection. This paragraph does not apply in the case of meningococcal meningitis. 
(b)  On or after June 15, 1995, an emergency rescue or public safety member may be required to undergo a preemployment physical examination that tests for and fails to reveal any evidence of hepatitis or tuberculosis. 
(3)  Disability Benefits Not-in-Line of Duty. Any member with ten (10) years or more credited service who shall become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a Police Officer, which disability is not directly caused by the performance of his duties as a Police Officer shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to two and three-quarters percent (2.75%) of his average final compensation multiplied by the total years of credited service, but in any event, the minimum amount paid to the member shall be not be less than forty percent (40%) of the average final compensation of the member. Terminated persons, either vested or non-vested, are not eligible for disability benefits. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a member is terminated by the City for medical reasons, the terminated person may apply for a disability benefit if the application is filed with the board within thirty (30) days from the date of termination. If a timely application is received, it shall be processed and the terminated person shall be eligible to receive a disability benefit if the board otherwise determines that he is totally and permanently disabled as provided for above. 
(4)  Conditions Disqualifying Disability Benefits. Each member who is claiming disability benefits shall establish, to the satisfaction of the board, that such disability was not occasioned primarily by: 
a.  Excessive or habitual use of any drugs, intoxicants or narcotics. 
b.  Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots or civil insurrections or while committing a crime. 
c.  Injury or disease sustained while serving in any branch of the Armed Forces. 
d.  Injury or disease sustained by the member after his employment as a Police Officer with the City of Fort Walton Beach shall have terminated. 
e.  Injury or disease sustained by the member while working for anyone other than the City and arising out of such employment. 
(5)  Physical Examination Requirement. A member shall not become eligible for disability benefits until and unless he undergoes a physical examination by a qualified physician or physicians and/or surgeon or surgeons, who shall be selected by the board for that purpose. The board shall not select the member's treating physician or surgeon for this purpose except in an unusual case where the board determines that it would be reasonable and prudent to do so. 
Any retiree receiving disability benefits under provisions of this ordinance may be required by the board to submit sworn statements of his condition accompanied by a physician's statement (provided at the retiree's expense) to the board annually and may be required by the board to undergo additional periodic re-examinations by a qualified physician or physicians and/or surgeon or surgeons who shall be selected by the board, to determine if such disability has ceased to exist. If the board finds that the retiree is no longer permanently and totally disabled to the extent that he is unable to render useful and efficient service as a Police Officer, the board shall recommend to the City that the retiree be returned to performance of duty as a Police Officer, and the retiree so returned shall enjoy the same rights that he had at the time he was placed upon pension. In the event the retiree so ordered to return shall refuse to comply with the order within thirty (30) days from the issuance thereof, he shall forfeit the right to his pension. 
The cost of the physical examination and/or re-examination of the member claiming or the retiree receiving disability benefits shall be borne by the fund. All other reasonable costs as determined by the board incident to the physical examination, such as, but not limited to, transportation, meals and hotel accommodations, shall be borne by the fund. 
If the retiree recovers from disability and reenters the service of the City as a Police Officer, his service will be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month for which he received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date he reentered the service of the City will not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the system. 
The board shall have the power and authority to make the final decisions regarding all disability claims. 
(6)  Disability Payments. The monthly benefit to which a member is entitled in the event of the member's disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date the board determined such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the first payment. The last payment will be: 
a.  If the retiree recovers from the disability, the payment due next preceding the date of such recovery, or 
b.  If the retiree dies without recovering from disability, the payment due next preceding his death or the 120th monthly payment, whichever is later. 
Provided, however, the disability retiree may select, at any time prior to the date on which benefit payments begin, an optional form of benefit payment as described in subsection (j)(1)a. or (1)b., which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of benefit. 
(i)  Vesting. If a member terminates his employment as a Police Officer, either voluntarily or by discharge, and is not eligible for any other benefits under this system, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1)  If the member has less than ten (10) years credited service upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a refund of his accumulated contributions or the member may leave it deposited with the fund. 
(2)  If the member has ten (10) or more years of credited service upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a monthly retirement benefit, determined in the same manner as for normal or early retirement and based upon the member's credited service, average final compensation and the benefit accrual rate as of the date of termination, payable to him commencing at the member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, determined as if he had remained employed, provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions and provided the member survives to his otherwise normal or early retirement date. If the member does not withdraw his accumulated contributions and does not survive to his otherwise normal or early retirement date, his designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as provided herein for a deceased member, vested or eligible for retirement under pre-retirement death. 
(j)  Optional Forms of Benefits. 
(1)  In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable in the event of normal or early retirement as specified herein, a member, upon written request to the board, may elect to receive a retirement income or benefit of equivalent actuarial value payable in accordance with one (1) of the following options: 
a.  A retirement income of a monthly amount payable to the retiree for his lifetime only. 
b.  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the retiree during the lifetime of the retiree and following the death of the retiree, one hundred percent (100%), seventy-five percent (75%), sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 ?%) or fifty percent (50%) of such monthly amount payable to a joint pensioner for his lifetime. Except where the retiree's joint pensioner is his spouse, the payments to the joint pensioner as a percentage of the payments to the retiree shall not exceed the applicable percentage provided for in the applicable table in the Treasury regulations. (See Q & A-2 of 1.401(a)(9)-6) 
c.  If a member retires prior to the time at which social security benefits are payable, he may elect to receive an increased retirement benefit until such time as social security benefits shall be assumed to commence and a reduced benefit thereafter in order to provide, to as great an extent as possible, a more level retirement allowance during the entire period of retirement. The amounts payable shall be as recommended by the actuaries for the system, based upon the social security law in effect at the time of the member's retirement. 
(2)  The member, upon electing any option of this section, will designate the joint pensioner (subsection (1)b. above) or beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the system in the event of member's death, and will have the power to change such designation from time to time. Such designation will name a joint pensioner or one (1) or more primary beneficiaries where applicable. A member may change his beneficiary at any time. If a member has elected an option with a joint pensioner and member's retirement income benefits have commenced, member may thereafter change his designated beneficiary at any time, but may only change his joint pensioner twice. Subject to the restriction in the previous sentence, a member may substitute a new joint pensioner for a deceased joint pensioner. In the absence of proof of good health of the joint pensioner being replaced, the actuary will assume that the joint pensioner has deceased for purposes of calculating the new payment. 
(3)  The consent of a member's or retiree's joint pensioner or beneficiary to any such change shall not be required. The rights of all previously-designated beneficiaries to receive benefits under the system shall thereupon cease. 
(4)  Upon change of a retiree's joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the amount of the retirement income payable to the retiree shall be actuarially redetermined to take into account the age of the former joint pensioner, the new joint pensioner and the retiree and to ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the present value of the retiree's then-current benefit at the time of the change. Any such retiree shall pay the actuarial recalculation expenses. Each request for a change will be made in writing on a form prepared by the board and on completion will be filed with the board. In the event that no designated beneficiary survives the retiree, such benefits as are payable in the event of the death of the retiree subsequent to his retirement shall be paid as provided in subsection (k). 
(5)  Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
a.  If a member dies prior to his normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first occurs, no retirement benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under subsection (g). 
b.  If the designated beneficiary (or beneficiaries) or joint pensioner dies before the member's retirement under the system, the option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the member upon his retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with the provisions of this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the member prior to his retirement. 
c.  If both the retiree and the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by member or retiree die before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period certain and life thereafter, made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (1), the board may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be paid in a lump sum and in accordance with subsection (k). 
d.  If a member continues beyond his normal retirement date pursuant to the provisions of subsection (f)(1), and dies prior to his actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to the provisions of this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made, or a retirement benefit will be paid, under the option to a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by the member in the amount or amounts computed as if the member had retired under the option on the date on which his death occurred. 
e.  The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the City. 
(6)  A retiree may not change his retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his first retirement check. 
(7)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the board in its discretion, may elect to make a lump sum payment to a member or a member's beneficiary in the event that the total commuted value of the monthly income payments to be paid do not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000). Any such payment made to any person pursuant to the power and discretion conferred upon the board by the preceding sentence shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to such member and shall not be subject to review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons. 
(k)  Beneficiaries. 
(1)  Each member or retiree may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, designate a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the event of his death. Each designation may be revoked or changed by such member or retiree by signing and filing with the board a new designation-of-beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefits under the system shall cease. 
(2)  If a deceased member or retiree failed to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection (1), or if the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) named by a deceased member or retiree predeceases the member or retiree, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the system with respect to such deceased member or retiree, shall be paid to the estate of the member or retiree and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(3)  Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(l)  Claims Procedures. 
(1)  The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written requests ("claims"), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person ("Claimant"), including members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(2)  The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth in Florida Statutes. 
(m)  Reports to Division of Retirement. Each year and no later than March 15th, the board shall file an annual report with the Division of Retirement containing the documents and information required by F.S. § 185.221. 
(n)  Roster of Retirees. The Secretary of the board shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under the provisions of this ordinance in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the same shall cease to be paid. Additionally, the Secretary shall keep a record of all members in such a manner as to show the name, address, date of employment and date of termination of employment. 
(o)  Maximum Pension. 
(1)  Basic Limitation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this system to the contrary, the member contributions paid to, and retirement benefits paid from, the system shall be limited to such extent as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of Code Section 415 for a qualified retirement plan. Before January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the limits specified in Code Section 415(b), subject to the applicable adjustments in that section. On and after January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the dollar amount specified in Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) ($160,000), subject to the applicable adjustments in Code Section 415(b) and subject to any additional limits that may be specified in this system. For purposes of this section, "limitation year" shall be the calendar year. 
For purposes of Code Section 415(b), the "annual benefit" means a benefit payable annually in the form of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) without regard to the benefit attributable to after-tax employee contributions (except pursuant to Code Section 415(n) and to rollover contributions (as defined in Code Section 415(b)(2)(A)). The "benefit attributable" shall be determined in accordance with Treasury Regulations. 
(2)  Adjustments to Basic Limitation for Form of Benefit. If the benefit under the plan is other than the annual benefit described in subsection (1), then the benefit shall be adjusted so that it is the equivalent of the annual benefit, using factors prescribed in Treasury Regulations. If the form of the benefit without regard to any automatic benefit increase feature is not a straight life annuity or a qualified joint and survivor annuity, then the preceding sentence is applied by either reducing the Code Section 415(b) limit applicable at the annuity starting date or adjusting the form of benefit to an actuarially equivalent amount (determined using the assumptions specified in Treasury Regulation Section 1.415(b)-1(c)(2)(ii)) that takes into account the additional benefits under the form of benefit as follows: 
a.  For a benefit paid in a form to which Section 417(e)(3) of the Code does not apply (generally, a monthly benefit), the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greater of: 
1.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any) payable to the member under the plan commencing at the same annuity starting date as the form of benefit to the member, or 
2.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the form of benefit payable to the member, computed using a five percent (5%) interest assumption (or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables described in Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Rulings 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code); or 
b.  For a benefit paid in a form to which Section 417(e)(3) of the Code applies (generally, a lump sum benefit), the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greatest of: 
1.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable, computed using the interest rate and mortality table, or tabular factor, specified in the plan for actuarial experience; 
2.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable, computed using a five and one-half percent (5.5%) interest assumption (or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code); or 
3.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable (computed using the applicable interest rate for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(3) (the 30-year Treasury rate (prior to January 1, 2007, using the rate in effect for the month prior to retirement, and on and after January 1, 2007, using the rate in effect for the first day of the Plan Year with a one-year stabilization period)) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code), divided by 1.05. 
c.  The actuary may adjust the 415(b) limit at the annuity starting date in accordance with subsections a. and b. above. 
(3)  Benefits Not Taken into Account. For purposes of this section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account in applying these limits: 
a.  Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; 
b.  Any other benefit not required under §415(b)(2) of the Code and Regulations thereunder to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of Code Section 415(b)(1); and 
c.  That portion of any joint and survivor annuity that constitutes a qualified joint and survivor annuity. 
(4)  COLA Effect. Effective on and after January 1, 2003, for purposes of applying the limits under Code Section 415(b) (the "Limit"), the following will apply: 
a.  A member's applicable limit will be applied to the member's annual benefit in the member's first limitation year of benefit payments without regard to any automatic cost of living adjustments; 
b.  Thereafter, in any subsequent limitation year, a member's annual benefit, including any automatic cost of living increases, shall be tested under the then applicable benefit limit including any adjustment to the Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) dollar limit under Code Section 415(d), and the regulations thereunder; but 
c.  In no event shall a member's benefit payable under the system in any limitation year be greater than the limit applicable at the annuity starting date, as increased in subsequent years pursuant to Code Section 415(d) and the regulations thereunder. 
Unless otherwise specified in the system, for purposes of applying the limits under Code Section 415(b), a member's applicable limit will be applied taking into consideration cost of living increases as required by Section 415(b) of the Code and applicable Treasury Regulations. 
(5)  Other Adjustments in Limitations. 
a.  In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before age sixty-two (62), the limit prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the provisions of Code Section 415(b) of the Code, so that such limit (as so reduced) equals an annual straight life benefit (when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a one hundred sixty thousand dollar ($160,000) annual benefit beginning at age sixty-two (62). 
b.  In the event the member's benefit is based on at least fifteen (15) years of credited service as a full-time employee of the police or fire department of the City, the adjustments provided for in a. above shall not apply. 
c.  The reductions provided for in a. above shall not be applicable to disability benefits pursuant to subsection (h), or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to subsection (g). 
d.  In the event the member's retirement benefit becomes payable after age sixty-five (65), for purposes of determining whether this benefit meets the limit set forth in subsection (1) herein, such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the benefit beginning at age sixty-five (65). This adjustment shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate. 
(6)  Less than Ten (10) Years of Participation. The maximum retirement benefits payable under this section to any member who has completed less than ten (10) years of participation shall be the amount determined under subsection (1) of this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of participation and the denominator of which is ten (10). The reduction provided by this subsection cannot reduce the maximum benefit below ten percent (10%) of the limit determined without regard to this subsection. The reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be applicable to pre-retirement disability benefits paid pursuant to subsection (h), or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to subsection (g). 
(7)  Participation in Other Defined Benefit Plans. The limit of this section with respect to any member who at any time has been a member in any other defined benefit plan as defined in Code Section 414(j) maintained by the City shall apply as if the total benefits payable under all City defined benefit plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one plan. 
(8)  Ten Thousand Dollar ($10,000) Limit; Less Than Ten Years of Service. Notwithstanding anything in this subsection (o), the retirement benefit payable with respect to a member shall be deemed not to exceed the limit set forth in this subsection (8) if the benefits payable, with respect to such member under this system and under all other qualified defined benefit pension plans to which the City contributes, do not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000) for the applicable limitation year and for any prior limitation year and the City has not any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan in which the member participated; provided, however, that if the member has completed less than ten (10) years of credited service with the City, the limit under this subsection (8) shall be a reduced limit equal to ten thousand dollars ($10,000) multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of credited service and the denominator of which is ten (10). 
(9)  Reduction of Benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or contributions to all plans, where required, shall be accomplished by first reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be determined by the board and the plan administrator of such other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures for defined contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be established by the board and the plan administrator for such other plans provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority pursuant to the agreement of the board and the plan administrator of all other plans covering such member. 
(10)  Service Credit Purchase Limits. 
a.  Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, if a member makes one or more contributions to purchase permissive service credit under the system, as allowed in subsections (z) and (aa), then the requirements of this section will be treated as met only if: 
1.  The requirements of Code Section 415(b) are met, determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all such contributions as an annual benefit for purposes of Code Section 415(b), or 
2.  The requirements of Code Section 415(c) are met, determined by treating all such contributions as annual additions for purposes of Code Section 415(c). 
For purposes of applying subparagraph 1., the system will not fail to meet the reduced limit under Code Section 415(b)(2)(c) solely by reason of this subparagraph, and for purposes of applying subparagraph 2. the system will not fail to meet the percentage limitation under Section 415(c)(1)(B) of the Code solely by reason of this subparagraph. 
b.  For purposes of this subsection the term "permissive service credit" means service credit: 
1.  Recognized by the system for purposes of calculating a member's benefit under the plan, 
2.  Which such member has not received under the plan, and 
3.  Which such member may receive only by making a voluntary additional contribution, in an amount determined under the system, which does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service credit. 
Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, such term may, if otherwise provided by the system, include service credit for periods for which there is no performance of service, and, notwithstanding clause b.2., may include service credited in order to provide an increased benefit for service credit which a member is receiving under the system. 
(11)  Contribution Limits. 
a.  For purposes of applying the Code Section 415(c) limits which are incorporated by reference and for purposes of this subsection (11), only and for no other purpose, the definition of compensation where applicable will be compensation actually paid or made available during a limitation year, except as noted below and as permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulations. Unless another definition of compensation that is permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulation, is specified by the System, compensation will be defined as wages within the meaning of Code Section 3401(a) and all other payments of compensation to an employee by an employer for which the employer is required to furnish the employee a written statement under Code Sections 6041(d), 6051(a)(3) and 6052 and will be determined without regard to any rules under Code Section 3401(a) that limit the remuneration included in wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services performed (such as the exception for agricultural labor in Code Section 3401(a)(2)). 
1.  However, for limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, compensation will also include amounts that would otherwise be included in compensation but for an election under Code Sections 125(a), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 402(k), or 457(b). For limitation years beginning after December 31, 2000, compensation will also include any elective amounts that are not includible in the gross income of the employee by reason of Code Section 132(f)(4). 
2.  For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2007, compensation for the limitation year will also include compensation paid by the later of 2½ months after an employee's severance from employment or the end of the limitation year that includes the date of the employee's severance from employment if: 
(a)  The payment is regular compensation for services during the employee's regular working hours, or compensation for services outside the employee's regular working hours (such as overtime or shift differential), commissions, bonuses or other similar payments, and, absent a severance from employment, the payments would have been paid to the employee while the employee continued in employment with the employer; or 
(b)  The payment is for unused accrued bona fide sick, vacation or other leave that the employee would have been able to use if employment had continued. 
3.  Back pay, within the meaning of Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2(g)(8), shall be treated as compensation for the limitation year to which the back pay relates to the extent the back pay represents wages and compensation that would otherwise be included under the definition, of "Salary" in subsection (a), Definitions. 
b.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the board may modify a request by a member to make a contribution to the system if the amount of the contribution would exceed the limits provided in Code Section 415 by using the following methods: 
1.  If the law requires a lump sum payment for the purchase of service credit, the board may establish a periodic payment deduction plan for the member to avoid a contribution in excess of the limits under Code Sections 415(c) or 415(n). 
2.  If payment pursuant to subparagraph 1. will not avoid a contribution in excess of the limits imposed by Code Section 415(c), the board may either reduce the member's contribution to an amount within the limits of that section or refuse the member's contribution. 
c.  If the annual additions for any member for a limitation year exceed the limitation under Section 415(c) of the Code, the excess annual addition will be corrected as permitted under the Employee Plans Compliance Resolution System (or similar IRS correction program). 
d.  For limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 2009, a member's compensation for purposes of this subsection (11) shall not exceed the annual limit under Section 401(a)(17) of the Code. 
(12)  Additional Limitation on Pension Benefits. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary: 
a.  The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to a retiree who becomes a member of the system and who has not previously participated in such system, on or after January 1, 1980, shall not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of his average final compensation. However, nothing contained in this section shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension increases attributable to cost-of-living increases or adjustments. 
b.  No member of the system shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to social security benefits or federal benefits under Chapter 1223, Title 10, U.S. Code. 
(13)  Effect of Direct Rollover on 415(b) Limit. If the plan accepts a direct rollover of an employee's or former employee's benefit from a defined contribution plan qualified under Code Section 401(a) which is maintained by the employer, any annuity resulting from the rollover amount that is determined using a more favorable actuarial basis than required under Code Section 417(e) shall be included in the annual benefit for purposes of the limit under Code Section 415(b). 
(p)  Minimum Distribution of Benefits. 
(1)  General Rules. 
a.  Effective Date. Effective as of January 1, 1989, the plan will pay all benefits in accordance with a good faith interpretation of the requirements of Code Section 401(a)(9) and the regulations in effect under that section, as applicable to a governmental plan within the meaning of Code Section 414(d). Effective on and after January 1, 2003, the plan is also subject to the specific provisions contained in this section. The provisions of this section will apply for purposes of determining required minimum distributions for calendar years beginning with the 2003 calendar year. 
b.  Precedence. The requirements of this section will take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the plan. 
c.  TEFRA Section 242(b)(2) Elections. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section other than this subsection (1)c., distributions may be made under a designation made before January 1, 1984, in accordance with Section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the plan that related to Section 242(b)(2) of TEFRA. 
(2)  Time and Manner of Distribution. 
a.  Required Beginning Date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date which shall not be later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the City. 
b.  Death of Member Before Distributions Begin. If the member dies before distributions begin, the member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed no later than as follows: 
1.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by a date on or before December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age seventy and one-half (70½), if later, as the surviving spouse elects. 
2.  If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then, distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
3.  If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
4.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this subsection (2)b., other than subsection (2)b.1., will apply as if the surviving spouse were the member. 
For purposes of this subsection (2)b., distributions are considered to begin on the member's required beginning date or, if subsection (2)b.4. applies, the date of distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (2)b.1. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member before the member's required beginning date (or to the member's surviving spouse before the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (2)b.1., the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. 
c.  Death After Distributions Begin. If the member dies after the required distribution of benefits has begun, the remaining portion of the member's interest must be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution before the member's death. 
d.  Form of Distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with this section. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code and Treasury regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual account described in Section 414(k) of the Code will be distributed in a manner satisfying the requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code and Treasury regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
(3)  Determination of Amount to be Distributed Each Year. 
a.  General Requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
1.  The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one (1) year. 
2.  The member's entire interest must be distributed pursuant to subsection (f), subsection (g), subsection (i), or subsection (j) (as applicable) and in any event over a period equal to or less than the member's life or the lives of the member and a designated beneficiary, or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the member or of the member and a designated beneficiary. The life expectancy of the member, the member's spouse, or the member's beneficiary may not be recalculated after the initial determination for purposes of determining benefits. 
b.  Amount Required to be Distributed by Required Beginning Date. The amount that must be distributed on or before the member's required beginning date (or, if the member dies before distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under subsection (g)) is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g., monthly. All of the member's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's required beginning date. 
c.  Additional Accruals After First Distribution Calendar Year. Any additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues. 
(4)  General Distribution Rules. 
a.  The amount of an annuity paid to a member's beneficiary may not exceed the maximum determined under the incidental death benefit requirement of Code Section 401(a)(9)(G), and effective for any annuity commencing on or after January 1, 2008, the minimum distribution incidental benefit rule under Treasury Regulation Section 1.401(a)(9)-6, Q&A-2. 
b.  The death and disability benefits provided by the plan are limited by the incidental benefit rule set forth in Code Section 401(a)(9)(G) and Treasury Regulation Section 1.401-1(b)(1)(I) or any successor regulation thereto. As a result, the total death or disability benefits payable may not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the cost for all of the members' benefits received from the retirement system. 
(5)  Definitions. 
a.  Designated beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the plan and is the designated beneficiary under Section 40l(a)(9) of the Code and Section 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of the Treasury regulations. 
b.  Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin pursuant to subsection (g). 
(q)  Miscellaneous Provisions. 
(1)  Interest of Members in System. All assets of the fund are held in trust, and at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system with respect to retirees and members and their spouses or beneficiaries, shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(2)  No Reduction of Accrued Benefits. No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the City Council of the City of Fort Walton Beach which shall have the effect of reducing the then vested accrued benefits of members or a member's beneficiaries. 
(3)  Qualification of System. It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified public pension plan under the applicable provisions of the Code for a qualified plan under Code Section 401(a) and a governmental plan under Code Section 414(d), as now in effect or hereafter amended. Any modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of the Code as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other applicable provisions of the U.S. federal tax laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(4)  Use of Forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to reduce future City contributions. 
(5)  Prohibited Transactions. Effective as of January 1, 1989, a board may not engage in a transaction prohibited by Code Section 503(b). 
(6)  USERRA. Effective December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any other provision of this system, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service are governed by Code Section 414(u) and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, as amended. To the extent that the definition of "Credited Service" sets forth contribution requirements that are more favorable to the member than the minimum compliance requirements, the more favorable provisions shall apply. 
(7)  Vesting. 
a.  Member will be one hundred percent (100%) vested in all benefits upon attainment of the plan's age and service requirements for the plan's normal retirement benefit; and 
b.  A member will be one hundred percent (100%) vested in all accrued benefits, to the extent funded, if the plan is terminated or experiences a complete discontinuance of employer contributions. 
(8)  Electronic Forms. In those circumstances where a written election or consent is not required by the plan or the Code, an oral, electronic, or telephonic form in lieu of or in addition to a written form may be prescribed by the board. However, where applicable, the board shall comply with Treasury Regulations § 1.401(a)-21. 
(r)  Repeal or Termination of System. 
(1)  This ordinance establishing the system and fund, and subsequent ordinances pertaining to said system and fund, may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part; provided that if this or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefitting hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby. 
(2)  If this ordinance shall be repealed, or if contributions to the system are discontinued or if there is a transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. chapter 121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one (1) of the options provided for in this ordinance who are designated by any of said members. In the event of repeal, discontinuance of contributions, or transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there shall be full vesting one hundred percent (100%) of benefits accrued to date of repeal and such benefits shall be nonforfeitable. 
(3)  The fund shall be distributed in accordance with the following procedures: 
a.  The board shall determine the date of distribution and the asset value required to fund all the nonforfeitable benefits after taking into account the expenses of such distribution. The board shall inform the City if additional assets are required, in which event the City shall continue to financially support the plan until all nonforfeitable benefits have been funded. 
b.  The board shall determine the method of distribution of the asset value, whether distribution shall be by payment in cash, by the maintenance of another or substituted trust fund, by the purchase of insured annuities, or otherwise, for each Police Officer entitled to benefits under the plan as specified in subsection c. 
c.  The board shall distribute the asset value as of the date of termination in the manner set forth in this subsection, on the basis that the amount required to provide any given retirement income is the actuarially computed single-sum value of such retirement income, except that if the method of distribution determined under subsection b. involves the purchase of an insured annuity, the amount required to provide the given retirement income is the single premium payable for such annuity. The actuarial single-sum value may not be less than the Police Officer's accumulated contributions to the plan, with interest if provided by the plan, less the value of any plan benefits previously paid to the Police Officer. 
d.  If there is asset value remaining after the full distribution specified in subsection c., and after the payment of any expenses incurred with such distribution, such excess shall be returned to the City, less return to the State of the State's contributions, provided that, if the excess is less than the total contributions made by the City and the State to date of termination of the plan, such excess shall be divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the City and the State. 
e.  The board shall distribute, in accordance with subsection b., the amounts determined under subsection c. 
If, after twenty-four (24) months after the date the plan terminated or the date the board received written notice that the contributions thereunder were being permanently discontinued, the City or the board of the fund affected has not complied with all the provisions in this section, the Florida Department of Management Services will effect the termination of the fund in accordance with this section. 
(r)  Domestic Relations Orders; Retiree Directed Payments; Exemption From Execution And Non-Assignability. 
(1)  Domestic Relations Orders. 
a.  Prior to the entry of any domestic relations order which affects or purports to affect the system's responsibility in connection with the payment of benefits of a retiree, the member or retiree shall submit the proposed order to the board for review to determine whether the system may legally honor the order. 
b.  If a domestic relations order is not submitted to the board for review prior to entry of the order, and the system is ordered to take action that it may not legally take, and the system expends administrative or legal fees in resolving the matter, the member or retiree who submits such an order will be required to reimburse the system for its expenses in connection with the order. 
(2)  Retiree Directed Payments. The board may, upon written request by a retiree or by a dependent, when authorized by a retiree or the retiree's beneficiary, authorize the system to withhold from the monthly retirement payment those funds that are necessary to pay for the benefits being received through the City, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the City, to make payment to insurance companies for insurance premiums as permitted by F.S. Chapter 185, and to make any payments for child support or alimony. 
(3)  Exemption from Execution, Non-Assignability. Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, annuities, or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this ordinance/resolution and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this ordinance/resolution are hereby exempted from any state, county or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable. 
(s)  Pension Validity. The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore have been granted under any prior or existing law, or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or correct the pension amount of any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law or any person hereafter granted a pension under this ordinance if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any person who has heretofore under any prior or existing law been or who shall hereafter under this ordinance be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments or underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
(t)  Forfeiture of Pension. 
(1)  Any member who is convicted of the following offenses committed prior to retirement, or whose employment is terminated by reason of his admitted commission, aid or abetment of the following specified offenses, shall forfeit all rights and benefits under this system, except for the return of his accumulated contributions, but without interest, as of the date of termination. Specified offenses are as follows: 
a.  The committing, aiding or abetting of an embezzlement of public funds; 
b.  The committing, aiding or abetting of any theft by a public officer or employee from employer; 
c.  Bribery in connection with the employment of a public officer or employee; 
d.  Any felony specified in F.S. chapter 838; 
e.  The committing of an impeachable offense; 
f.  The committing of any felony by a public officer or employee who willfully and with intent to defraud the public or the public agency, for which he acts or in which he is employed, of the right to receive the faithful performance of his duty as a public officer or employee, realizes or obtains or attempts to obtain a profit, gain, or advantage for himself or for some other person through the use or attempted use of the power, rights, privileges, duties or position of his public office or employment position; or 
g.  The committing on or after October 1, 2008, of any felony defined in F.S. § 800.04, against a victim younger than sixteen (16) years of age, or any felony defined in Chapter 794, Florida Statutes, against a victim younger than eighteen (18) years of age, by a public officer or employee through the use or attempted use of power, rights, privileges, duties, or position of his or her public office or employment position. 
(2)  Conviction shall be defined as an adjudication of guilt by a court of competent jurisdiction; a plea of guilty or a nolo contendere; a jury verdict of guilty when adjudication of guilt is withheld and the accused is placed on probation; or a conviction by the Senate of an impeachable offense. 
(3)  Court shall be defined as any state or federal court of competent jurisdiction which is exercising its jurisdiction to consider a proceeding involving the alleged commission of a specified offense. Prior to forfeiture, the board shall hold a hearing on which notice shall be given to the member whose benefits are being considered for forfeiture. Said member shall be afforded the right to have an attorney present. No formal rules of evidence shall apply, but the member shall be afforded a full opportunity to present his case against forfeiture. 
(4)  Any member who has received benefits from the system in excess of his accumulated contributions after member's rights were forfeited shall be required to pay back to the fund the amount of the benefits received in excess of his accumulated contributions, but without interest. The board may implement all legal action necessary to recover such funds. 
(u)  Conviction and Forfeiture; False, Misleading or Fraudulent Statements. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly make, or cause to be made, or to assist, conspire with, or urge another to make, or cause to be made, any false, fraudulent, or misleading oral or written statement or withhold or conceal material information to obtain any benefit from the system. 
(2)  A person who violates subsection (1) commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
(3)  In addition to any applicable criminal penalty, upon conviction for a violation described in subsection (1), a member or beneficiary of the system may, in the discretion of the board, be required to forfeit the right to receive any or all benefits to which the person would otherwise be entitled under the system. For purposes of this subsection, "conviction" means a determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld. 
(v)  Indemnification. 
(1)  To the extent not covered by insurance contracts in force from time to time, the City shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless members of the board from all personal liability for damages and costs, including court costs and attorneys' fees, arising out of claims, suits, litigation, or threat of same, herein referred to as "claims", against these individuals because of acts or circumstances connected with or arising out of their official duty as members of the board. The City reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to settle or not settle the claim at any time, and to appeal or to not appeal from any adverse judgment or ruling, and in either event will indemnify, defend and hold harmless any members of the board from the judgment, execution, or levy thereon. 
(2)  This section shall not be construed so as to relieve any insurance company or other entity liable to defend the claim or liable for payment of the judgment or claim, from any liability, nor does this section waive any provision of law affording the City immunity from any suit in whole or part, or waive any other substantive or procedural rights the City may have. 
(3)  This section shall not apply nor shall the City be responsible in any manner to defend or pay for claims arising out of acts or omissions of members of the board which constitute felonies or gross malfeasance or gross misfeasance in office. 
(w)  Direct Transfers of Eligible Rollover Distributions; Elimination of Mandatory Distributions. 
(1)  Rollover Distributions. 
a.  General. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the system to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
b.  Definitions. 
1.  Eligible rollover distribution: An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one (1) of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten (10) years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the Code and the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income. Effective January 1, 2002, any portion of any distribution which would be includible in gross income as after-tax employee contributions will be an eligible rollover distribution if the distribution is made to an individual retirement account described in section 408(a); to an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b); to a qualified defined contribution plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible; or on or after January 1, 2007, to a qualified defined benefit plan described in Code Section 401(a) or to an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of the distribution that is includible in gross income and the portion of the distribution that is not so includible. 
2.  Eligible retirement plan: An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Code; an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Code; an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Code; effective January 1, 2002, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by an eligible employer described in section 457(e)(1)(A) of the Code and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan; effective January 1, 2002, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Code; a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the Code; or effective January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA described in Section 408A of the Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. This definition shall apply in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse. 
3.  Distributee: A distributee includes an employee or former employee. It also includes the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse. Effective January 1, 2007, it further includes a nonspouse beneficiary who is a designated beneficiary as defined by Code Section 401(a)(9)(E). However, a nonspouse beneficiary may rollover the distribution only to an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity established for the purpose of receiving the distribution and the account or annuity will be treated as an "inherited" individual retirement account or annuity. 
4.  Direct rollover: A direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(2)  Rollovers or Transfers into the Fund. On or after January 1, 2002, the System will accept, solely for the purpose of purchasing credited service as provided herein, permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans, member rollover cash contributions and/or direct cash rollovers of distributions made on or after January 1, 2002, as follows: 
a.  Transfers and Direct Rollovers or Member Rollover Contributions from Other Plans. The system will accept either a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a member contribution of an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code, from an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Code or from an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state. The system will also accept legally permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans. 
b.  Member Rollover Contributions from IRAs. The system will accept a member rollover contribution of the portion of a distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity described in section 408(a) or 408(b) of the Code that is eligible to be rolled over. 
(3)  Elimination of Mandatory Distributions. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, in the event this plan provides for a mandatory (involuntary) cash distribution from the plan not otherwise required by law, for an amount in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), such distribution shall be made from the plan only upon written request of the member and completion by the member of a written election on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount. 
(y)  Family and Medical Leave Act. The fractional parts of the twelve (12) month period ending each March 1 that a member is on leave without pay from the City pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) shall be added to his credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  The request for credited service for FMLA leave time for the twelve (12) month period prior to each March 1 and payment of professional fees shall be made on or before March 31. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made on or before April 30 for the preceding twelve (12) month period ending March 1 and shall be made in one (1) lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be issued. 
(4)  Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall not count toward vesting. 
(z)  Military Service Prior To Employment. This section applies to those members employed by the City Police Department on or before December 11, 1979. The years or fractional parts of years that a Police Officer serves or has served on active duty in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior to first and initial employment with the City Police Department shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any time prior to retirement. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six (6) months of his request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one (1) lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  The maximum credit under this section when combined with credited service purchased for prior police service with an employer other than the City of Fort Walton Beach shall be five (5) years. 
(5)  Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count for all purposes, except vesting and eligibility for not-in-line of duty disability benefits. 
(aa)  Prior Police Service. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, and except as provided for in subsection (1), the years or fractional parts of years that a member previously served as a full-time Police Officer with the City during a period of previous employment and for which period accumulated contributions were withdrawn from the fund, in the state of Florida shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any time prior to retirement. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six (6) months of his request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one (1) lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  The maximum credit under this section for service other than with the City of Fort Walton Beach shall be five (5) years of credited service and shall count for all purposes, except vesting and eligibility for not-in-line of duty disability benefits. There shall be no maximum purchase of credit for prior service with the City of Fort Walton Beach and such credit shall count for all purposes, including vesting. 
(5)  In no event, however, may credited service be purchased pursuant to this Section for prior service with any other municipal, county or state law enforcement department Police department, if such prior service forms or will form the basis of a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan as set forth in subsection (o)(12)b. 
(6)  For purposes of determining credit for prior service as a Police Officer as provided for in this section, in addition to service as a Police Officer in this State, credit may be given for federal, other state, county, or municipality service if the prior service is recognized by the Criminal Justice Standards and Training Commission within the Department of Law Enforcement, as provided under F.S. Chapter 943, or the Police Officer provides proof to the board that such service is equivalent to the service required to meet the definition of a Police Officer under section (a), above. 
(bb)  Reemployment After Retirement. 
(1)  Any retiree who is retired under this system, except for disability retirement as previously provided for, may be reemployed by any public or private employer, except the City, and may receive compensation from that employment without limiting or restricting in any way the retirement benefits payable under this system. Reemployment by the City shall be subject to the limitations set forth in this section. 
(2)  After Normal Retirement. Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system and who is reemployed as a police officer after that retirement and, by virtue of that reemployment, is eligible to participate in this system, shall upon being reemployed discontinue receipt of benefits. Upon reemployment, the retiree shall be deemed to be fully vested and the additional credited service accrued during the subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit amount attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be added to the benefit determined upon the initial retirement to determine the total benefit payable upon final retirement. Calculations of benefits upon retirement shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation, and credited service as of that date and the retirement benefit amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation (based only on the subsequent employment period), and credited service as of the date of subsequent retirement. The amount of any death or disability benefit received as a result of a subsequent period of employment shall be reduced by the amount of accrued benefit eligible to be paid for a prior period of employment. The optional form of benefit and any joint pensioner selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to change upon subsequent retirement except as otherwise provided herein, but the member may select a different optional form and joint pensioner applicable to the subsequent retirement benefit. 
(3)  Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system and who is reemployed by the City after that retirement and, by virtue of that reemployment is ineligible to participate in this system, shall, during the period of such reemployment, discontinue receipt of benefits during any subsequent employment period. 
(4)  After Early Retirement. Any retiree who is retired under early retirement pursuant to this system and who subsequently becomes an employee of the City in any capacity shall discontinue receipt of benefits from the system. If by virtue of that reemployment, the retiree is eligible to participate in this system, the retiree shall be deemed to be fully vested and the additional credited service accrued during the subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit amount attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be added to the benefit determined upon the initial retirement to determine the total benefit payable upon final retirement. Calculations of benefits upon retirement shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation, credited service and early retirement reduction factor as of that date and the retirement benefit amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation (based only on the subsequent employment period), and credited service as of the date of subsequent retirement. The amount of any death or disability benefit received as a result of a subsequent period of employment shall be reduced by the amount of accrued benefit eligible to be paid for a prior period of employment. The optional form of benefit and any joint pensioner selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to change upon subsequent retirement except as otherwise provided herein, but the member may select a different optional form and joint pensioner applicable to the subsequent retirement benefit. Retirement pursuant to an early retirement incentive program shall be deemed early retirement for purposes of this section if the member was permitted to retire prior to the customary retirement date provided for in the system at the time of retirement. 
(5)  Reemployment of Terminated Vested Persons. Reemployed terminated vested persons shall not be subject to the provisions of this section until such time as they begin to actually receive benefits. Upon receipt of benefits, terminated vested persons shall be treated as normal or early retirees for purposes of applying the provisions of this section and their status as an early or normal retiree shall be determined by the date they elect to begin to receive their benefit. 
(cc)  Supplemental Benefit Component For Special Benefits; Chapter 185 Share Accounts. There is hereby established an additional plan component to provide special benefits in the form of a supplemental retirement, termination, death and disability benefits to be in addition to the benefits provided for in the previous sections of this plan, such benefit to be funded solely and entirely by Chapter 185, Florida Statutes, premium tax monies for each plan year which are allocated to this supplemental component as provided for in F.S. § 185.35. Amounts allocated to this supplemental component ("Share Plan") shall be further allocated to the members and DROP participants in a manner to be agreed upon. 
(Ord. No. 1895 , §§ 1—29, 5-13-2014; Ord. No. 1996 , §§ 1—6, 9-25-2018)  
2.10 - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 
 
2.10.01 - Charter Officers, Duties. 
There are three (3) Officers set out in the City Charter: City Manager, City Clerk, and City Attorney. 
These Officers shall have the duties and responsibilities as required of them by the City Charter, this Code, and any ordinance, resolution, or contract adopted and approved by the City Council.  
2.10.02 - Departments Established. 
There are the following Departments within the organizational structure of the City government: 
(1)  Administrative Services, 
(2)  Financial Services, 
(3)  Fire Services, 
(4)  Police Services, 
(5)  Engineering Services, 
(6)  Utility Services 
(7)  Recreational and Cultural Services. 
a.  The Administrative Services Department shall be responsible for human resources, risk management, information technology and public information. 
b.  The Financial Services Department shall be responsible for all finance and purchasing functions. 
c.  The Fire Services Department shall be responsible for all fire safety and education related functions. 
d.  The Police Services Department shall be responsible for all police functions. 
e.  The Engineering Services Department shall be responsible for engineering, planning, building permitting and inspections, code enforcement, neighborhood improvement, the Community Redevelopment Agency, street maintenance, and fleet maintenance. 
f.  The Utility Services Department shall be responsible for all functions related to utilities services including water distribution, wastewater collection, water operations, sewer operations, facilities maintenance, and sanitation. 
g.  The Recreation and Cultural Services Department shall be responsible for all functions related to parks and recreation and grounds maintenance including right-of-way maintenance, medians and the cemetery, and all functions of the City's golf course operations and maintenance. 
h.  The City Manager shall have authority to reassign functions from one department to another when it is in the best interests of the City operation to do so.  
2.10.03 - City Manager's Authority. 
The City Manager shall have authority to direct and manage the departments, divisions or functional activities within each department, as is necessary to administer the affairs of the City, pursuant to the Charter and any ordinance, resolution, or contract adopted and approved by the City Council.  
2.11 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
 
2.11.01 - States of Emergency. 
As used in this section, "disaster" and "public danger" mean a hurricane, flood, wind damage, tornado, fire or other major catastrophe affecting the City. 
In the event of a disaster within the City or public danger to the residents of the City, the Mayor or the Mayor Pro tem, or any member of the Council in the absence of the Mayor and the Mayor Pro tem, is hereby authorized to declare a state of emergency, and the City Manager may place all City employees under the jurisdiction of the Director of Emergency Management for the purpose of controlling any state of emergency and for the protection of the property and residents of the City.  
2.11.02 - Price Gouging. 
During any state of emergency declared pursuant to this section, no person shall increase the price of goods or services or engage in the practice commonly known as "price gouging." 
In determining what price gouging consists of, any amount which exceeds five percent (5%) of the price charged for goods or services immediately preceding the emergency shall constitute price gouging. 
Anyone found engaging in the practice of price gouging shall be immediately arrested and charged with a violation of this subsection.  
2.11.03 - Recovery Actions Take Permitting Priority. 
Immediate recovery actions needed to protect the public health and safety shall take priority in permitting decisions following hurricane storm events. 
If rebuilt, structures which suffer damage in excess of 50 percent (50%) of their appraised value shall be rebuilt in accordance with all current and applicable land use and building code requirements.  
2.11.04 - Emergency Management Agency Establishment, Membership. 
The Emergency Management Agency is hereby established. 
The members of the Agency shall be: the City Manager, who shall be the Chairperson of the Agency and the Director of Emergency Management, the Fire Chief, who shall be the Deputy Director of Emergency Management, the Police Chief, the Public Works Director, and the Mayor. 
Authority for any action required by emergency operations is hereby vested in the City Manager. In the absence of the City Manager, this authority shall be vested in the Mayor. 
The Human Resources Director shall be an ex-officio member of the Agency. The term of office for the Mayor shall be for the elected term of his or her office. The term of the other members shall be the period of appointment of their primary positions.  
2.11.05 - Rules and Regulations Generally. 
The Emergency Management Agency is hereby authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations, subject to Council approval, as are necessary to carry out a General Emergency Management Program for the residents of the City.  
2.11.06 - Director and Deputy Director. 
The Director and the Deputy Director of Emergency Management shall be the Operational Chief and the Deputy Operational Chief in charge of Emergency Management Operations for the duration of any declared emergency.  
2.11.07 - Duties of Director of Emergency Management. 
The Director of Emergency Management shall be charged with the preparation of the Emergency Operations Plan for the City, together with such other duties as the Emergency Management Agency may prescribe. 
Specific duties of the Emergency Management Director shall include: 
(1)  Maintain an inventory of areas within the City which have experienced repeated damage from coastal storms, 
(2)  Make recommendations to the City Council, as needed, regarding Comprehensive Plan and ordinance amendments to ensure consistency with the hazard mitigation annex of the local peacetime emergency plans and applicable existing interagency mitigation reports.  
2.11.08 - Authority to Act for City; Coordination. 
The Emergency Management Agency shall act for the City and is hereby authorized to coordinate its efforts with County, State and Federal Authorities for emergency management operations of the City and its residents, and in all matters relating to the national defense of the United States. 
CHAPTER 2 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
2005 Code Section 	1992 Code Section 	State Law References/Other Historical Notes 
2.00.01 	2-1 	Code 1985, § 204.01; Res. 86-32 (8-12-86), Res. 2013-28 (10-08-13) 
2.00.02 	2-2 	Code 1985, § 204.02; Res. 86-36 (8-12-86) 
2.00.03 	2-3 	Code 1985, § 234.01; Ord. 833 (5-28-85) 
2.00.04 	2-4 	Code 1985, § 234.02; Res. 85-48 (10-8-85) 
2.00.05 	2-311 	Ord. 1252, § 3 (8-9-94) 
2.00.051 	2-312 	Ord. 1252, § 4 (8-9-94); Ord. 1273 § 1 (11-22-94) 
2.00.052 	2.313 	Ord. 1252, § 5 (8-9-94) 
2.00.053 	2.314 	Ord. 1252, § 6 (8-9-94) 
2.00.054 	2.315 	Ord. 1252, § 7 (8-9-94) 
2.00.06 	2-5 	§ 171.044, F.S.; Code 1985, §§ 206.01, 1406.03; Ord. 1060 (9-26-89); Ord. No 1464, §§ II, III (3-12-02) 
2.00.061 		Ord. No 1464, §§ II, III (3-12-02) 
2.00.062 		Ord. No 1464, §§ II, III (3-12-02) 
2.00.063 		Ord. No 1464, §§ II, III (3-12-02) 
2.00.064 		Ord. No 1464, §§ II, III (3-12-02) 
2.00.065 		Ord. No 1464, §§ II, III (3-12-02) 
2.00.066 		Ord. No 1464, §§ II, III (3-12-02) 
2.01 		§ 4 and § 60, City Charter 
2.01.01 	2-33 	Code 1985, § 220.03; Res. 83-29 (7-12-83) ; Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.01.02 	2-6 	Ord. 1569, (9-23-03); Ord. 1579 (2-24-04) 
2.01.021 		Ord. 1569, (9-23-03); 
2.01.022 		Ord. 1569, (9-23-03); 
2.01.023 		Ord. 1569, (9-23-03); 
2.01.024 	2-6 	Repealed Ord 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.01.03 	2-31 	§ 286.011, F.S.; Code 1985, § 220.01; Ord. 1782, § 2 (10-28-08) 
2.01.04 	2-32 	Code 1985, § 220.02; Ord. 1198, § 1 (7-28-92) 
2.01.05 	13-1 	Chs. 97-107, § 166.032, F.S.; § 60, City Charter; Code 1985, § 208.01; Ord. 755 (2-8-83) 
2.01.051 	13-4 	Code 1985, § 208.05; Ord. 755 (2-8-83) 
2.01.052 	13.2 	Code 1985, § 208.05; Ord. 755 (2-8-83) 
2.01.053 	13.3(a) 	Code 1985, § 208.04; Ord. 815 (2-26-85); Ord. 1194, §§ 1, 2 (8-11-92) 
2.01.054 	13.3(b) & (d) 	Code 1985, § 208.04; Ord. 815 (2-26-85); Ord. 1194, §§ 1, 2 (8-11-92) 
2.01.055 	13.3(c) 	Code 1985, § 208.04; Ord. 815 (2-26-85); Ord. 1194, §§ 1, 2 (8-11-92) 
2.02.01 	2-56 	Code 1985, § 260.01 
2.02.02 	2-57 	Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.02.03 	2-57(b), (c) 	Code 1985, § 260.02; Ord. 864 (1-28-86); Ord. 932 (2-24-87); Ord. 1045 (9-12-89); Ord. 1281 (5-9-95); Ord. 1419 (10-10-00); Ord. 1691, § II, (3-14-06) ; Repealed & Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.02.04 	2-57(d) 	Code 1985, § 260.02; Ord. 864 (1-28-86); Ord. 932 (2-24-87); Ord. 1045 (9-12-89); Ord. 1281 (5-9-95); Ord. 1419 (10-10-00); Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.02.05 	2-58(a) 	Code 1985, § 260.03; Ord. 1419 (10-10-00); Ord. 1668 (11-8-05); Ord. 1713, § II, (11-14-06) ; Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.02.06 	2-59 	Code 1985, § 260.04; Ord. 775 (7-10-84) Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.02.07 	2-60 	Code 1985, § 260.04; Ord. 775 (7-10-84) Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.03 		Res. 94-21 (9-13-94); abolished: Ord. 1819 (2-9-10) Repealed 
2.03.01 		Ord. No. 1706, § 2, (5-23-06); Ord. 1819 (2-9-10) Repealed 
2.03.02 		Ord. 1819 (2-9-10) Repealed 
2.04 		Code 1985, §§ 274.01-274.03; Ord. 1256 (9-13-94) Repealed & Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.04.01 	20-341 	Code 1985, § 1264.01; Ord. 826 (5-28-85); Ord. 977 (1-26-88); Ord. 1229, § 2 (8-24-93); Repealed & Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.04.02 	20-342(a) 	Code 1985, § 1264.02; Ord. 826 (5-28-85); Ord. 991 (5-10-88); Ord. 1013 (9-27-88); Ord. 1039 (7-25-89); Ord. 1778, § III (9-28-08); Repealed & Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.04.03 	20-342(b) 	Code 1985, § 1264.02; Ord. 826 (5-28-85); Ord. 991 (5-10-88); Ord. 1013 (9-27-88); Ord. 1039 (7-25-89); Repealed: Ord. 1778, § III (9-28-08) 
2.04.04 	20-342(c) 	Code 1985, § 1264.02; Ord. 826 (5-28-85); Ord. 991 (5-10-88); Ord. 1013 (9-27-88); Ord. 1039 (7-25-89); Repealed: Ord. 1778, § III (9-28-08) 
2.04.05 	20-342(d) 	Code 1985, § 1264.02; Ord. 826 (5-28-85); Ord. 991 (5-10-88); Ord. 1013 (9-27-88); Ord. 1039 (7-25-89); Repealed: Ord. 1778, § III (9-28-08) 
2.04.06 	20-342(e) 	Code 1985, § 1264.02; Ord. 826 (5-28-85); Ord. 991 (5-10-88); Ord. 1013 (9-27-88); Ord. 1039 (7-25-89); Repealed: Ord. 1778, § III (9-28-08) 
2.04.061 		Code 1985, § 1264.02; 
2.04.062 		Code 1985, § 1264.02; 
2.04.063 		Code 1985, § 1264.02; 
2.04.064 		Code 1985, § 1264.02; 
2.04.065 		Code 1985, § 1264.02; 
2.04.066 		Code 1985, § 1264.02; 
2.04.067 		Code 1985, § 1264.02; 
2.04.07 	20-343 	Code 1985, § 1264.05; Ord. 826 (5-28-85); Ord. 1013 (9-27-88); Repealed: Ord. 1778, § III (9-28-08) 
2.04.08 	20.345 	Code 1985, § 1264.07; Ord. 826 (5-28-85); Ord. 1013 (9-27-88); Ord. 1347, § 3 (3-24-98); Repealed: Ord. 1778, § III (9-28-08) 
2.04.09 	20-344 	Code 1985, § 1264.07; Ord. 826 (5-28-85); Ord. 1013 (9-27-88); Ord. 1347, § 3 (3-24-98); Repealed: Ord. 1778, § III (9-28-08) 
2.04.10 		Code 1985, § 1264.07; 
2.04.11 		Code 1985, § 1264.07; 
	20-346 	Repealed: Ord. 1673 (11-8-05) 
2.05 		§ 162.01 et seq., F.S., Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act; Repealed & Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.05.01 	20-87, 20-88(d) 	Code 1985, § 271.02; Ord. 1065 (3-13-90); Ord. 1584 (4-27-04); Repealed & Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.05.02 	20-88 	§ 162.05, F.S. (2004); Code 1985 § 271.03; Ord. 1065 (3-13-90); Ord. 1584, § II (4-27-04); Repealed & Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.05.03 	20-86, 20-90 	Code 1985, §§ 271.01, 271.05; Ord. 1065 (3-13-90); Ord. 1725, (4-24-07); Ord. 1778, § III (9-28-08); Repealed & Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.05.031 		Code 1985, §§ 271.01, 271.05; 
2.05.032 		Code 1985, §§ 271.01, 271.05; 
2.05.033 		Code 1985, §§ 271.01, 271.05; 
2.05.034 		Code 1985, §§ 271.01, 271.05; 
2.05.035 		Code 1985, §§ 271.01, 271.05; 
2.05.036 		Code 1985, §§ 271.01, 271.05; 
2.05.04 	2-58(b) 	Code 1985, § 260.03; Ord. 1419 (10-10-00); Repealed & Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.05.05 	20-89 	Code 1985, § 271.04; Ord. 1065 (3-19-90); Repealed & Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
	6-26 - 6-28 	Code 1985, § 275.01; Res. 87-23 (8-11-87); Res. 88-5 (1-26-88); Res. 90-11 (2-27-90); Repealed: Ord. 1676 (11-22-05) 
2.06 		§ 163.356 et seq., F.S. (2004), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.01 	11-26(a) 	Code 1985, § 272.10; Ord. 1240, § 3 (12-14-93); Ord. 1262, § 3 (9-27-94) Ord. 1845 (3-8-11), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.02 	11-26(b) 	Code 1985, § 272.10; Ord. 1240, § 3 (12-14-93); Ord. 1262, § 3 (9-27-94), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.03 	11-29(10) 	Code 1985, § 272.04; Ord. 806 (1-8-85); Ord. 962 (9-8-87); Res. 93-26 (12-14-93); Ord. 1230 (12-14-93), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.04 	11-29(3), (9) 	Code 1985, § 272.04; Ord. 806 (1-8-85); Ord. 962 (9-8-87); Res. 93-26 (12-14-93); Ord. 1230 (12-14-93), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.05 	11-32 	Code 1985, § 272.06; Ord. 806 (1-8-85), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.06 	11-26© 	Code 1985, § 272.10; Ord. 1240 (12-14-93); Ord. 1262 (9-27-94), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.07 	11-27(a) 	Code 1985, § 272.02; Ord. 726 (6-9-81); Ord. 1466 (1-8-02), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.071 	11-27(b) 	Code 1985, § 272.02; Ord. 726 (6-9-81); Ord. 1466 (1-8-02), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.072 	11-27(c) 	Code 1985, § 272.02; Ord. 726 (6-9-81); Ord. 1466 (1-8-02), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.073 	11-27 (d) 	Code 1985, § 272.02; Ord. 726 (6-9-81); Ord. 1466 (1-8-02), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.074 	11-27 (f) 	Code 1985, § 272.02; Ord. 726 (6-9-81); Ord. 1466 (1-8-02), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.075 	11-27(e) 	Code 1985, § 272.02; Ord. 726 (6-9-81); Ord. 1466 (1-8-02), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.076 	11-29(6) 	Code 1985, § 272.04; Ord. 806 (1-8-85); Ord. 962 (9-8-87); Res. 93-26 (12-14-93); Ord. 1230 (12-14-93), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.077 	11-27(g) 	Code 1985, § 272.02; Ord. 726 (6-9-81); Ord. 1466 (1-8-02), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.07 		Ord. 806 (1-8-85), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.08 	11-30 	Code 1985, § 272.05; Ord. 806 (1-8-85), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.09 	11-28(a), (b) 	§ 163.360 et seq., F.S.; Code 1985, § 272.03; Ord. 806 (1-8-85); Ord. 1240 (12-14-93); Ord. 1466 (1-8-02); Ord. 1778, § III (9-28-08), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.091 	11-29(2) 	Code 1985, § 272.04; Ord. 806 (1-8-85); Ord. 962 (9-8-87); Res. 93-26 (12-14-93); Repealed Ord. 1778 (09-23-08) 
2.06.092 	11-29(8) 	Code 1985, § 272.04; Ord. 806 (1-8-85); Ord. 962 (9-8-87); Res. 93-26 (12-14-93); Repealed Ord. 1778 (09-23-08) 
2.06.093 	11-29(7) 	Code 1985, § 272.04; Ord. 806 (1-8-85); Ord. 962 (9-8-87); Res. 93-26 (12-14-93); Repealed Ord. 1778 (09-23-08) 
2.06.094 	11-29(11) 	Code 1985, § 272.04; Ord. 806 (1-8-85); Ord. 962 (9-8-87); Res. 93-26 (12-14-93); Repealed Ord. 1778 (09-23-08) 
2.06.095 	11-29(12) 	Code 1985, § 272.04; Ord. 806 (1-8-85); Ord. 962 (9-8-87); Res. 93-26 (12-14-93); Repealed Ord. 1778 (09-23-08) 
2.06.096 	11-29(13) 	Code 1985, § 272.04; Ord. 806 (1-8-85); Ord. 962 (9-8-87); Res. 93-26 (12-14-93); Repealed Ord. 1778 (09-23-08) 
2.06.097 	11-29(5) 	Code 1985, § 272.04; Ord. 806 (1-8-85); Ord. 962 (9-8-87); Res. 93-26 (12-14-93); Repealed Ord. 1778 (09-23-08) 
2.06.10 	11-29(1), (4) 	Code 1985, § 272.04; Ord. 806 (1-8-85); Ord. 962 (9-8-87); Res. 93-26 (12-14-93); Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.11 	11-31 	Code 1985, § 272.06; Ord. 806 (1-8-85), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.06.12 	11-33 	Code 1985, § 272.08; Ord. 806 (1-8-85) 
2.07 	20-2612 	Ord. No. 1251 (10-11-94), Res. 2012-26 Repealed Historic Sites Brd. (9 Oct 12) Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12), 
2.07.01 	20-2613 	Ord. No. 1251, § 2, (10-11-94), Res. 2012-26 Repealed Historic Sites Brd. (9 Oct 12) Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12), 
2.07.02 	20-2612, 20-2613, in part, 20-2614(d) 	Ord. No. 1251 (10-11-94), Res. 2012-26 Repealed Historic Sites Brd. (9 Oct 12) Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12), 
2.07.03 	20-2614, 20-2615, 20-2616 	Ord. No. 1251 (10-11-94), Res. 2012-26 Repealed Historic Sites Brd. (9 Oct 12) Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12), 
2.07.031 	20-2614(b) 	Ord. No. 1251 (10-11-94), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12), Res. 2012-26 Repealed 
2.07.032 	20-2614(c) 	Ord. No. 1251 (10-11-94), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12), Res. 2012-26 Repealed 
2.07.033 	20-2615(a) 	Ord. No. 1251 (10-11-94), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12), Res. 2012-26 Repealed 
2.07.034 	20-2615(c) 	Ord. No. 1251 (10-11-94), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12), Res. 2012-26 Repealed 
2.07.035 	20-2615(d) 	Ord. No. 1251 (10-11-94), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12), Res. 2012-26 Repealed 
2.07.036 	20-2616 	Ord. No. 1251 (10-11-94), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12), Res. 2012-26 Repealed 
2.07.04 	20-2617, 20-2618 	Ord. No. 1251 (10-11-94), Res. 2012-26 Repealed Historic Sites Brd. (9 Oct 12) 
2.08 		Ch. 175, F.S. (2004); Ord. 1646 (6-30-05),{Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12)} 
2.08.01 		Ord. 1646 (6-30-05), 
2.08.02 		Ord. 1646 (6-30-05), 
2.09 		Code 1985, § 266.01; Code 1985, § 266.01; Ord 1646 (6-30-05){Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12)} 
2.09.01 	20-2226 	Code 1985, § 266.01; Ord 1646 (6-30-05) 
2.09.02 	20-2227 	Code 1985, § 266.01; Ord 1646 (6-30-05) 
2.09.03 	20-2228 	Code 1985, § 266.01; Ord 1646 (6-30-05) 
2.09.04 	20-2229 	Code 1985, § 266.01; Ord 1646 (6-30-05) 
2.10 		421 F.S., Res 68-09 (2-27-68), {Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12)} 
2.10.01 	2-71 	§ 421.04(1), F.S.; Code 1985, § 264.01, Res 68-09 (1)(2-27-68), 
2.10.02 	2-74 	Code 1985, § 264.04, Res 68-09 (4)(2-27-68), 
2.10.03 	2-72 	Code 1985, § 264.02, Res 68-09 (2)(2-27-68), 
2.10.04 	2-73 	§ 421.05, F.S.; Code 1985, § 264.03; Res 68-09 (3)(2-27-68), Res. 89-51, (10-24-89) 
2.11 	20-61 	Ord. 1867 (09-11-12), Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.01 	20-61 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04); Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.02 	20-62 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04); Ord. 1819 (2-9-10); Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.03 	20-63(a) 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04), Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.04 	20-63(b) 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04), Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.05 	20-64(a) 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04), Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.06 	20-64(b1) 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04), Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.07 	20-64(b2), (c) 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04); Ord. 1668 (11-8-05), Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.08 	20-65(a) 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04), Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.09 	20-65(d) 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04), Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.10 	20-65(e) 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04), Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.11 	20-65(b-c) 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04), Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.12 	20-66 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04); Ord. 1715, § II, (1-23-06); Ord. 1822 (3-9-10), Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.11.13 	20-67 	Ord. 1432, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. 1583, § II, (6-8-04), Repealed Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.12 		Ord. 1646 (6-30-05), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.13 		Abolished: Ord. 1819 (2-9-10) 
2.13.01 	30-64(a) 	Ord. 1613 (11-9-04); Abolished Ord. 1819 (2-9-10) 
2.13.02 	30.664(b) 	Ord. 1613 (11-9-04); Abolished Ord. 1819 (2-9-10) 
2.14.01 		Ord. 1678 (11-8-05); Ord. 1790 (1-27-09) 
2.14.02 		Ord. 1678 (11-8-05); Ord. 1776, § III (9-28-08); Ord. 1801 (6-9-09) 
2.14.03 		Ord. 1678 (11-8-05) 
	2-211, 2-212, 2-151, 2-152, 2-166, 2-167, 2-168, 2-246 	Repealed: Ord. 1678 (11-8-05) 
2.15 		§ 870.041 et seq., F.S.; Code 1985, § Res 262.09; Ord. 512, Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.15.01 	14-1 (a - b) 	§ 870.041 et seq., F.S.; Code 1985, § Res 262.09; Ord. 512 (7-23-68); Ord. 512.1 (11-10-69); Ord. 710 (10-9-79); Ord. 891 (7-8-86) 
2.15.02 	14-1 (c - d) 	§ 870.041 et seq., F.S.; Code 1985, § Res 262.09; Ord. 891 (7-8-86) 
2.15.03 	14-2 	Ord. 1126 (10-8-91), 
2.15.04 	14.26 	Code 1985, § Res 262.01; Ord. 928 (2-10-87); Ord. 1677 (11-8-05) 
2.15.05 	14-27 	Code 1985, § Res 262.02, Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.15.06 	14-28 	Code 1985, § Res 262.03; Ord. 928 (2-10-87), Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
2.15.07 	14-30 	Code 1985, § Res 262.04, Re-Numbered Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
	14-29 &14.32 	Code 1985, § Res 262.05; Ord. 1126, § I (10-8-91) Repealed: Ord. 1677 (11-8-05) 
2.15.08 	14-31 	Code 1985, § Res 262.07, 
  
CHAPTER 3 - BUILDINGS, CONSTRUCTION & FIRE CODES  
3.00 - GENERAL 
 
3.00.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to comply with chapters 489, 553 and 633, F.S., and to provide rules and regulations to improve public safety by promoting the control and abatement of fire hazards; providing uniform minimum standards, regulations and requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction, installation and uses of materials in electrical wiring, plumbing, including irrigation systems, natural and liquefied petroleum gas piping, mechanical systems or equipment and providing for assurance of the qualifications and competency of those persons installing and inspecting the same; regulating the use of structures, premises, and open areas; establishing the responsibilities and procedures for construction, unsafe building and minimum housing code enforcement; and setting forth standards for compliance and achievement of these objectives to afford reasonable protection for public safety, health, and general welfare.  
3.00.02 - Application. 
This chapter and all of the technical codes adopted by reference shall apply to all existing structures, to all new structures and to all alterations to any new or existing structure, both private and public, located within the corporate limits of the City of Fort Walton Beach, except those which are specifically exempted by state or federal statutes or state administrative rules.  
3.01 - BUILDING CODE 
 
3.01.01 - Florida Building Code Incorporated by Reference. 
The current Florida Building Code, as adopted by rule of the Florida Building Commission as required by state statute, with its six main volumes of Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Fuel Gas, Existing Building, Residential, and excluding the Test Protocols volume, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated into this chapter and code of ordinances by reference. The Florida Building Code is remedial and shall be construed to secure the public safety, health and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems.  
3.01.02 - Administration. 
(a)  Chapter 1, FBC Applies. Chapter 1 of the Florida Building Code (abbreviated in this chapter as "F.B.C") shall be used for the administration of this chapter and the Florida Building Code, except as modified in this chapter. 
(b)  Delegation of Authority. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the F.B.C. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this chapter and the F.B.C. and to adopt policies and procedures to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter and the F.B.C., and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. 
(c)  Applications and Permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, alteration, demolition, and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the F.B.C. 
(d)  Revocation of Permits. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate, incomplete information, or misrepresentation as to any material fact in the application, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any provisions of this chapter or the F.B.C. 
The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter or the F.B.C. 
(e)  Notices and Orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter and the F.B.C. 
(f)  Inspections. The building official, or a designee which may include any competent and properly licensed or certified individual or agency, shall make all of the required inspections. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such experts to render an opinion as necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise. 
(g)  Liability. Pursuant to Florida law, the building official or a designee, any member of the board of adjustment or employee who is delegated the enforcement of this chapter and the F.B.C., while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this chapter and the F.B.C., or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage or cost in any action accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(h)  Requirements not Provided in the F.B.C. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official.  
3.01.03 - Building Permit Required. 
Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any required impact-resistant coverings, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or alter, improve, change, enlarge or repair any parking area, stormwater management system, or infrastructure, or any other installation of which is regulated by this chapter, the F.B.C., or the land development code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit.  
3.01.04 - Exceptions. 
Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit. Minor repairs may include but are not limited to: 
(a)  painting and the replacement of nonstructural flooring; 
(b)  repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping joints and repairing drop cords; for the installation of wiring, devices or equipment for telephone, telegraph, district messenger or tele-autograph systems or any signaling system (other than a commercial radio system) operating at 50 volts or less, when installed by a public utility subject to regulation as such by the Florida Public Service Commission or an agency of the United States; 
(c)  repairing or replacing any fixture; 
(d)  service conducted to maintain the system, including minor part replacement on any piece of the system; or 
(e)  repairing or replacing any plumbing fixture.  
3.01.05 - Penalty for Commencement Prior to Permitting 
Any person who commences any work on a building, site, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits, or any individual who acquires a permit issued in error for either incorrect or false information provided on the application shall be subject to a fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
Emergency repairs (e.g. over weekends or holidays) may be made without subsequent penalty as long as the required permit is applied for on the first working day following the day the emergency repairs are made. The building official will determine the validity of the emergency in administering this provision. 
The building official may deny any permit application which is requested by a person who has violated the provisions of this section three times or more.  
3.01.06 - Permit Fees. 
Permit application requests shall be accompanied by fees and charges as may be established by the city council by resolution in the comprehensive fee schedule for proper filing and processing.  
3.01.07 - Fees for Checking Plans. 
A fee for checking a plan shall be paid to the engineering services department at the time of submitting a plan and specifications. Such fee shall be equal to one-half of the building permit fee. Such plan-checking fee is in addition to the building permit fee and shall be considered nonrefundable.  
3.01.08 - Fee for Re-issuance. 
The permit holder must pay the entire permit fee to have reissued any building permit that has expired, but shall not pay a plan check fee unless new plans are submitted for review.  
3.01.09 - Fee for Sewer & Water Connections Required. 
In those instances where the issuance of a permit for connecting to city sewer and water is required, the fee (including connection or impact fees) for connecting to the sewer and water system of the city shall be collected at the same time the fee is collected for the building permit.  
3.01.10 - Refund of Fees. 
A refund of permit fees may be made to the permit holder under the following conditions: the permit is still valid and in effect and the project is cancelled and a written notice of project cancellation is filed with the building official and a written request for refund is filed with the building official not more than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of cancellation. When no work under the permit has commenced, a refund may be made of the full permit fee. When any portion of the work has commenced under the permit, no refund shall be made. Refunds shall be made for duplicate permits issued for the same work.  
3.01.11 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1951, § 2, adopted November 15, 2016, repealed § 3.01.11, which pertained to specific elevation required. For a complete derivation, see the Table of Historical Notes and References at the end of this chapter.  
3.01.12 - Transfer of Permit. 
A permit holder may transfer a permit, whether or not work under the permit has commenced, upon filing of the following information with the building official: a written, notarized request from the new permit holder for the transfer of the permit; a written, notarized statement from the original permit holder agreeing to the transfer of the permit; along with the appropriate fees for transferring the permit. Upon issuance of a transferred permit, the new permit holder shall assume full responsibility for the project and continuation of the permit. 
In the event the contractor of record ceases to serve as the contractor on the project, and the aforementioned transfer of permit does not occur, the owner or the contractor must provide the building official written notice as soon as possible. Upon receipt of such notice, the engineering services department will perform a final inspection under this permit and close it out. Before construction can continue, a properly qualified person must obtain a new permit.  
3.01.13 - Threshold Buildings. 
Any threshold building submitted for plan review may at the discretion of the building official be required to have a third party plan review service. The cost for review by the outside plan review service will be in addition to the plan review fees charged by the building department and will be borne by the applicant.  
3.01.14 - Survey of Building Foundations Required. 
(a)  Survey Required. The permit holder shall submit to the building official, within 21 calendar days of the foundation inspection, an as-built survey map depicting the foundation, pilings or similar element of the building that identifies the location of the outer walls of the building or addition as installed and the location of such foundation or pilings, precisely dimensioned in relation to each and every relevant property line of the property upon which a structure is being constructed and any other foundation or building on the site. 
For waterfront properties, the mean high water line and required view corridors shall be clearly indicated on the drawing. The flood zone and finished floor elevation shall also be shown. The survey shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer. 
(b)  Review of Survey. The building official shall have seven business days to review the survey, any supplemental drawings and certification provided for by this section, and shall approve the survey, supplemental drawing(s) and certification if all requirements have been met. 
(c)  Permit Holder's Liability. Any work commenced within the 28 calendar day period from the date of the submission of the required as-built foundation survey, which is required by this section, shall be at the permit holder's risk. Any deficiencies or encroachments detected by the building official's review shall be corrected by the permit holder forthwith and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey, supplemental drawing and certification required by this section, or failure to make such corrections, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. No vertical inspections shall be performed by the building official until the as-built foundation survey has been submitted and approved. 
(d)  Waiver of Survey Requirement. The building official may waive the as-built foundation survey or certification for minor construction on single-family residential property involving an addition or accessory building or structure if: 
(1)  the location of the property line can be readily ascertained; and 
(2)  it can be readily and unquestionably determined that the new construction is within the required building setbacks.  
3.01.15 - Enforcement of Provisions. 
Any licensed individual or company who violates the provisions of this chapter or the F.B.C. may be subject to review and subsequent action by the Okaloosa County Construction Licensing board. In addition, any property owner who violates the provisions of this chapter or the F.B.C. may be subject to Code Enforcement Board action.  
3.01.16 - Technical Amendments to the Florida Building Code. 
The Florida Building Code, Residential is hereby amended by the following technical amendments. 
R322.2.1 Elevation requirements. 
1.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas not designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot, 1 foot above the higher of the elevation of the surface of the center of the street or of the curb of the street abutting or adjacent to the property, or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
2.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot (305 mm), 1 foot above the higher of the elevation of the surface of the center of the street or of the curb of the street abutting or adjacent to the property, or to the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
3.  In areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), buildings and structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM plus 1 foot, or 1 foot above the higher of the elevation of the surface of the center of the street or of the curb of the street abutting or adjacent to the property, or at least 3 feet if a depth number is not specified. 
4.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot, or 1 foot above the higher of the elevation of the surface of the center of the street or of the curb of the street abutting or adjacent to the property, or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
Exception: Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation, including basements whose floors are not below grade on all sides, shall meet the requirements of Section R322.2.2. 
R322.3.2 Elevation requirements. 
1.  All buildings and structures erected within coastal high-hazard areas shall be elevated so that the lowest portion of all structural members supporting the lowest floor, with the exception of piling, pile caps, columns, grade beams and bracing, is elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot, 1 foot above the higher of the elevation of the surface of the center of the street or of the curb of the street abutting or adjacent to the property, or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
2.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides are prohibited. 
3.  The use of fill for structural support is prohibited. 
4.  Minor grading, and the placement of minor quantities of fill, shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios and walkways. 
Exception: Walls and partitions enclosing areas below the design flood elevation shall meet the requirements of Sections R322.3.4 and R322.3.5. 
(Ord. No. 1951 , § 2, 11-15-16)  
3.02 - ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
3.02.01 - Electrical Meter Placement. 
All electrical meter placement must be verified by the local utility company.  
3.02.02 - Tampering Prohibited. 
Tampering with meters or with conductors carrying unmetered current and the unauthorized breaking of utility company seals are prohibited. New service or existing service that has been altered or repaired shall not be connected until the local utility company has received an authorized inspection certificate.  
3.02.03 - Marinas. 
All new installations of upland electrical services at marinas shall be underground.  
3.03 - PLUMBING CODE 
 
3.03.01. - Excavations and Obstructions. 
No person shall excavate or obstruct any public or private street, alley, sidewalk or other thoroughfare for the purpose of installing plumbing, sewer or drainage work. All excavations in public ways in the city shall be made by the city or a licensed underground utility contractor, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.  
3.03.02 - Septic Tank and Field Lines. 
No major repair or increase in size shall be made to an existing septic tank, nor shall a field line be increased when the city's sanitary sewer system is available. Existing septic tank users are required to be connected to the city's central sanitary sewer system within one year of notice by the city of the availability of service.  
3.03.03 - Independent Systems. 
The drainage and plumbing system of each new building and of each new work installed in an existing building shall be separate from and independent of that of any other building. Every building shall have an independent connection with a public or private sewer when such sewer is available, except that a building of single ownership located on a single lot or building site may have one sewer.  
3.03.04 - Laterals; Laying of Pipes. 
Laterals from the building must be connected to the "Y" branch in the main sewer adjoining each building site, where taken off the existing sewer or lateral as close to the street curb as possible. Sewer pipe from the curb line to the main line sewer shall be not less than four inch pipe. No part of such pipe shall be laid less than 36 inches from the top of such pipe to the top of the established or existing street grade, when possible. Where such pipe cannot be covered at all points by 24 inches of earth, such pipe shall be extra heavy cast iron or ductile iron pipe.  
3.03.05 - Sand and Oil Interceptors Required. 
(a)  Any business establishment, established after September 24, 1991, which repairs or washes vehicles, equipment, or boats or where either vehicles, equipment, boats, or repair work areas are spray cleaned prior to or during the repair process, shall provide and maintain both a sand interceptor and oil separator to receive all residue from maintenance areas. 
(b)  No such establishment shall dump any foreign matter, grease or excess oil in any sand trap interceptor. Such establishments shall keep all interceptors in a clean condition in order to prevent such foreign matter from entering the city sanitary sewerage system. 
(c)  The building official may inspect the premises of such establishments every six (6) months or as necessary to determine if sand interceptors and oil separators are being kept in proper condition.  
3.03.06. - Grease Interceptors. 
All commercial grease interceptors shall be pumped dry and cleaned of grease and residue a minimum of once every six (6) calendar months. Where necessary, more frequent cleaning of these grease interceptors shall be required as deemed necessary by either the city engineer or a designee. The operator of the business utilizing the grease interceptor shall certify as to the pumping and cleaning of the grease interceptors as required, but not later than every six (6) calendar months, and shall furnish a copy of the certificate to the city engineer or a designee upon request. No person shall pour grease into storm sewers.  
3.04 - WIND-BORNE DEBRIS REGION 
 
3.04.01 - Wind-Borne Debris Region Established. 
There is hereby established a "Wind-Borne Debris Region" defined as all land within the corporate limits of the City of Fort Walton Beach. To assure proper methods for new construction or repair of existing buildings and structures, the wind borne debris region is established to provide a region where buildings constructed within said region must be either designed for internal pressures that may result inside a building when a window or door is broken or a hole is created in its walls or roof by large debris, or be designed with protected openings, pursuant to Chapter 16 of the F.B.C.  
3.05 - Reserved[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006 , adopted February 26, 2019, repealed Chapter 3.05, §§ 3.05.01—3.05.16. Former Chapter 3.05 pertained to Floodplain Management and derived from Ord. No. 1950 , § 2, adopted November 15, 2016. 
 
Secs. 3.05.01—3.05.16. - Reserved.  
3.07 - DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS 
 
3.07.01 - Permit Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to wreck or demolish any building or structure in the City of Fort Walton Beach without first securing a permit and paying the appropriate fees.  
3.07.02 - Application. 
An application for a demolition permit to wreck or demolish a building or structure within the City of Fort Walton Beach shall be in writing on forms provided by the building official. The application shall include the demolition contractor's name and address, certification or competency card number, property owner's address, location of the building or structure; legal description of the property and date the demolition is to begin. 
An owner-occupier of a single family residence may demolish his or her home, garage or shed type structure without securing a business tax receipt or certificate of competency. It shall be unlawful to employ any person, firm or corporation to assist that does not first produce a current business tax receipt and house wreckers competence card. Such owner-occupier must comply with all other provisions of this section.  
3.07.03 - Conditions of Demolition. 
All sewer, gas, water, storm drainage lines and similar taps or connections shall be properly closed and disconnected as per approval from the city or appropriate utility company. All debris from the building or structure shall be removed from the site. The lot shall be graded to a smooth, even finished grade, free from building material, debris, holes and depressions. Any further excavation or clearing of the lot shall require a clearing and grubbing permit. The lot shall be graded to provide proper drainage and a stormwater retention system may be required by the city code.  
3.07.04 - Exposure of Adjacent Walls. 
In the event walls of adjacent buildings become exposed as a result of the demolition, the newly exposed walls shall be finished in order to maintain the aesthetics and value of adjacent property, and weatherproofed to prevent deterioration of the wall.  
3.07.05 - Structures of Four Units or More. 
In the event the subject demolition or renovation involves a commercial, industrial, or government owned building, or a residential structure with more than four (4) units the Federal EPA regulations concerning asbestos abatement will apply.  
3.07.06 - Performance Bond Required. 
Prior to the issuance of a demolition permit, a performance bond shall be required to cover the cost of the work. 
3.07.061  Form of Bond: The performance bond shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney and shall cover 100 percent of the cost estimate. The cost estimate shall be established by the contract signed for the demolition and for subsequent construction if required. 
3.07.062  Bond Coverage: The performance bond shall cover the following: in the event of total demolition, the cost to demolish the structure, remove all debris, grade the lot and repair adjacent buildings; and, in the event of partial demolition of a building, the cost to demolish the structure, remove all debris, grade the lot and repair adjacent buildings and construct or reconstruct the remaining portions of the building so that the exterior of any partially demolished building appears complete, finished and enclosed.  
3.08 - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 
 
3.08.01 - Right to Inspect. 
The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected any building, structure or portion thereof, including electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe or unsanitary or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment. After the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected a building, structure or portion thereof and has determined that such building, structure or portion thereof is unsafe, he or she shall initiate proceedings to cause the abatement of the unsafe condition by repair, rehabilitation, vacation or demolition or combination thereof.  
3.08.02 - Notice, Content. 
The building official shall prepare and issue a notice of unsafe building directed to the owner of record of the building or structure. The notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information. 
3.08.021  Address, Legal Description: The street address and legal description of the building, structure or premise. 
3.08.022  Detail of Conditions: A statement indicating the building or structure has been declared unsafe by the building official, and a detailed report documenting the conditions determined to have rendered the building or structure unsafe under the provisions of the adopted codes of the city. 
3.08.023  Time to Complete Required Action: A statement advising that if the following required action as determined by the building official is not commenced within or completed by the time specified, the building will be ordered vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed and the building official may cause the work to be done and all costs incurred charged against the property or the owner of record. 
3.08.024  Time for Commencement: If the building or structure is to be repaired, the notice shall require that all necessary permits be secured and the work commenced within 60 days and continued to completion within such time as the building official determines. 
3.08.025  Time for Vacating Structure: If the building or structure is to be vacated, the notice shall indicate the time within which vacation is to be completed. 
3.08.026  Time for Demolition: If the building or structure is to be demolished, the notice shall require that the premises be vacated within 60 days, that all required permits for demolition be secured and that the demolition be completed within such time as determined reasonable by the building official. 
3.08.027  Statement of Right to Appeal: A statement advising that any person having any legal interest in the property may appeal the notice by the building official to the board of adjustment; and that such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the building official within 30 days from the date of the notice and that failure to appeal in the time specified will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing.  
3.08.03 - Service, Posting of Notice. 
The notice and all attachments thereto shall be served upon the owner of record and posted on the property in a conspicuous location. A copy of the notice and all attachments thereto shall also be served on any person determined from the official public records to have a legal interest in the property. Failure of the building official to serve any person herein required to be served other than the owner of record shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder nor shall it relieve any other person served from any obligation imposed on him. 
3.08.031  Method of Service: The notice shall be served either personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each person at the address as it appears on the official public records. If the addresses are not available on any person required to be served the notice, the notice addressed to such person shall be mailed to the address of the building or structure involved in the proceedings. The failure of any person to receive notice, other than the owner of record, shall not invalidate any proceedings under this chapter. Service by certified or registered mail as herein described shall be effective on the date the notice was received as indicated on the return receipt. 
3.08.032  Proof of Service: Proof of service of the notice shall be by written declaration indicating the date, time and manner in which service was made and signed by the person served on by the receipt. 
3.08.033  Recording of Notice: If the notice is not complied with nor an appeal within the allotted time, the building official shall file in the office of the recorder a certificate describing the property and certifying that the building or structure is unsafe and that the owner of record has been served. This certificate shall remain on file until such time as the conditions rendering the building or structure unsafe have been abated. At such time, the building official shall file a new certificate indicating that the corrective action has been taken and the building or structure is no longer unsafe from that condition. 
3.08.034  Posting of Notice to Vacate: Every notice to vacate, in addition to complying with the provisions of this part, shall be posted at each exit and entrance to the building or structure and shall state: 
THIS BUILDING IS UNSAFE AND ITS OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 
3.08.035  Removal of Notice: Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or demolition is complete. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or their agents to remove such notice without written permission of the building official, or for any person to enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing it.  
3.08.04 - Standards for Compliance. 
The following action shall be taken by the building official when ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of an unsafe building or structure. 
3.08.041  Repair IAW Building Code: The building shall be ordered repaired in accordance with the adopted building code or demolished at the option of the owner. In the event the building is to be repaired, an architect or engineer, registered in the State of Florida, and knowledgeable in such area of repair shall verify in writing that such repair can be made to abate the conditions rendering the building or structure unsafe. 
3.08.042  Immediate Hazard: If the building or structure poses an immediate hazard to life or to the safety of the public it shall be ordered vacated immediately. 
3.08.043  Rights of Building Official in Emergency: The decision of the building official shall be final in cases of emergency, which in his or her/her opinion, involve imminent danger to human life or health. The building official shall promptly cause such building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems or portion thereof to be made safe or cause its removal. For this purpose, he/she may at once enter such structure or land on which it stands, or abutting land or structures, with such assistance and at such cost as he/she may deem necessary. 
3.08.044  Costs: Costs incurred under this section shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and shall be collected in the manner provided by law.  
3.08.05 - Appeals. 
Any person entitled to service in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, may appeal any action of the building official to the board of adjustment, with the following requirements. 
3.08.051  Filing: Such appeal must be filed in writing with the building official within 30 days from the date of service and must contain at least the following information: identification of the building or structure concerned by the street address or legal description; a statement identifying the legal interest of each appellant; a statement identifying the specific order or section being appealed; a statement detailing the issues on which the appellant desires to be heard; and the legal signature of all appellants and their official mailing addresses. 
3.08.052  Hearing: Upon receipt of an appeal, the board shall as soon as practical fix a date, time and location for the hearing of the appeal. The hearing date shall not be more than 60 days from the date the appeal was filed with the building official. Written notice of the time and location of the hearing shall be delivered personally or mailed to each appellant at the address on the appeal by certified mail, postage prepaid and receipt requested. 
3.08.053  Failure to appear: Failure of any person to appear at the hearing set in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver of his or her right to an administrative hearing on the notice. 
3.08.054  Scope of Hearing: The hearing shall offer the appellant reasonable opportunity to be heard on only those specific matters or issues raised by the appellant in his or her appeal. The appellant may appear at the hearing in person or through his or her/her attorney or other designated representative. 
3.08.055  Stay of Notice Under Appeal: Except for a vacation order issued, enforcement of any notice issued by the building official under the provisions of this chapter shall be held in abeyance during the course of an appeal.  
3.09 - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 
 
3.09.01 - Permit Required. 
No person shall move any building or structure in excess of 600 sq. ft. in floor area, over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the city or from one lot to another within the city without first obtaining a moving permit therefore from the building official.  
3.09.02 - Permit Application. 
Any person seeking a moving permit under this chapter to move a building or structure from inside the city to a point outside the city, through the city, within the city for reinstallation at another location inside the city, or into the city from another local government's jurisdiction, shall first file an application for such permit with the building official.  
3.09.03 - Form of Permit Application. 
The application shall be made in writing, upon forms provided by the building official and shall set forth a description of the building proposed to be moved, giving the street number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and the condition of the exterior and interior; a legal description of the lot from which the building is to be moved, giving the lot and block number if such lot is located in the city; the highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the building is proposed to be moved; the proposed moving date and hours; any additional information which the building official finds necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.  
3.09.04 - Permit Documentation. 
The following shall accompany each application under this section sufficient evidence that the building and lot from which it is to be removed are free of any liens, taxes, and city charges, and if the applicant is not the owner, a written statement or bill of sale, signed by the owner, or other sufficient evidence that he is entitled to move the building.  
3.09.05 - Inter-Jurisdictional Certification. 
If the building or structure in question is to be moved into the city from another local government's jurisdiction, then one of the following must accompany the application to move: certification from a state registered professional engineer or architect certifying that the subject building or structure complies with all provisions of all applicable building and construction codes and standards currently in effect in the city or certification from a state board of building codes and standards certified building official or building inspector representing the jurisdiction in which the building or structure was constructed, stating that the subject building or structure was constructed and inspected under the same building codes and standards of the city (or equivalent) and that the building or structure has been adequately maintained to those standards since construction.  
3.09.06 - Fee. 
The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee, which may be amended from time to time as set forth by resolution by the city council and be subject to further requirements as determined by the city manager.  
3.09.07 - Estimate of Expenses. 
Upon receipt of an application, it shall be the duty of the building official to obtain from the department of public works an estimate of the expense that will be incurred in removing and replacing electric wires, street lamps, traffic signals or pole lines belonging to the city or any other property of the city, the removal and replacement of which will be required by reason of the moving of the building through the city, together with the cost of materials necessary to be used in making such removals and replacements. Prior to issuance of the moving permit, the building official shall require of the applicant a deposit of a sum of money equal to twice the amount of the estimated expense.  
3.09.08 - Expenses for Traffic Officer. 
The permittee shall pay the expense of a traffic officer when such officer is necessary to accompany the movement of the building to protect the public from injury. This expense shall not be charged for the first two hours of utilization, but thereafter shall accrue at a rate to be established by resolution of the city council.  
3.09.09 - Cash Deposit Required. 
An application for a moving permit under this chapter shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in the sum of $20,000 as an indemnity for any expense the city may sustain by reason of damage or injury to any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, fire hydrant or other property of the city, which may be caused by or be incidental to the removal of any building over, along or across any street in the city, and to indemnify the city against any claim for damages because of injury to any person or private property, and to satisfy any claim by an individual arising out of, caused by or incidental to the moving of any building over, along or across any street in the city.  
3.09.10 - Bond in Lieu of Cash. 
Any person filing a permit application may file, in lieu of the general cash deposit required, a bond, approved as to form by the city attorney and executed by a bonding or surety company authorized to do business in the state, in the amount of $20,000, conditioned upon the assurance that this chapter and other applicable ordinances and laws will be complied with. Such bond shall run to the city for the use and benefit of any person intended to be protected thereby and shall be conditioned on the payment for any damage to public or private property and the payment for any damage or loss resulting from any malfeasance, misfeasance, nonfeasance or negligence in connection with any of the activities or conditions upon which the permit applied for is granted.  
3.09.11 - Insurance in Lieu of Cash. 
Any person filing a permit application may file, in lieu of the general cash deposit required, a liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state and approved as to form by the city attorney, in the same amount and providing the same protection as would be required for a bond pursuant to this chapter.  
3.09.12 - Permittee's Liability for Expenses. 
The permittee shall be liable for any expense; damage or cost in excess of deposited amounts or securities, and the city council may direct the city attorney to prosecute an action against the permittee in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of such amounts.  
3.09.13 - Duties of Permittee. 
Every permittee under this chapter shall move a building only over streets designated in the written permit; notify the building official, in writing, of a desired change in the moving date and hours as proposed in the application; notify the building official, in writing, of any and all damage done to property belonging to the city within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred; remove the building from the city streets after one-half day of such occupancy, unless an extension is granted by the city manager; remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to the existing grade at the original building site so that the premises are left in safe and sanitary condition; ensure the sewer line is plugged with concrete stopper, the water shut off, and the meter reported to the city water chapter, and notify the gas, electric and other utility companies to remove their services; ensure that the building being moved conforms to all provisions of the city zoning ordinances and, if nonconforming, make the building conforming.  
3.09.14 - Enforcement Officials. 
The building official, the police department and the department of public works shall enforce and carry out the requirements of this chapter and applicable laws.  
3.09.15 - Duties of Officials. 
The building official shall inspect the building proposed to be moved and the applicant's equipment to determine whether the standards for issuance of a moving permit are met. 
The building official shall refuse to issue a moving permit if he finds that: there has not been compliance with any application, fee or deposit requirement; the building is too large to move without endangering persons or property in the city; the building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons or property in the city; the applicant's equipment is unsafe and persons and property would be endangered by its use; or for any other reason, persons or property in the city would be endangered by the moving of the building. 
The building official shall obtain from the department of public works a list of designated streets over which the building may be moved. The building official shall have the list approved by the chief of police and shall reproduce the list upon the permit in writing. In making their determinations, the department of public works and the chief of police shall act to assure maximum safety to persons and property in the city and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards.  
3.09.16 - Condition of Original Premises. 
The city shall proceed to do the work necessary to leave the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition, where the permittee has not complied with the requirements of this chapter, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the general deposit.  
3.20 - FIRE CODE 
 
3.20.01 - Code Adopted. 
Pursuant to section 633.025, F.S. (2007), and other applicable provisions of law, the Florida Fire Prevention Code (2007) of the National Fire Protection Association, and its incorporated standards and codes as published in the National Fire Codes of the National Fire Protection Association, and all subsequent amendments thereto, is adopted. A copy of the Florida Fire Prevention Code is on file in the office of the city fire chief and the city's public library.  
3.20.02 - Enforcement. 
The fire code adopted by this chapter shall be enforced by the city's fire chief and fire marshal.  
3.20.03 - Appeals. 
Whenever the fire chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire code adopted by this chapter do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire chief to the board of adjustment within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. The decision of the board of adjustment upon such appeal shall be final.  
3.20.13 - Permit and Service Fees. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish fees for specific fire code permits as defined in NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code, as adopted by the city, and for the establishment of fees for services performed by the fire department. 
(b)  Definitions. All terms in this section shall be defined as stated in NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code, as adopted by the city. 
(c)  Fee Required. A fee, as set by the city council in the city's comprehensive fee schedule and amended in the future by resolution, shall be paid at the time of application for a renewable permit, an installation, removal, or alteration permit, an activity permit, hazardous materials storage permit, or any other permitting, plan review or inspection service provided by the fire department. 
(d)  No Refund. Fees are not refunded if an applicant does not receive the permit. 
(e)  Failure to Apply. Failure to apply for necessary permits or services can result in an order from the fire marshal to obtain the required permit or service. Such an order shall be considered as application made for the required permit or service. 
CHAPTER 3 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
2005 Code Section 	1992 Code Section 	State Law References/Other Historical Notes 
		Ordinance 1565, adopted March 8, 2005, repealed 1992 Code, Article XIII Buildings and Building Regulations," in its entirety. 
3.00.01 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.00.02 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.00.03 		Repealed Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.00.04 		Repealed Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.01 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.02 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.03 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.04 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.05 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09), Ord 1886 11 Feb 2014 
3.01.06 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.07 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.08 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.09 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.10 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.11 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.12 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.13 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.14 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.01.15 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.01 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.02 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.03 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.04 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.05 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.06 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.07 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.08 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.09 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.10 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.11 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.12 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.02.13 		Ord. 1719, § II, (2-13-07); Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.03 		Ord. 1565 (3-22-05) 
3.03.01 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.03.02 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.03.03 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.03.04 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.03.05 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.03.06 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.03.07 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.04 		Ord. 1565 (3-22-05) 
3.04.01 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.05 		Ord. 1565 (3-22-05) 
3.05.01 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.06 		Ord. 1565 (3-22-05) 
3.06.01 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.06.02 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.06.03 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.06.04 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.06.05 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.06.06 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.06.07 		Ord. 1815 (10-27-09) 
3.07 		Ord. 1565 (3-22-05) 
3.07.02 		Ord. 1725, § III, (4-24-07) 
3.08 		Ord. 1565 (3-22-05) 
3.09 		Ord. 1565 (3-22-05) 
3.10 		Ord. 1565 (3-22-05); Repealed Ord. 1779, § III (9-23-08) 
3.20 		Ord. 1626 (3-8-05) 
3.20.01 	20-3201 	Ord. 1626 (3-8-05); Ord. 1786 (1-13-09); Ord. 1781 (3-24-09) 
3.20.02 	20-3202 	Ord. 1465, § 5, (11-21-01); Ord. 1781 (3-24-09) 
3.20.03 	20-3203 	Ord. 1465, § 5, (11-21-01); Ord. 1781 (3-24-09) 
3.20.04 	20-3204 	Ord. 1465, § 5, (11-21-01); Ord. 1781 (3-24-09) 
3.20.05 	20-3205 	Ord. 1465, § 5, (11-21-01); Repealed Ord. 1781 (3-24-09) 
3.20.06 	20-3206 	Ord. 1465, § 5, (11-21-01); Repealed Ord. 1781 (3-24-09) 
3.20.07 	20-3207 	Ord. 1465, § 5, (11-21-01); Repealed Ord. 1781 (3-24-09) 
	20-3208 	Repealed: Ord. 1626 (3-8-05) 
3.20.08 	20-3209 	Ord. 1465, § 5, (11-21-01); Ord. 1626 (3-8-05); Repealed Ord. 1781 (3-24-09) 
3.20.09 	20-3209 	Ord. 1465, § 5, (11-21-01); Ord. 1626 (3-8-05); Repealed Ord. 1781 (3-24-09) 
3.20.10 	20-3209 	Ord. 1465, § 5, (11-21-01); Ord. 1626 (3-8-05); Repealed Ord. 1781 (3-24-09) 
3.20.11 	20-3210 	Ord. 1465, § 5, (11-21-01); Repealed Ord. 1781 (3-24-09) 
3.20.12 	20-3211 	Ord. 1465, § 5, (11-21-01); Repealed Ord. 1781 (3-24-09) 
3.20.13 		Ord. 1775, § II (9-23-08) 
  
CHAPTER 4 - FINANCE & TAXATION  
4.01 - FINANCE 
 
4.01.01 - Authority of Finance Director. 
(a)  The Finance Director, subject to Florida law and the supervision of the City Manager, shall adopt procedures for the receipt, recording, and disposition of all City funds and moneys, keeping and supervising of all accounts, the levy, assessment and collection of taxes and other revenue, the making and collection of special assessments, the custody and disbursement of City funds and moneys, the control over expenditures, and such other duties as the City Manager may require. 
(b)  Finance reports shall be made to the Finance Director by each department and office showing the receipt and disposition of all moneys for each quarter, fiscal year, and at other times as may be required by the City Manager. The City Manager shall submit such reports to the City Council. 
(c)  The City Manager and Finance Director are hereby authorized to be the officers who shall sign the various checks and other instruments of withdrawal on behalf of the City. The Mayor may sign on behalf of either the Manager or the Director if either of those officers is unavailable for signature. 
(d)  The City Manager and the Finance Director are also authorized to draft, propose, and amend as necessary and lawful the comprehensive fee schedule.  
4.01.02 - Purchasing. 
The following policies are hereby established for purchasing all supplies, materials and any other matter or commodity necessary for the operation of the affairs of the City: 
4.01.021  Centralized Purchasing Department: Purchases for the requirements and operation of all City agencies are to be made through a centralized purchasing department. Regulations for purchases by this department shall be as prescribed from time to time by the Council or the City Manager. 
4.01.022  Quality: All purchases shall be of a quality to suit the intended purposes at the least expense. 
4.01.023  Procedures: All purchases shall be made in accordance with approved and accepted procedures. 
4.01.025  Practices for purchases of $20,000 or less: The administrative practices to be used for purchases of $20,000 or less shall be prescribed by the City Manager. 
Public advertisement and competition is required for City purchases in excess of $20,000; provided, however, that equipment and vehicle repairs may be made at a cost below $25,000 without public advertisement and bids and continuing contracts may be awarded consistent with Florida law. 
The establishment of threshold amounts does not preclude the City Manager from prescribing public advertisement and bids for purchases, vehicle and equipment repair below the establishment threshold amounts, including the awarding or rejection of bids in these categories. 
The awarding or rejection of bids above the established threshold amounts of $20,000 and $25,000 requires Council action. The administrative practices used for these purchases requires Council action. The administrative practices used for these purchases will be subject to the annual audit and made a part of the report to the Council each year.  
4.01.03 - Procedure for Processing City Property. 
Procedures for the receipt and processing of property by the City shall be as set forth in procedures established by the City Manager.  
4.01.04 - Authority of City Manager. 
The authority for enactment of this ordinance is section 166.021, Florida Statutes (2007), and relevant provisions of the City Charter. 
The City of Fort Walton Beach must deal, on a repetitive basis, with a number of administrative, quasi-judicial and litigation-related monetary claims against it, and must assert a number of such claims against other parties. The City Council of Fort Walton Beach intends to delegate certain settlement authority to the City Manager to assert and settle enumerated claims for and against the City up to a maximum of $20,000. The City Council hereby finds that the City Manager has the training, knowledge and experience to negotiate the most beneficial settlements that are consistent with applicable laws, regulations and statutes. 
The City Council hereby delegates to the City Manager, in addition to any previously delegated authority, the authority to negotiate and compromise settlements of routine claims, litigation and administrative matters, for and against the City of Fort Walton Beach, with third parties, and to execute releases and satisfactions of judgments and other liens that may be required by such settlements. Routine claims, litigation and administrative matters shall include: 
(a)  Forfeiture actions; 
(b)  Contract disputes; 
(c)  Garnishment actions; 
(d)  Billing and collections disputes with customers or suppliers of goods and services; 
(e)  Compromise of bankruptcy claims; and 
(f)  Mediation or other pre-suit settlements of claims or litigation that are not otherwise at the time of settlement covered by insurance defense.  
4.02 - EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSES FOR EXTRAORDINARY SERVICES 
 
4.02.01 - Extraordinary Expense, Defined. 
An extraordinary expense shall be that expense, and those related costs and fees, that are incurred by the City for any extraordinary services, but not limited to the City's actual cost of labor and materials associated with the use of any fire suppression equipment, specialized extinguishing or abatement agent, chemical, neutralizer, or similar equipment or materials that are employed to extinguish, confine, neutralize, contain, or clean any hazardous material that is or may be involved in a fire, spill, or the threat of any fire, spill, or any construction that may be needed to repair or correct the situation.  
4.02.02 - Extraordinary Service, Defined. 
An "extraordinary service" is one performed by the City of Fort Walton Beach Fire Department, the City of Fort Walton Beach Police Department, the City of Fort Walton Beach Public Works or any other City Department that is in addition to or above the normal services provided by such department, or requires the use of special equipment. 
"Extraordinary services" may include, but are not limited to, fire suppression, emergency services for medical care, extrication and other related services; the abatement and disposition of hazardous materials; spills or the threat of spills of toxic chemicals, utility line breaks or leakages; other imminent, perceived, or possible threats to the health, safety, or welfare of City residents that may be detailed or contemplated in this division and those instances where a property owner has been previously warned about violations of the City Code that, in the judgment of the City staff, are a particular threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the City residents, and for which the owner (or owner's agent, or person in charge of the property) has neglected to comply or has refused compliance therewith.  
4.02.03 - Liability for Expenses. 
Any person that requires extraordinary service shall be liable for any and all extraordinary expenses that are incurred by the City as a result of providing such extraordinary service. Such extraordinary expenses shall be assessed and collected as set forth in this division. 
When insurance coverage is available for any building, dwelling, structure, or other article that has been involved in a fire, and for which fire suppression, medical care, extrication, or related services were provided, the City shall file a claim with the insurer to recover the costs of the services provided.  
4.02.04 - Administration. 
The Finance Director shall establish procedures for collection of and collect any and all extraordinary expenses.  
4.02.05 - Enforcement. 
The City may enforce the provisions of this division by civil actions in a court of competent jurisdiction or the imposition and collection of a lien pursuant to provisions of this Code of Ordinances or both, for the collection of any amounts due hereunder plus costs and attorney's fees, or any other relief that may be available. 
Nothing herein shall authorize any City Department or any City staff member to refuse or delay any Municipal service to any person that has not paid the City for extraordinary service provided.  
4.03 - WATER BILLING 
 
4.03.01 - Fees, Rates, Charges Set in City Fee Schedule. 
All fees, rates, deposits, and other charges of any kind shall be set forth in the City's General Fee Schedule, as amended. The City Council may, by resolution, make any adjustments to the fee schedule as it may deem necessary and proper.  
4.03.02 - Finance Director Responsibility. 
The Finance Director shall be responsible for ensuring the City General Fee Schedule is maintained, updated, and adequately reimburses the City for costs, materials, time, efforts and distribution of the municipal water supply and distribution system.  
4.03.03 - Procedures for Charges, Connections, Collection, and Billing. 
The Finance Director and City Manager or a designee shall establish procedures for determining all charges related to the Municipal water supply and distribution system, including but not limited to all connection and reconnection fees, deposits, minimum monthly fees, consumption fees, and penalty charges. 
The Finance Director and City Manager or a designee shall establish procedures for determining all charges related to the sewer collection system, and stormwater assessment fee. 
The City Council may, by resolution, make any adjustments to these procedures as it may deem necessary and proper.  
4.04 - ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD EXEMPTIONS 
 
4.04.01 - Definitions. 
The words and phrases in this chapter shall have the meanings provided by section 196.075, F.S., as amended, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Household means a person or group of persons living together in a room or group of rooms as a housing unit, but the term does not include persons boarding in or renting a portion of the dwelling. 
Household income means the adjusted gross income, as defined in section 62 of the United States Internal Revenue Code, of all members of a household.  
4.04.02 - Entitlement. 
In accordance with section 6(f), Article VII of the Florida Constitution and Section 196.075, F.S., as amended, the City Council hereby authorizes an additional homestead exemption of $50,000.00 commencing with the year 2007, for any person who has legal or equitable title to real estate and maintains on it the permanent residence of such owner, who has attained age 65, and whose household income does not exceed $24,214. 
If title is held jointly with right of survivorship, the person residing on the subject property and otherwise qualifying may receive the entire amount of the additional homestead tax exemption.  
4.04.03 - Annual Adjustment. 
Beginning January 1, 2001, such person's $20,000.00 income limitation shall be adjusted annually, on January 1, by the percentage change in the average cost-of-living index in the period January 1, through December 31 of the immediate prior year compared with the period for the year prior to that. 
The index is the average of the monthly consumer price index figures for the stated 12-month period, relative to the United States as a whole, issued by the United States Department of Labor.  
4.04.04 - Liability for Wrongful Receipt. 
Persons receiving such additional homestead tax exemption shall be subject to the provisions of section 196.131 and 196.161, F.S., as amended, if applicable, pertaining to wrongful receipt of a homestead tax exemption.  
4.04.05 - Rescission of Exemption. 
It is the intent of the City in establishing this exemption that the City be empowered to rescind this additional homestead tax exemption at the end of any particular year should it be determined in the sole discretion of the City that there is an adverse financial impact of such an exemption, and it no longer serves the best financial interest of the City.  
4.04.06 - Application of Exemption. 
The additional homestead tax exemption established in this section shall apply only to taxes levied the City.  
4.04.07 - Claim, Receipt of Exemption, Duties. 
Those persons entitled to the homestead tax exemption in section 196.031, F.S., as amended, may apply for and may receive an additional homestead tax exemption as provided in this chapter. A taxpayer claiming the additional homestead tax exemption provided herein shall annually submit to the property appraiser, no later than March 1, a sworn statement of household income on a form prescribed by the Department of Revenue.  
4.04.08 - Proof of Income. 
The filing of the statement of the taxpayer shall be supported by copies of any Federal Income Tax Returns for the prior year, any wage and earnings statement (W-2 forms), and any other documents the Department of Revenue finds necessary, for each member of the household, to be submitted by June 1. The taxpayer's statement shall attest to the accuracy of such copies. The property appraiser may not grant the exemption without the required documentation.  
4.05 - UTILITY TAX 
 
4.05.01 - Levy of tax; Rate. 
There is hereby levied by the City on each and every purchase of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum or manufactured) and water service, but only on purchases within the City, a tax of ten percent (10%) of the payments received by the seller of such utility service from the purchaser for the purchase of such utility service. 
A like tax is hereby levied on services competitive with those enumerated in this section, hereby defined as fuel oil when consumed in such a way as to provide energy actually competitive with those taxed in this section, provided that the tax on the sale of fuel oil shall not exceed $0.04 per gallon. 
There is hereby imposed by the City, on each and every sale in the City of local telecommunication services and intrastate telecommunications toll services, as defined by and to the full extent permitted by section 166.231, F.S., a tax of seven percent (7%) of the charge made by the seller, which tax shall, in every case, be paid by the purchaser, for the use of the City, to the seller of such local telecommunication services or intrastate telecommunication services at the time of paying the charge to the seller.  
4.05.02 - Limitations and Exemptions. 
(1)  The tax imposed by this section shall not be applied against any fuel adjustment charge, and such charge shall be separately stated on each bill. 
"Fuel adjustment charge" means all increases in the cost of utility services to the ultimate consumer resulting from an increase in the cost of fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973. 
(2)  The purchase of natural gas or fuel oil by a public or private utility, either for resale or for use as fuel in the generation of electricity, and the purchase of fuel oil or kerosene for use as an aircraft engine fuel or propellant or for use in internal combustion engines, are exempt from taxation pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  The purchase of taxable items by the United States Government, the State or any other public body, as defined in section 1.01, F.S., and purchases by any recognized Church in the State for use exclusively for Church purposes, are exempt from taxation pursuant to this chapter.  
4.05.03 - Collection; Responsibility and Liability of Sellers; Discontinuance of Service. 
(1)  In every case, the tax shall be collected from the purchaser of the utility service and paid by the purchaser, for the use of the city, to the seller of the utility service at the time of the purchaser's paying the charge to the seller, but not less often than monthly. 
In all cases, the tax shall be computed on the aggregate amount of purchase, except fuel adjustment charges on which no tax is levied, during such period. The tax shall be collected monthly on all payments received by the seller in payment of bills, statements or invoices rendered by the seller to the purchaser on or before November 1, 1986. 
(2)  Every seller making sales subject to the taxes levied by this chapter, in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the City, shall collect from the purchaser, for the use of the City, the tax hereby imposed and levied, at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for each transaction, and shall report and pay over, on or before the end of each calendar month, to the City, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. 
No seller of such utility service shall collect the price of any sale taxed by this chapter without at the same time collecting the tax hereby levied with respect to such purchase. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any purchase shall be liable to the City for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the tax had been actually paid to the seller. 
The proper Officers of the City shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and shall take all proceedings in the name of the City as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax. However, the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected charges. If any purchaser fails, neglects or refuses to pay the seller the seller's charge for such purchase and the tax hereby levied and as hereby required on account of the purchase for which such charge is made, or either, the seller shall have the right and authority to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill have been paid in full.  
4.05.04. - Records of Purchases; Inspection. 
Each and every seller making sales subject to the taxes levied by this chapter shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the City of such service, which records shall show the price charged upon each purchase, the date thereof and the date of payment thereof. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by duly authorized agents of the City during business hours on all business days. Such duly authorized agents of the City shall have the right and authority to make such transcripts thereof, and during such times, as they may desire.  
4.05.05 - Statements and Collections, City as Seller. 
When the purchase of the utility service upon which a tax is levied by this chapter is from the City or an independent agency thereof, as seller, the applicable official responsible for billing shall state the amount of such tax on all statements or charges rendered to the purchasers of such utility service. 
Such tax shall be collected from such purchasers and remitted to the City at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for each transaction, and the proper Officials of the City shall audit such charges and taxes so collected.  
4.05.06 - Computation of Tax. 
In all cases, the tax levied by this chapter shall be computed on the aggregate amount of purchase, except as otherwise provided in this chapter (not less frequently than monthly), and the amount of the tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed.  
4.05.07 - Disposition of Taxes. 
All moneys accruing from the tax levied by this chapter shall be set aside and deposited as collected, separate and apart from all other City funds and accounts, in an account to be designated as the Utilities Service Tax Account. 
The moneys in such account shall be used and appropriated only for those Municipal purposes provided by Ordinance of the City.  
4.05.08 - Violations. 
No purchaser shall refuse, neglect or otherwise fail to pay the tax levied by this chapter, and no seller, or any officer, agent or employee of a seller, shall willfully make a false report, fail to make a report, and fail to pay such tax or violate any other provision of this chapter.  
4.06 - INSURANCE TAXES 
 
4.06.01 - Tax Levied, Casualty Risks. 
There is hereby levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which hereafter engages in or carries on, the business of insuring with respect to casualty risks, as shown by the records of the insurance commissioners of the state, an excise tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the City, which tax shall be in the amount of 0.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies covering property within the City.  
4.06.02 - Tax Levied on Property Risks. 
There is hereby assessed and imposed on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaged in or carrying on, or who shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of property insurance as shown by the records of the department of insurance, an excise or license tax amounting to 1.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies covering property within the City. 
In the case of multiple peril policies with a single premium for both the property and casualty coverage in such policies, 70 percent of such premium shall be used as the basis for such tax.  
4.06.03 - Due date. 
The license or excise taxes levied by this chapter shall be due and payable annually on March 1.  
4.06.04 - Violations. 
No person shall refuse, neglect or otherwise fail to pay the taxes levied by this chapter. Violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in chapter 1.05 of this Code.  
4.07 - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE 
 
4.07.01 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply. 
(a)  Above average annual wage means one hundred ten (110) percent or greater of the average annual wage for Okaloosa County. 
(b)  Average annual wage means the average annual wage paid to workers in Okaloosa County as published by the State of Florida, Department of Economic Opportunity, Bureau of Labor Market Statistics, for the most current year published. 
(c)  Applicant means the industrial or business entity seeking to be verified by the City as an eligible industry or business pursuant to this ordinance. 
(d)  Attributable tax increment means the increased increment in the City's ad valorem and tangible property tax base attributable or apportionable to new development, redevelopment or expansion of an industry or business. 
(e)  Business or industry means any business entity authorized to do business in the state, county and the city, including all members of an affiliate group of corporations as defined in Section 220.03 (1)(b) of the Florida Statutes. 
(f)  Expansion of an Existing Business means the expansion of a business or industry resulting in the increase in jobs and wages as defined herein. 
(g)  Full-time means any full-time equivalent position(s) including, but not limited to, positions obtained through co-employment under a professional employer organization agreement. 
(h)  Jobs means full-time equivalent positions, as such terms are consistent with terms used by the Florida Department of Economic Opportunity and U.S. Department of Labor for purposes of unemployment compensation tax administration and employment estimation. Jobs shall not include temporary construction jobs involved with the construction of facilities for the project or any jobs which have been previously included in any incentive benefit provided pursuant to this ordinance. 
(i)  New business means a business or industry which does not exist within the City, first begins its operations on a site located within the City and is clearly separate from any other operation owned by the same business or industry. 
(j)  New job means the addition of a new full-time job which is wholly based in the City and which previously did not exist as part of the City's total job base. 
(k)  Project means the creation of a new business or industry or the expansion of an existing business or industry.  
4.07.02 - Purposes and findings of fact. 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Fort Walton Beach Economic Development Incentive Ordinance." 
It is the intent of the City to establish and further a sound business and industrial tax base in the City of Fort Walton Beach, of which said tax base will benefit all residents in the City by better broadening the distribution of the burden of said taxes. 
This intent and purpose is accomplished by attracting those businesses and industries that pay greater than the average annual Okaloosa County wage to locate in the City. 
The Legislature of the State of Florida enacted Section 166.021(8) of the Florida Statutes to facilitate the growth and creation of business enterprises in the municipalities of the State of Florida. 
The City desires to participate in and promote economic development incentive programs that will assist in accomplishing the purposes of attracting targeted industries with value-added employment opportunities. 
It is the intent and purpose of this ordinance to provide the authority and mechanisms within the parameters of federal, state and local laws, to allow the expenditure of public funds for promotions and incentives to attract industries or businesses to locate within the City and through expansion of certain existing industries or businesses, particularly when such industries and businesses pay above average annual wage to locate or expand in the City.  
4.07.03 - Economic Development Ad Valorem Tax Exemption (EDATE). 
Subject to the provisions of this ordinance, certain new businesses or expansions of an existing business or industry due to relocation to the City or through expansion of existing facilities within the City may be granted an ad valorem property tax exemption of up to 100% of the increased value added to the tax roll for up to ten (10) years. 
To comply with statutory requirements, eligible applicants must meet the job creation threshold of 10 full-time (or full-time equivalent) jobs for a business that manufactures, processes, compounds, fabricates or produces for sale items of tangible personal property at a fixed location and which comprises an industrial or manufacturing plant; 25 full time (or full-time equivalent) jobs for other industries with a sales factor less than 0.50 for each year that the exemption is claimed; 50 full time (or full-time equivalent) jobs for an office use provided that such business or organization office first begins operation on a site clearly separate from any other commercial or industrial operation owned by the same business or organization; or any business or organization located in an enterprise zone or brownfield area that first begins operation on a site clearly separate from any other commercial or industrial operation owned by the same business or organization. 
The City Council, in its sole discretion, shall determine and set guidelines to insure continued consistency with statutory requirements and to integrate local input within the guidelines to achieve the desired results of offering this incentive. No precedent shall be implied or inferred by the granting of an exemption to a New Business or Expansion of an Existing Business.  
4.07.04 - Administration and Procedures. 
A supporting Policy & Procedures Manual to implement the exemptions and incentives provided for in this ordinance shall be developed upon adoption of this ordinance.  
4.07.05 - Performance Demonstration and Review. 
Following adoption of an ordinance granting an Economic Development Ad Valorem Tax Exemption or following execution of a grant of exemption agreement as required by this ordinance, the City may periodically conduct site visits and audits of the New Business or Expansion of an Existing Business to ensure that the business is satisfactorily performing under the ordinance or grant of exemption agreement and this ordinance. As a prerequisite of receiving an exemption or incentive from the City in year one and each year thereafter, the New Business or Expansion of an Existing Business shall demonstrate: 
(a)  That it has fully satisfied all terms and conditions contained in the agreement as described in this ordinance continuing through the subject funding period; 
(b)  That it has not been, nor is, in breach or default of the grant of exemption agreement or any other incentive agreement with the City pursuant to this ordinance; and, 
(c)  That it has created the number of eligible new jobs promised within the time frames set forth below: 
(1)  For any new construction or expansion of a building or facility to be used and occupied by the New Business or Expansion of an Existing Business, the New Business or Expansion of an Existing Business shall demonstrate that it has created the number of eligible new jobs promised no later than twelve (12) months from receiving the certificate of occupancy for its primary building or facility, or from the date of completing its multi-year expansion. 
(2)  For any existing building or facility, the New Business or Expansion of an Existing Business shall demonstrate that it has created the number of eligible new jobs promised no later than twelve (12) months from moving into its building or facility and commencing operations, or from the date of completing its multi-year expansion.  
4.07.06 - Cessation of Operations During Exemption Term. 
In the event the New Business or Expansion of an Existing Business ceases its operations, closes its business, moves out of the City, loses its status as a New Business or Expansion of an Existing Business at any time during the ordinance or agreement period, or is in breach or default of any ordinance or grant of exemption agreement with the City under this ordinance, then the New Business or Expansion of an Existing Business shall forfeit any and all funding/incentives which may be remaining under its agreement and any other incentive pursuant to this ordinance.  
4.07.07 - Incentives Non-Exclusive. 
The incentive in this ordinance is not exclusive and eligible businesses or industries may apply for as many incentives as they qualify for under other resolutions, ordinances or provisions of the Code. Further, the incentive in this ordinance does not preclude an industry or business from applying or qualifying in other federal, state or local programs. City Council, in its sole discretion, reserves the right to limit or restrict the number of applicants and the total number and dollar amount of all grants of exemption, deferrals and incentives under this ordinance which may be awarded in any given City fiscal year.  
4.07.08 - Referendum Election. 
The authority to grant economic development tax exemptions established by this ordinance was approved by a majority of the electors of the City of Fort Walton Beach voting in the referendum election on August 26, 2014.  
4.07.09 - Conflicting Provisions. 
Special Acts of the Florida Legislature applicable to the incorporated area of the City of Fort Walton Beach, City Ordinances and City Resolutions, or parts, thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby superseded by this ordinance to the extent of such conflict.  
4.08 - FIRE SERVICES ASSESSMENT AGAINST PROPERTY WITHIN THE CITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017 , adopted September 10, 2019, did not specify manner of inclusion in the Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Article 4.08. 
 
4.08.010 - Introduction. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assessed property means all parcels of land subject to the fire services assessment that receive a special benefit from the delivery of the fire services, programs or facilities. 
Assessment roll or fire services assessment roll means the special assessment roll approved by the City Council pursuant to this article, after a public hearing, to fund the fire services cost. 
Building means any structure, whether temporary or permanent, built for support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattel, or property of any kind, including mobile homes. This term shall include the use of land in which lot or spaces are offered for use, rent or lease for the placement of mobile homes, travel trailers, or the like for residential purposes. 
City means the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida. 
City Clerk means the City Clerk of the City Council, or such person's designee. 
City Council means the governing body of the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida. 
City Manager means the chief administrative officer of the City, designated by the City Council to be responsible for coordinating fire services assessments, or such person's designee. 
Fire services assessment means a special assessment lawfully imposed by the City Council against assessed property to fund all or any portion of the cost of the provision of fire services, facilities, or programs providing a special benefit to property as a consequence of possessing a logical relationship to the value, use, or characteristics of the assessed property. 
Fire services charge means collectively fire services assessments and fire services fees. 
Fire services cost means the amount determined by the City Council to be charged over a designated time period to fund all or any portion of the cost (as determined by generally accepted accounting practices) of the provision of fire services, facilities, or programs which provide a special benefit to assessed property, and may be fairly and reasonably charged to non-profit and government property for the fire services, facilities, and programs such property receives, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following components: 
(1)  The cost of physical construction, reconstruction or completion of any required facility or improvement; 
(2)  The costs incurred in any required acquisition or purchase; 
(3)  The cost of all labor, materials, machinery, and equipment; 
(4)  The cost of fuel, parts, supplies, maintenance, repairs, and utilities; 
(5)  The cost of computer services, data processing, and communications; 
(6)  The cost of all lands and interest therein, leases, property rights, easements, and franchises of any nature whatsoever; 
(7)  The cost of any indemnity or surety bonds and premiums for insurance; 
(8)  The cost of salaries, workers' compensation insurance, or any other employment benefits; 
(9)  The cost of uniforms, training, travel, and per diem; 
(10)  The cost of construction plans and specifications, surveys and estimates of costs; 
(11)  The cost of engineering, financial, legal, and other professional services; 
(12)  The costs of compliance with any contracts or agreements entered into by the City to provide fire services; 
(13)  All costs associated with the structure, implementation, collection, and enforcement of the fire services charges; 
(14)  All other costs and expenses necessary or incidental to the acquisition, provision, or construction of fire services, facilities, or programs, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any related financing authorized by the City Council by subsequent resolution; 
(15)  A reasonable amount for contingency and anticipated delinquencies and any uncollectible fire services charges; and 
(16)  Reimbursement to the City or any other person for any moneys advanced for any costs incurred by the City or such person in connection with any of the foregoing components of fire services cost. 
Fire services cost for assessed property means the subset of fire services cost fairly and reasonably attributable to property. 
Fire services cost for non-profit and government property means any subset of fire services cost fairly and reasonably attributable to those properties. 
Fire services fee rate resolution means the resolution described in Section 4.08.02(e) establishing the rate at which a fire services fee will be computed. 
Fiscal year means the period commencing October 1st of each year and continuing through the next succeeding September 30th, or such period as may be prescribed by law as the fiscal year for the City. 
Government property means property owned by the United States of America or any agency thereof, a sovereign state or nation, the state or any agency thereof, a county, school board, a special district or a municipal corporation. 
Nongovernment property means all property that is not government property. 
Ordinance means this Fire Services Assessment Ordinance. 
Owner means the person reflected as the owner of property on the tax roll or utility bill. 
Property Appraiser means the property appraiser of Okaloosa County. 
Tax Collector means the tax collector of the Okaloosa County. 
Tax roll means the real property ad valorem tax assessment roll maintained by the property appraiser for the purpose of the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes. 
Uniform Assessment Collection Act means F.S. §§ 197.3632 and 197.3635 or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of non-ad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
Utility means that utility owned and operated by the City, providing water and wastewater services, solid waste services, and stormwater services, or any combination of the foregoing, and billing customers on a monthly or periodic basis. 
Utility customer of record means the person or entity assuming responsibility for the payment for services of the utility. 
(b)  Interpretation. Unless the context indicates otherwise, words importing the singular number include the plural number, and vice versa; the terms "hereof," "hereby," "herein," "hereto," "hereunder" and similar terms refer to this chapter; and the term "hereafter" means after, and the term "heretofore" means before, the effective date of this chapter. Words of any gender include the correlative words of the other genders, unless the sense indicates otherwise. 
(c)  General Findings. It is hereby ascertained, determined, and declared that: 
(1)  Pursuant to Article VIII, Section 2(b), Florida Constitution, and F.S. §§ 166.021 and 166.041, the City Council has all powers of local self-government to perform City functions and to render City services in a manner not inconsistent with law, and such power may be exercised by the enactment of City ordinances. 
(2)  The City Council may exercise any governmental, corporate, or proprietary power for a municipal purpose except when expressly prohibited by law, and the City Council may legislate on any subject matter on which the Florida Legislature may act, except those subjects described in (a), (b), (c), and (d) of Section 166.021(3), F.S. The subject matter of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of Section 166.021(3), F.S., are not relevant to the imposition of assessments related to fire protection services, facilities or programs. 
(3)  The special benefits to property provide as a result of an assessment for fire protection services include but are not limited to: 
a.  Protecting the value and integrity of improvements, structures and land through the provision of fire protection services; 
b.  Protecting the life and safety of intended occupants in the use and enjoyment of property; 
c.  Lowering the cost of fire insurance by the presence of a professional and comprehensive fire protection services program within the City; and 
d.  Assured level of service to landowners and tenants. 
(4)  The annual assessments to be imposed pursuant to this ordinance are special assessments and may also constitute and be described as non-ad valorem assessments within the meaning and intent of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(5)  The purpose of this ordinance is to (1) provide procedures and standards for the imposition of City fire services assessments under the general home rule powers of the City to impose special assessments; (2) authorize a procedure for the funding of fire protection services, facilities, or programs providing special benefits to property within the City; and (3) legislatively determine the special benefit provided to assessed property from the City's fire protection services program. 
(6)  The fire services assessments to be imposed using the procedures provided in this chapter are imposed by the City Council, not the Property Appraiser or Tax Collector. The duties of the Property Appraiser and Tax Collector under the provisions of this ordinance and the Uniform Assessment Collection Act are ministerial. 
(Ord. No. 2017 , § Art. I(2—4), 9-10-19)  
4.08.020 - Annual Fire Services Assessments. 
(a)  General authority. 
(1)  The City Council is hereby authorized to impose a fire services assessment to fund all or any portion of the fire services cost for assessed property upon benefited nongovernment property at a rate of assessment based on the benefit accruing to such property from the City's provision of fire services, facilities, or programs. 
(2)  All fire services assessments shall be imposed each fiscal year in a subsequently adopted fire services fee rate resolution. Such fire services fee rate resolution shall determine the amount of the fire services assessment against assessed property pursuant to an apportionment methodology based upon a classification of property designed to provide a fair and reasonable apportionment of fire services cost for assessed property among properties on a basis reasonably related to the benefit provided by fire services, facilities, or programs funded with assessment proceeds. 
(3)  The fire services fee rate resolution shall also establish the method by which the fire services fee will be calculated for non-profit and government properties. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to require the imposition of assessments against government property. 
(b)  Proceedings. 
(1)  The proceedings for the imposition of an assessment shall include a public hearing noticed in the manner set forth herein, and the adoption at or anytime thereafter of an fire services fee rate resolution which shall (A) contain a brief and general description of the fire services costs, facilities or programs to be provided or made available, (B) describe the method or methods of apportioning the fire services cost among affected tax parcels, (C) describe the assessed properties, if any, to be exempted from the fire services fee rate resolution for legal or public policy purposes, (D) identify the rate or rates of assessment and approve and adopt the annual fire services assessment roll, consistent with the requirements of Section 4.08.02(c) hereof, and (E) determine the method of collecting the fire services fee rate resolution. 
(2)  So long as the development and articulation of any method of apportionment, rates of assessment, the assessment roll or methods of notice have been reasonably undertaken and otherwise promulgated to the public in accordance with the time periods and provisions hereof, the fire services fee rate resolution may be adopted at the same meeting of the City Council, or at any subsequent meeting of the City Council, immediately after adoption of this ordinance, or any amendment hereto. 
(c)  Assessment Roll. 
(1)  The City Manager shall prepare, or direct the preparation of, the fire services assessment roll, which shall contain the following: 
a.  A summary description of all assessed property by tax parcel conforming to the description contained on the tax roll. 
b.  The name of the owner of the assessed property. 
(2)  The extension or application of the rates of the proposed assessment to be imposed against each such tax parcel of assessed property. 
(3)  The assessment roll shall be retained by the City Manager and shall be open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the assessment roll be in printed form if the amount of the assessment for each tax parcel of property can be determined by use of the internet, a computer terminal available to the public or similar technology available to the public. 
(d)  Notice by Publication. At least twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing for the fire services fee rate resolution, the City shall notice the public hearing by publication in a newspaper generally circulated within the boundaries of the City. The notice shall provide: 
(1)  The date, time and place of the hearing; 
(2)  A general statement that the City Council will consider imposing a special assessment throughout the City and a general description of the fire protection services, facilities and programs to be provided; 
(3)  The proposed rate of assessment; 
(4)  Procedure for objecting provided for in Section 4.08.02(e) hereof; 
(5)  The method by which the fire services assessment will be collected; and 
(6)  A statement that the initial assessment roll is available for inspection at the office of the City Manager and all interested person may ascertain the amount to be assessed against a parcel of assessed property at City Hall. 
(e)  Annual Assessment Resolution. At the time named in such notice, or to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken by the City Council, the City Council shall receive any written comments or objections of interested persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the City Council, adopt the fire services assessment rate resolution which shall (A) establish the rate or rates of assessment to be imposed in the designated fiscal year; (B) approve and adopt the assessment roll, with such amendments and directions as it deems just and right; and (C) provide direction as to the method of collection. All parcels assessed shall derive a special benefit from the fire protection services, facilities, or programs to be provided or constructed and the assessment shall be fairly and reasonably apportioned between the properties that receive the special benefit. All objections to the annual assessment resolution shall be made in writing and filed with the City Manager at or before the time or adjourned time of such hearing. The annual fire services assessment resolution as confirmed shall constitute the final action necessary annually to impose or re-impose assessments hereunder. 
(f)  Effect of Annual Assessment Resolution. The fire services assessments for the initial fiscal year and each subsequent fiscal year shall be established upon adoption and confirmation of the annual fire services assessment rate resolution. The adoption and confirmation of the annual assessment resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented (including, but not limited to, the method of apportionment and assessment, the rate or rates of assessment, the assessment roll, and the levy and lien of the assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within twenty (20) days from the date of the City Council action adopting and confirming on the annual assessment resolution. The initial assessment roll, as approved by the annual assessment resolution, shall be delivered for collection using the traditional direct billing method of collection described in Section 4.08.030(a) hereof to collect the assessments, or such other method as the City Council by resolution shall designate. 
(g)  Adoption of Subsequent Annual Assessment Resolutions. The City Council may adopt subsequent annual assessment resolutions as a part of and during its budget adoption process for each fiscal year following the initial fiscal year for which an assessment is imposed hereunder. The annual fire services assessment resolution shall approve the assessment roll for the upcoming fiscal year. The assessment roll may be prepared in accordance with the methods of apportionment set forth in the prior assessment resolution but may include modifications as a matter of policy as to what, if any, portion or portions of the City's budget is paid for from legally available funds other than assessment revenues. Failure to adopt an annual assessment resolution during the budget adoption process may be cured at any time. 
(h)  Lien of Fire Service Assessments. Upon the adoption of the assessment roll, all assessments shall constitute a lien against such property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, until paid such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims. The lien for an assessment shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the City Council of the annual assessment resolution. The lien for an assessment collected under the Uniform Assessment Collection Method shall attach to the property included on the assessment roll as of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the tax roll. The lien for an assessment collected under the traditional method of collection provided in Section 4.08.030(a) hereof shall be deemed perfected upon adoption and confirmation by the City Council of the annual assessment resolution, after a public hearing, and shall attach to the property on such date of each such annual assessment resolution. 
(i)  Revisions to Fire Services Cost Assessments. If any fire services assessment made under the provisions of this ordinance is either in whole or in part annulled, vacated, or set aside by the judgment of any court, or if the City Council is satisfied that any such assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the City Council has omitted any property on the assessment roll which property should have been so included, the City Council may take all necessary steps to impose a new assessment against any property benefited by the fire service assessed costs, following as nearly as may be practicable, the provisions of this ordinance and in case such second assessment is annulled, vacated, or set aside, the City Council may obtain and impose other assessments until a valid assessment is imposed. 
(j)  Procedural Irregularities. Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any assessment under the provisions of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such assessment was duly levied, that the assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings adequate to such assessment were duly had, taken, and performed as required by this ordinance; and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any party objecting to an assessment imposed pursuant to this ordinance must file an objection with a court of competent jurisdiction within the time periods prescribed herein. 
(k)  Correction of Errors and Omissions. 
(1)  No act of error or omission on the part of the Property Appraiser, Tax Collector, City Manager, City Council, or their agents, employees, or deputies shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment of an assessment imposed by the City Council under the provision of this ordinance. 
(2)  When it shall appear that any assessment should have been imposed under this ordinance against a parcel of property specially benefited by the provision of fire protection services, facilities, or programs, but that such property was omitted from the assessment roll, the City Council may, upon provision of notice to the owner by first class mail, impose the applicable assessment for the fiscal year in which such error is discovered, in addition to the applicable assessment due for the prior two (2) fiscal years. 
(3)  Such total assessment shall become delinquent if not fully paid upon the expiration of sixty (60) days from the date of the adoption of said resolution. The assessment so imposed shall constitute a lien against such property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved and may be collected as provided in Section 4.08.030 hereof. 
(4)  The City Manager shall have the authority at any time, upon his own initiative or in response to a timely filed petition from the owner of any property subject to an assessment, based upon presentation of competent and substantial evidence, to correct any error in annually applying the assessment apportionment method to any particular parcel of property not otherwise requiring the provision of mailed notice pursuant to this ordinance or the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Additionally, because the size and nature of the tax roll may yield anomalies, the City Manager is authorized to apply sound public administration judgment and delete or remove individual tax parcels from the assessment roll that due to specific circumstances do not receive a special benefit, are not developable (e.g. subsurface rights, submerged, slivers, right-of-way, common elements) or are reasonably determined to be inappropriate, infeasible or impracticable to assess, and do not merit the expenditure of public funds and resources to impose or collect such assessments. Any such corrections shall be considered valid ab initio and shall in no way affect the enforcement of the assessment imposed under the provisions of this ordinance. All requests from affected property owners for any such changes, modifications or corrections shall be referred to, and processed by, the City Manager and not the Property Appraiser or Tax Collector. 
(5)  After the assessment roll has been delivered to the Tax Collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, any changes, modifications, or corrections thereto shall be made in accordance with the procedures applicable to correcting errors and insolvencies on the tax roll upon timely written request and direction of the City Manager. 
(l)  Interim Assessments. 
(1)  An interim fire services assessment may be imposed against all property for which a certificate of occupancy is issued after adoption and confirmation of the fire services fee rate resolution. The amount of the interim assessment shall be calculated upon a monthly rate, which shall be one-twelfth of the annual rate for such property computed in accordance with the fire services fee rate resolution for the fiscal year in which the certificate of occupancy is issued. Such monthly rate shall be imposed for each full calendar month remaining in the fiscal year. In addition to the monthly rate, the interim assessment shall also include an estimate of the subsequent year's assessment. If the Council determines to impose an interim assessment, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until full payment of the interim assessment is received by the City. Issuance of the certificate of occupancy by mistake or inadvertence, and without the payment in full of the interim assessment, shall not relieve the owner of such property of the obligation of full payment. For the purpose of this provision, such interim assessment shall be deemed due and payable on the date the certificate of occupancy was issued and shall constitute a lien against such property as of that date. Said lien shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all State, county, district or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved. 
(2)  Exclusive of property for which an interim assessment was paid pursuant to subsection (a) hereof, an interim assessment may also be imposed against any property which for any reason was omitted from the fire service assessment roll or was not listed on the tax roll as an individual tax parcel as of the effective date of the assessment roll approved by the annual assessment resolution for any upcoming fiscal year. For the purpose of this provision, such interim assessment shall be deemed due and payable and shall constitute a lien against such property for which it is imposed. Said lien shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all State, county, district or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved. 
(m)  Administrative Hardship Deferment. 
(1)  Annually upon application of the owner of a tax parcel subject to the assessments contemplated herein, the City Manager may grant a hardship deferment, in which case the tax parcel in question will receive a deferral. The owner shall be required to execute a binding agreement encumbering the tax parcel and otherwise assure the City that payment in full of the assessment and any recording cost, plus interest at an estimated cost of City funds compounded annually, shall be due over a period of time or upon sale or transfer of the property. Such agreement or a memorandum thereof shall be recorded in the Official Records of Okaloosa County, Florida. Dependent upon the volume or demand for such deferment, the City Council may determine to release such deferments in the future. However, all funding for such hardship deferment, or the consequences of the deferment or any future release, shall be from legally available funds other than direct proceeds of other assessments. The Assessment Coordinator is authorized to use sound public administration judgment in applying this authority and considering such applications. 
(2)  This provision serves to promote a public purpose and the general welfare, morals and contentment of the inhabitants and residents of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2017 , § Art. II(5—17), 9-10-19)  
4.08.030 - Collection of Fire Service Assessments. 
(a)  Collection. Unless otherwise directed by the City Council, the assessment shall be collected pursuant to the utility billing method provided in subsection (b) hereof. Any hearing or notice required by this ordinance may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by this ordinance or the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(b)  Collection of Fire Services Charges on the Utility Bill. 
(1)  The fire services charge may be billed to and collected on a monthly basis along with the City's Utility in the regular utility billing cycle, appearing as a separate line item. 
(2)  The utility customer of record and the owner of such property subject to a fire services charge are responsible for payment of the fire services charge as the charge is either a fire services fee on non-profit or government property which is in exchange for services and facilities furnished to such property to manage and control the fire services burden generated by the use and development of such property, or alternatively, the charge is a fire services assessment on nongovernment property for which the property receives a benefit from the provision of fire services, facilities and programs by the City. 
(3)  Bills for the fire services charge shall be payable at the same time, in the same manner, and subject to the same penalties as have been heretofore established for other utility fees charged and administered by the City. The owner and utility customer of record shall be notified of any deficiency in the payment of the fire services charge in the same manner as other delinquent utility bills. The failure to pay such a fire services charge shall subject the property to the discontinuance of other utility services and all other penalties and charges available under law relative to the discontinuance of such utility services. The administrative appeal and hearing procedure applicable to the discontinuance of other utility services in the City shall be applicable to the discontinuance of such services for any delinquencies resulting under this article. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the City may make alternative collection arrangements with property owners or tenants or both for the payment of the fire services charge. 
(c)  Alternative Method of Collection of Fire Assessments. In lieu of utilizing the utility bill, the City Council may elect to collect fire services assessments by the uniform assessment collection act or any other method which is authorized by law or under the alternative collection method provided by this section. 
(1)  The City shall provide fire assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
a.  A brief explanation of the fire services assessment; 
b.  A description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the fire services assessment; 
c.  The number of units contained within the parcel; 
d.  The total amount of the fire services assessment imposed against the parcel for the appropriate period; 
e.  The location at which payment will be accepted; 
f.  The date on which the fire services assessment is due; and 
g.  A statement that the fire services assessment constitutes a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. 
(2)  A general notice of the lien resulting from imposition of the fire services assessment shall be recorded in the official records of Okaloosa County. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require that individual liens or releases be filed in the official records. 
(3)  The City shall have the right to collect all delinquent fire services assessments in the manner provided for the delinquent utility bills or in any manner provided by law for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property or appoint or retain an agent to institute such foreclosure and collection proceedings. 
(4)  A fire services assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within sixty (60) days from the date any installment is due. The City or its agent shall notify any property owner who is delinquent in payment of the fire services assessment within ninety (90) days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state in effect that the City or its agent will either: 
a.  Initiate a foreclosure action or suit in equity and cause the foreclosure of such property subject to a delinquent fire services assessment in a method now or hereafter provided by law for foreclosure of mortgages on real property; or 
b.  Cause an amount equivalent to the delinquent fire services assessment, not previously subject to collection using the uniform method under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, to be collected on the tax bill for a subsequent year. 
(5)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any foreclosure action as described in this article shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the City may be the purchaser to the same extent as any person. The City or its agent may join in one (1) foreclosure action for the collection of fire services assessments against any or all property assessed in accordance with the provisions of this article. All delinquent owners whose property is foreclosed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the City and its agents, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent fire services assessments and any other costs incurred by the City as a result of such delinquent fire services assessments and the costs shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(6)  In lieu of foreclosure, any delinquent fire services assessment and the costs, fees and expenses attributable thereto, may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided however, that (i) notice is provided to the owner in the manner required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and this article, and (ii) any existing lien of record on the affected parcel for the delinquent fire services assessment is supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of the assessment roll, as applicable, to the tax collector. 
(7)  Notwithstanding the City's use of an alternative method of collection, the City Manager shall have the same power and authority to correct errors and omissions as provided to them or other City officials in Section 4.08.020(k). 
(8)  Any City Council action required in the collection of fire services assessments may be by resolution. 
(d)  Fire Services Fee on Non-Profits and Government Property. Legislative declarations as to fire services fee on government property. It is hereby ascertained and declared that the fire services fee as authorized in this article is reasonably related to the cost of providing fire services, facilities and programs to non-profits and government property. The fire services fee is not a special assessment; it is a fee for services available and rendered to property owned and operated by non-profit and government owners. 
(e)  Fire Services Assessments on Nongovernment Property. Legislative declarations as to the existence of special benefit. It is further hereby ascertained and declared that the fire services, facilities, and programs provide a special benefit to nongovernment property that is improved by the existence or construction of a building based upon the following legislative determinations: 
(1)  Fire services possess a logical relationship to the use and enjoyment of improved property by: 
a.  Protecting the value of the improvements and structures through the provision of available fire services; 
b.  Protecting the life and safety of intended occupants in the use and enjoyment of improvements and structures within improved parcels; 
c.  Lowering the cost of fire insurance by the presence of a professional and comprehensive fire services program within the City; and 
d.  Containing the spread of fire incidents occurring on vacant property with the potential to spread and endanger the structures and occupants of improved property. 
(2)  The fire services of the City under its existing fire services program enhances and strengthens the relationship of such services to the use and enjoyment of buildings within improved parcels of property within the areas served by the City. 
(3)  Within the areas served by the City, the fire services of the City under its existing fire services program enhance the value of business and commercial property that is improved by the existence or construction of a building, which enhanced value can be anticipated to be reflected in the rental charge or value of such business or commercial property. 
(Ord. No. 2017 , § Art. III(18—20), 9-10-19)  
4.08.040 - General Provisions. 
(a)  Applicability. This ordinance and the City's authority to impose assessments pursuant hereto shall be applicable throughout the City. 
(b)  Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are severable; and if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or provision is held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby. 
(c)  Alternative Method. This ordinance shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized hereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing or which may hereafter come into existence. This ordinance, being necessary for the welfare of the inhabitants of the City, shall be liberally construed to affect the purposes hereof. 
(d)  Effective Date. This ordinance shall be in force and take effect immediately upon adoption by the City Council on second reading and signature by the Mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2017 , § Art. IV(23—26), 9-10-19) 
CHAPTER 4 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
2005 Code Section 	1992 Code Section 	State Law References/Other Historical Notes 
4.01.01 	2-268 	Code 1985, § 242.01; Ord. 739 (3-23-82); Ord. 1790 (1-27-09) 
4.01.02 	2-266 	Code 1985, § 238.01; Ord. 1114 (10-23-90); Ord. 1454 (9-11-01); Ord. 1670 (11-8-05); Ord. 1804 (8-25-09) 
4.01.021 	2-266 	Code 1985, § 238.01; Ord. 1114 (10-23-90); Ord. 1454 (9-11-01); Ord. 1670 (11-8-05); Ord. 1804 (8-25-09) 
4.01.022 		Code 1985, § 238.01; Ord. 1114 (10-23-90); Ord. 1454 (9-11-01); Ord. 1670 (11-8-05); Ord. 1804 (8-25-09) 
4.01.023 		Code 1985, § 238.01; Ord. 1114 (10-23-90); Ord. 1454 (9-11-01); Ord. 1670 (11-8-05); Ord. 1804 (8-25-09) 
4.01.024 		Code 1985, § 238.01; Ord. 1114 (10-23-90); Ord. 1454 (9-11-01); Ord. 1670 (11-8-05); Ord. 1804 (8-25-09), Repeal Ord. 1838 (10-12-10) 
4.01.025 		Code 1985, § 238.01; Ord. 1114 (10-23-90); Ord. 1454 (9-11-01); Ord. 1670 (11-8-05); Ord. 1804 (8-25-09), Ord. 1804 (8-25-09), 
4.01.03 	2-267 	Code 1985, § 238.02; Ord. 1226 (6-22-93), Ord. 1647 (6-30-05) 
4.01.04 		Ord. 1805 (8-25-09) 
4.01.24 		Repealed: Ord.1838 (10-12-10) 
4.02.01 	2-281 	Ord. 1120, § 2 (5-12-92); Ord. 1775, § III (9-23-08); Ord. 1810 (9-8-09) 
4.02.02 	2-281 	Ord. 1120, § 4 (5-12-92); Ord. 1775, § III (9-23-08); Ord. 1810 (9-8-09) 
4.02.03 	2-282 	Ord. 1120, § 4 (5-12-92); Ord. 1775, § III (9-23-08) 
4.02.04 	2-283 	Ord. 1120, § 2 (5-12-92); Ord. 1775, § III (9-23-08) 
4.02.05 	2-284, 2-285 	Ord. 1120, § 2 (5-12-92) 
4.03.01 	36-51, et seq.; 36-81, et seq., 36-251, et seq. 	Repealed: Ord. 1670 (11-8-05) 
4.04.01 	2-291 	Ord. 1399, § 6 (12-28-99) 
4.04.02 	2-292(a) 	Ord. 1399, § 3 (12-28-99); Ord. 1730, § 1, 5-29-07) 
4.04.03 	2-292(b) 	Ord. 1399, § 3 (12-28-99) 
4.04.04 	2-292(c) 	Ord. 1399, § 3 (12-28-99) 
4.04.05 	2-293 	Ord. 1399, § 4 (12-28-99) 
4.04.06 	2-294 	Ord. 1399, § 5 (12-28-99) 
4.04.07 	2-295 	Ord. 1399, § 6 (12-28-99) 
4.05.01 	22-27 	Code 1985, § 890.01; Ord. 900 (9-9-86) 
4.05.02 	22-28 	Code 1985, § 890.02; Ord. 900 (9-9-86); Ord. 1393 (3-14-00); Ord. 1773, § II (9-23-08) 
4.05.03 	22-29 	Code 1985, § 890.03; Ord. 900 (9-9-86) 
4.05.04 	22-30 	Code 1985, § 890.04; Ord. 900 (9-9-86) 
4.05.05 	22-31 	Code 1985, § 890.05; Ord. 900 (9-9-86) 
4.05.06 	22-32 	Code 1985, § 890.06; Ord. 900 (9-9-86) 
4.05.07 	22-33 	Code 1985, § 890.07; Ord. 900 (9-9-86) 
4.05.08 	22-34 	Code 1985, § 890.08; Ord. 900 (9-9-86) 
4.06.01 	22-57 	§ 185.08 - .10, F.S.; Code 1985, § 894.01 
4.06.02 	22-58 	§ 175.101, .121, et seq., F.S. 
4.06.03 	22-59 	Code 1985, § 894.02 
4.06.04 	22-56, 22-60 	Code 1985, § 894.03; Code 1985, § 894.99 
4.07 		Ord. 1905 (10-14-14) 
  
CHAPTER 5 - HEALTH & SANITATION  
5.01 - VIOLATIONS 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this title are punishable as provided in chapter 1.05.  
5.02 - ANIMAL CONTROL 
 
5.02.01 - Definitions. 
Animal: Shall be construed to include every living dumb creature. 
Custodian: Any person or agent designated by the owner of an animal to provide care, shelter, protection, refuge or food and otherwise control the animal's actions. 
Direct control: The immediate, continuous physical control of a dog or cat by means of a leash or other tether of sufficient strength to restrain the animal. Direct control shall not include verbal or aural control. 
Farm animal: means all ungulates; including cattle, swine, horses, mules, goats and sheep; and poultry, ostriches and similar species. 
Household pet: means an animal including, but not limited to a dog, bird, domesticated cat, rodent (such as a gerbil, guinea pig, hamster, etc.), ferret, rabbit, non-venomous reptile, and non-venomous amphibian, that is kept as subordinate to residential use for the purpose of providing human companionship. The following animals are not considered household pets: wild animals as defined by the State of Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, and hoofed animals of any kind, except purebred miniature potbellied pigs, also known as Sus scrofa bittatus. The Sus scrofa bittatus are considered household pets. 
Owner: Any natural person, firm, association or corporation who owns, keeps, transports, harbors or controls an animal, including any custodian of an animal. This definition does not include the City.  
5.02.02 - Prohibition. 
No person shall keep or permit to run at large in the city any farm animal.  
5.02.03 - Pets. 
Household pets shall be kept in compliance with all applicable provisions of this code, the Okaloosa County Animal Control Code and state law.  
5.02.04 - Conditions of Animal Presence in City Recreational Parks and Facilities. 
(a)  No owner shall permit an animal to run at large at any city recreational facility. 
(b)  No animal shall be permitted to destroy or damage public real or personal property, or interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the parks. 
(c)  The owner of an animal shall have direct control at all times an animal is in a Community or Special Use Community park or near a recreational and cultural center. 
(d)  Animals, other than dogs used to aid the blind are not permitted inside any recreational or cultural center. 
(e)  The owner or custodian of an animal shall immediately remove and dispose of the animal's waste upon any public or private property when the owner or custodian of the animal could reasonably be expected to be aware of the waste or has received notice of the existence of the waste. 
(f)  No owner or custodian shall leave an animal closed in or confined to a vehicle at a park, recreational, or cultural center unless the animal is confined in a cage or container or temporarily securely tethered by a device that will not permit the animal to fall or jump from the vehicle, and that provides adequate air for its consumption. 
(g)  No person shall conduct, sponsor or participate in a performing animal exhibition, display, circus or rodeo in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering. All equipment on performing animals shall fit properly and be in good working condition.  
5.03 - LITTER CONTROL 
 
5.03.01 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cover: Any device, equipment, container, close-fitting tarpaulin, chain, rope, wire or line used on vehicles to prevent any part of a vehicle load to shift, blow, leak, fall or escape in any manner from the vehicle. 
Enforcement agency: The police department, the sanitation and licensing inspector and their agents. 
Litter: Refuse and rubbish, including, but not limited to, paper, bottles, cans, glass, crockery, scrap metals, plastic, rubber, yard trash, tar paper, lumber, masonry, concrete, drywall, packaging and crating materials, tree and shrub trimmings, leaves and disposable packages and containers. 
Salvaging: The controlled removal of valuable or useful material from solid waste for utilization. 
Storage: The interim containment of litter in an approved manner, such as by use of roll-off containers, wire fencing, wood fencing or other controlled measures, after generation and prior to proper and final disposal. 
Unauthorized accumulation: The accumulation of litter on residential or commercial properties in violation of any of the provisions of this division. This shall not include building materials used in constructing or repairing a building or stored for future construction or repairs. 
Written corrective notice: A written statement issued to the violator of any of the provisions of this division, or an agent, identifying and specifying the violation, the date and time of issuance, the corrective measures to be taken and the date and time by which the correction is to be completed.  
5.03.02 - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in chapter 1.05. Imposition of the penalty provided in this section shall not prohibit a court from imposing civil penalties for violations of any of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, picking up litter or performing other labor commensurate with the offense committed.  
5.03.03 - Enforcement Authority. 
The police department and the sanitation and licensing inspector shall enforce this division. Police officers and the sanitation and licensing inspector are hereby authorized to issue uniform traffic citations and court summonses, to make arrests and to issue written corrective notices to persons violating any of the provisions of this division.  
5.03.04 - Arrest; Prosecution. 
Prosecution for a violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be initiated by the enforcement agency officer who witnesses such offense or has sufficient probable cause to believe that such offense has been committed, or who discovers an article of litter bearing the name or address of a person on the property of another or on any public property. It shall be presumed that any article of litter so discovered is the property of such person whose name or address appears thereon and that such person placed or caused to be placed such article of litter on the property of another or public property. This presumption is based on the tenet that all generators of such litter are responsible for such litter until such time as it has been properly disposed of.  
5.03.05 - Corrective Notice Alternative. 
In lieu of arrest, a corrective written notice may be issued to a violator of any of the provisions of this division to correct the offense. The notice shall state the date and time it is issued, the nature of the offense committed, the corrective measures to be taken and the date and time by which such corrections are to be made. All such notices issued shall be maintained by the issuing authority for public inspection during normal office hours. Notices mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the violator's last known place of residence, shall be deemed personal service upon the person for the purposes of this division.  
5.03.06 - Remedy for Noncompliance with Corrective Notice. 
If a person served with a written corrective notice fails to comply with the notice within the period stipulated, and in those cases in which no notice can be served because the location of the owner or agent of the property in question is unknown, the council may cause the property to be cleaned up and the nuisance abated. The cost for such cleanup shall be billed and mailed via certified mail to the last known address of such owner or agent. If such bill is not paid within thirty (30) days from the mailing date, or if, because the location of the owner or agent is unknown and no bill can be sent, the council shall execute a lien on the property for the amount expended on the cleanup until the bill is satisfied.  
5.03.07 - Disposal of Litter Required. 
Whoever generates litter in the city shall manage, store, handle, transport and dispose of it in accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
5.03.08 - Materials, Objects Blown from Vehicles. 
An owner, lessee or driver of a vehicle, from which any materials or objects have fallen, blown, leaked, sifted or otherwise escaped, shall immediately cause the materials or objects on public property or private property to be cleaned up and shall pay any costs.  
5.03.09 - Litter at Commercial, Public Establishments. 
The owners and operators of commercial establishments shall store their litter in a controlled manner so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and litter in and about their establishments, to include but not be limited to the following requirements: 
(a)  The number and size of containers necessary for each commercial establishment shall be as required to control all waste generated on the premises. 
(b)  Spillage and overflow around containers shall immediately be cleaned up by the generator thereof as it occurs. 
(c)  All loading and unloading areas at commercial establishments shall be provided, by the generator, with litter receptacles to store loose debris, paper, cardboard, packaging materials and similar materials. 
(d)  Every person owning or operating a public establishment or public place shall have receptacles available that are adequate to contain litter generated from such establishment. 
(e)  Every person in possession, in charge of or in control of any place, public or private, where litter is accumulated or generated, shall have available, and at all times shall keep such litter in, adequate and suitable receptacles and/or containers capable of holding such materials until proper final disposal is accomplished. 
(f)  No person shall keep any unauthorized accumulation of litter on any property, vacant or occupied, any premises, a public street, alley or other public place or a private place.  
5.03.10 - Construction Debris Control, Removal. 
All construction and demolition contractors, owners and agents shall provide onsite control measures for the storage of loose debris, paper, tar paper, packaging and crating materials and other litter to prevent wind-driven scattering of such materials if the materials are otherwise not properly disposed of on a daily basis. All litter tarpaper, packaging and crating materials and similar materials shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the completion of the construction or demolition.  
5.03.11 - Responsibility for Surrounding Areas. 
Each operator, owner, lessee or agent of any business, industry or institution, private or public, profit or nonprofit, shall keep the adjacent and surrounding areas clean of wind-driven litter generated from such business, industry or institution. These areas include public property, roads, rights-of-way, grounds, parking lots, loading and unloading areas and vacant lots owned or leased by such business, industry or institution.  
5.03.12 - Unauthorized Disposal. 
No private property owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent shall grant permission to any person to dispose of litter on the property in any manner other than in permitted disposal sites.  
5.04 - DECLARATION OF NUISANCES; DUTIES 
 
5.04.01 - Nuisance Defined. 
Nuisance shall mean an unlawful act, or omission of the performance of a duty, or the suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or to exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either: 
(a)  Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; or 
(b)  Offends decency; or 
(c)  Is offensive to the senses; or 
(d)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage; or 
(e)  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 
(f)  Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others; or 
(g)  Is declared by ordinance to be a nuisance.  
5.04.02 - Nuisance Conditions. 
A public nuisance includes, but is not limited to, the following actions or omissions: 
(1)  Failure to maintain property in accordance with the standards set forth in this section or Code in general. 
(2)  Accumulation or open storage of trash, debris, litter, garbage, bottles, paper, cans, rags, dead plants or trees, dead or decayed animal matter, fruit, vegetables, offal, tools, equipment, lawn and garden products, buckets, containers, appliances, household furniture, bricks, concrete, scrap lumber or any other refuse of any nature. 
(3)  Any condition that provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes, other vermin or pests except on pristine lots and in preserve areas. 
(4)  Any building or structure which does not meet the requirements of the Code and is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such a structurally unsafe or unsanitary condition that is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a fire hazard to the vicinity in which it is located. 
(5)  All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises. 
(6)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(7)  The pollution of any public well, cistern, stream, lake, canal, or body of water by sewage, dead animals, industrial wastes or other noxious substances; 
(8)  Any condition constituting a fire hazard. 
(9)  Any worn-out, scrapped, partially dismantled, non-operative, unusable or discarded materials or objects, such as motor vehicles or parts thereof, building materials, machinery, boats or part thereof, trailers, or other such items. 
(10)  The storage of any vehicle or boat, or parts thereof, without a valid current license plate or other registration certificate, showing said vehicle or part thereof to be titled in the name of the owner or occupier of the property upon which said vehicle or part thereof is located. Failure to have such license or other registration certificate specifically attached to the vehicle or part thereof shall be prima facie evidence that said property is worn-out, scrapped, non-operative, unusable or discarded, as provided in this chapter. 
(11)  Except as otherwise authorized in the Stormwater Management Regulations, any wholly or partially manmade pool, pond, other body of water, depression or excavation, or any other condition on the premises wherein water may accumulate and stand in such a manner as to make possible the propagation or production of disease vectors, biting insects, pests or the like. 
(12)  Any unsafe, unsanitary or unsightly condition that is not included above and that endangers the public health, welfare or safety. 
(13)  A sanitary nuisance is the commission of any act, by an individual, organization or corporation, or the keeping, maintaining, propagation, existence or permitting of anything, by an individual, organization or corporation, by which the health or life of an individual may be threatened or impaired, or by or through which, directly or indirectly, disease may be caused.  
5.04.03 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this title, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
Developed: Any lot, tract, or parcel which currently has a structure or structures upon said property or an approved parking lot which meets the requirements of this Code. 
Hazardous trees: Any tree which is diseased or dying and which if it falls could fall on adjacent property or the right-of-way. 
Pristine: A lot, tract or parcel or a portion of a lot, tract or parcel, which consists primarily of native plant species that, has not been cleared. 
Preserve areas: Vegetative areas required to be preserved by law. 
Public right-of-way: The paved and unpaved area of a highway, roadway, street or alley, or other such strip of land, reserved for public use, whether established by prescription, easement, dedication, gift, purchase, eminent domain or any other legal means. 
Property owner: The owner of any lot, tract, or parcel as listed in the current Okaloosa County tax records. 
Trash/debris/litter: Items, which are not usable in their present condition as intended by the manufacturer by reason of being broken, discarded, not maintained or abandoned. Items include, but are not limited to: mechanical equipment, automobiles, boats, trailers, trucks, or any parts thereof, household furnishings, toys, garbage, bottles, paper, cans, rags, dead or decayed animal matter, fruit, vegetables, offal, bricks, concrete, scrap lumber or other building debris or any other refuse of any nature. 
Undeveloped: Any lot, tract, or parcel which does not currently have any structure or a parking lot placed upon said property which is not a city parking lot, an approved public parking lot or an approved parking lot required to serve a specific building/use. Properties having remnants of past development (e.g., improved parking areas, driveways, and floor slab) but which have been substantially cleared shall be considered to be undeveloped property. 
Unwholesome: Offensive to the senses, unsound in quality or condition, diseased, or decayed. 
Weeds: Plants that by reason of abandonment, lack of care or lack of maintenance choke out growth or other plant material in the area. Dead, dying or unattended plant life, named or unnamed, which is abandoned or overgrown to a height in excess of ten inches in height shall, for the purpose of this code, be defined as a weed unless it is pristine. 
(Ord. No. 1967 , § 3, 1-24-17)  
5.04.04 - Sanitary Nuisances Prohibited. 
No owner, lessee, operator, tenant or agent shall maintain premises, private or open to the public, upon which litter is permitted, caused, allowed or existing in any manner as to be a sanitary nuisance.  
5.04.05 - Property Nuisances Prohibited. 
No person shall cause, permit, allow or suffer any of the conditions described in this section to occur or exist upon any lot, tract or parcel of land, improved or unimproved, or in any building thereon, in the City, to an extent and in a manner that such lot, tract or parcel of land or building is or may reasonably become infested with or inhabited by rodents, vermin, reptiles or wild animals, or may furnish a breeding place for mosquitoes, vermin or reptiles, and/or may threaten or endanger the public health, safety or welfare. Such conditions are hereby declared to be public nuisances and may be abated as such.  
5.04.06 - Duty of Property Owner. 
It shall be the duty of the owners, lessees or other persons in control of property within the City to maintain their lot, tract or parcel and the abutting right-of-way but not including that area which is paved as roadway consistent with the standards set out in this title.  
5.04.07 - Duties for Developed, Undeveloped Property. 
The owner, lessee or person in charge or control of the property, developed or undeveloped, within the City shall cut down and remove all weeds, grass and undergrowth on said property when said weeds, grass, or undergrowth exceeds ten inches in height for developed properties and eighteen (18) inches in height for undeveloped properties. Said vegetative material growing in the abutting right of way shall not exceed ten (10) inches in height for both developed and undeveloped properties.  
5.04.08 - Duties for Pristine Property. 
For pristine undeveloped lots, tracts, and parcels or pristine portions of developed lots, tracts, and parcels, the owner of said property shall not be required to cut the vegetation which is primarily native plant species. In the abutting right-of-way of the pristine lot, the weeds, grass and undergrowth shall not exceed ten inches in height. The entire property and abutting right-of-way shall be kept free from any trash, debris and litter.  
5.04.09 - Duties for Preserve Areas. 
In preserve areas all maintenance requirements shall be determined by the department of environmental protection, except that the entire property shall be kept free of trash, debris and litter.  
5.04.10 - Landscape Materials. 
Landscape materials shall be maintained reasonably free of weeds and foreign matter and shall be kept in reasonably healthy conditions at all times. All dead material shall be removed. Hazardous trees that potentially may fall on adjacent properties or rights of way shall be removed.  
5.04.11 - Areas to be Free of Trash & Debris. 
The property and right-of-way shall be kept free of trash, debris and litter. Sidewalks shall be kept free of trash, debris, or litter. Bushes, trees and other vegetative matter shall not obstruct the public sidewalk from the sidewalk surface to a height of eight feet. Irrigation systems shall not overspray the public sidewalk.  
5.04.12 - Draining, Re-grading, Filling Required. 
Any lot, tract or parcel, including swimming pools thereon, which shall be unwholesome or unsanitary, have stagnant water standing thereon, or be in such other condition as to be susceptible to producing disease shall be drained, re-graded or filled by the owner in a manner approved by the city.  
5.04.13 - Clay Pits, Caves, Depressions. 
The owner, lessor or occupant of any real property in the City wherein there exists any clay pit, cave or other depression, so located and of such depth that a child might conceivably be drowned therein when such depression is filled with rainwater or other liquid, shall enclose the depression with a fence of a height of six feet or more, with a vertical mesh spacing not to exceed two inches. The enclosure shall be of such construction as not to be penetrable without the aid of tools or another mechanical device. The existence of any such depression not so protected is hereby declared to be a dangerous and attractive nuisance.  
5.04.14 - Drug Nuisance. 
Drug nuisance shall mean any place or premises within the City which has been used on more than two (2) occasions as the site of the unlawful sale or delivery of controlled substances as defined in chapter 893, F.S.  
5.04.15 - Violations Regarding Private Wells, Excavations. 
A violation of any of the provisions of chapter 10.60 of the Code shall be deemed to be a nuisance, and the City Manager is hereby authorized to take such action as is necessary to abate such nuisance or to prevent it.  
5.05 - PENALTY, ABATEMENT, CORRECTION OF NUISANCES 
 
5.05.01 - Cumulative Interpretation. 
The provisions of this title are to be cumulative to any other provisions of this Code. Further, the mere fact that a property condition is lawful under any other law or ordinance does not authorize any condition declared to be a public nuisance by this chapter, and the mere fact that a property condition does not constitute a public nuisance under this chapter does not authorize a condition which violates any other law or ordinance. The equitable remedies provided for in these sections shall be in addition to the penalty provided in Chapter 1.05.  
5.05.02 - Notice to Abate Nuisances. 
Whenever the City Manager, the Building Official or any other authorized City agent or body becomes aware of or finds that any nuisance condition exist, it shall be the duty of the City Manager or designee to immediately give written notice to the owner, custodian, agent, trustee or occupant of the property, by certified mail or by personal service, directing such person to remove, terminate and abate such public nuisance within twenty (20) days of the mailing, delivery or service of such written notice. If any appeal is to be made to the Council, it shall be made within twenty (20) days, as set forth in Appeals, (5.05.04) below. The written notice shall include a sufficient description to identify the property upon which the public nuisance exists, a description of the public nuisance to be terminated and a statement that if the custodian, agent, trustee or occupant shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter, that an appeal before the Council may be made, that the total cost of any such nuisance termination, if made by the City, including administrative costs, shall be a special tax and lien on the property, and that any such person is subject to prosecution for violating this chapter. The mailing of such notice shall be sufficient proof thereof, and the delivery or service of the notice shall be equivalent to mailing. If the mailing address of any such person is not known to the City Manager or designee and the property is unoccupied, then posting of the notice upon the property shall constitute sufficient notice to the owner, custodian, agent, lessee, trustee or occupant thereof, and no additional notice shall be required for any action pursuant to this chapter.  
5.05.03 - Posting of Property. 
It shall also be the duty of the City Manager or designee to cause a notice to be posted upon the property or any part thereof upon which the public nuisance exists. Such posted notice shall state a description of the public nuisance, the time period allowed for a written petition of appeal to the Council, that termination of the public nuisance by the city shall cause a special tax and lien for the total costs thereof to be placed on the property and that the owner, custodian, agent, lessee or occupant of the property is subject to prosecution for a violation of this chapter.  
5.05.04 - Appeals. 
Within twenty (20) days after the date of mailing the notice provided for in Notice to Abate Nuisances, (5.05.02) above, or the delivery, service or posting thereof, as the case may be, the owner, custodian, agent, lessee, trustee or occupant of the property involved shall have the right to appear before the Council for a hearing to show that such public nuisance does not exist; to show why such public nuisance is not unsightly and does not threaten or endanger the public health, welfare or safety; or to show why such public nuisance cannot be terminated within twenty (20) days; or to show why such public nuisance should not be removed, terminated and abated by the city as provided in this chapter. The City and the petitioner may introduce such witnesses and exhibits as are deemed necessary.  
5.05.05 - Noncompliance with Notice. 
If a public nuisance, as described in this code, is not terminated by the owner, custodian, agent, lessee or occupant of the property involved within twenty (20) days from the date of the notice, and a timely appeal has not been made to the Council, then the City Manager or designee shall cause such condition to be terminated by the City.  
5.05.06 - Right of Entry by City. 
The City Manager or designee shall have the right to enter upon real property, and shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for trespassing upon such real property, in the discharge of the duties in removing, terminating or abating a public nuisance as described in this Code.  
5.05.07 - Liens for Costs of Nuisance Abatement. 
The total expense, including administrative costs, incurred by the City in causing a public nuisance to be terminated shall be a special tax and lien upon the property upon which the public nuisance was terminated.  
5.05.08 - Imposition by Resolution. 
Whenever the City has incurred expense that is incidental to privately owned real property for the removing, terminating or abating of a public nuisance, the imposition of a lien shall be by the adoption of a resolution by the Council. The resolution imposing a lien shall contain the authority for the lien imposition; the legal description of the subject real property; the name of each title holder of record as of the date that the meeting notice to title holders of record is mailed, according to the records of the County Property Appraiser; and the amount of the lien itemized as to charges and costs.  
5.05.09 - Notice to Property Owners. 
Notice of the meeting at which the Council will consider a resolution imposing a lien shall be posted on the subject real property and sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each title holder of record, according to the records of the county property appraiser on the date the notice is mailed. The notice shall be posted and mailed on or before fifteen (15) days from the date of consideration of the resolution by the Council and shall have attached thereto a copy of the proposed resolution.  
5.05.10 - Finance Director's Duties. 
The City Manager shall have a copy of the Council resolution imposing the lien furnished to the Director of Finance who shall, upon receipt of such document: 
(a)  Cause a copy of each Council resolution imposing a lien to be entered in a book, which shall be prepared and kept for that purpose and kept open for public inspection during reasonably office hours in the office of the Director. The book shall show the title holder of record, the amount of such cost, the date of completion of the work and a legal description of the property upon which the lien is placed. A certified copy of the resolution imposing a lien shall be recorded in the official records of the County. A certified copy of the resolution imposing a lien shall be provided to the County Tax Collector; 
(b)  Upon entry of the copy of the Council resolution imposing the lien into the lien book, cause a copy of the Council resolution imposing the lien to be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each title holder of record according to the records of the county property appraiser on the date the notice was mailed pursuant to section 5.05.09 of this section; and 
(c)  Cause a notice of assessment and lien to be published once in a daily newspaper, regularly published and in general circulation in the City, which notice shall show the nature of the assessment and lien, the amount thereof and a legal description of the property affected thereby.  
5.05.11 - Finality and Priority of Lien. 
The lien shall be effective and final against the real property upon which the work has been done from the time of entry of the copy of the Council resolution imposing the lien into the lien book. Liens in the lien book shall take priority as of the time of the entry therein.  
5.05.12 - Payment and Enforcement of Lien. 
Each of the liens provided for in this action may be paid within ninety (90) days after the publication of the notice of assessment and lien without interest. Thereafter, the amount of the lien, including administrative costs and the cost of the publication of the notice of assessment and lien, together with interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum and the costs of collection, shall be a lien against the property and shall be collected and enforceable in the same manner as is provided by law for the enforcement of other taxes levied upon the property.  
5.05.13 - Rates and Charges. 
The City Manager or designee shall cause to be prepared a current schedule of rates, charges and costs that may be assessed by the City using its own equipment and personnel for abatement of public nuisances, as provided in this chapter, and shall file such schedule with the City Clerk.  
5.05.14 - Judicial Proceedings for Nuisance Abatement. 
Whenever, in the judgment of the City Manager or designee, it is necessary for the City to obtain the assistance of the courts to remove, terminate or abate a public nuisance, and in all cases in which the person in possession of the property involved has refused the Manager or designee entry upon such property, the Manager or designee shall request that the Council commence and maintain all necessary actions in a court of competent jurisdiction to assist the City in carrying out its responsibilities under this chapter. Such actions may encompass any or all of the following proceedings: 
(a)  An application for an injunction or restraining order, whether temporary or permanent, to prevent a person from maintaining or continuing to maintain any of the conditions declared in this chapter to be public nuisances, or to compel a person to remove, terminate or abate a public nuisance as provided in this chapter or to compel the performance of any act specifically required of a person to remove, terminate or abate a public nuisance; or 
(b)  To empower the City Manager or designee to enter upon any property whereon a public nuisance exists or is maintained for the purpose of removing, terminating or abating such nuisance and to prevent the person in possession of such property from interfering with the Manager or designee while exercising this power in accordance with the court's order.  
5.05.15 - Judicial Proceedings as Last Resort. 
The judicial remedies authorized to be sought by this section are in addition to the power of the City Manager to terminate public nuisances granted by section 5.05.05 and 5.05.06. The Manager or designee shall, as much as possible, terminate public nuisances without recourse to the courts.  
5.05.16 - Contractor as City's Agent. 
Whenever the City Manager has contracted with a private contractor to terminate a public nuisance, as provided in this chapter, the remedies authorized in this chapter to be sought for the Manager or designee and the City may be sought by the Manager or designee on behalf of the private contractor, to the extent that they are necessary to enable the private contractor to terminate the public nuisance.  
5.06 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE—GENERAL 
 
5.06.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the maintenance, upkeep and appearance of improved or unimproved premises; to minimize impacts of construction; and to provide a just, equitable and practicable method to preclude: 
(a)  Residential and commercial buildings, structures and premises from causing and/ or endangering the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants; or 
(b)  Diminished property values; or 
(c)  Detracting from the appropriate appearance of the residential area, by way of example: 
(1)  Failure to remove abandoned property, litter or debris: or 
(2)  Failure to cut and/ or remove the accumulation of weeds, grass or uncultivated vegetation.  
5.06.02 - General provisions. 
(a)  Maintenance: Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this chapter or a prior code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The requirements of this chapter are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection or safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. 
(b)  Existing remedies: The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed to abolish or impair other remedies of any local, State or Federal jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure. 
(c)  Requirements not covered by this chapter: The Building Official shall determine requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation and general conditions acceptable for an existing fixture, structure or equipment not specifically covered by this chapter. 
(d)  Deviation from chapter: Where practical difficulties are prohibitive in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Building Official has the authority to grant modifications for individual cases. The modification shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter and shall not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The basis for granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files. 
(e)  Compliance: It shall be the duty of each and every owner and operator of improved or unimproved property within the City to comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter. No permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless there is compliance with all applicable sections of this chapter. No premises or building, or combination, shall be used in a manner inconsistent with or in conflict with the requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  Conflict with other codes: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings, structures or premises in existence or built within the City limits or annexed therein. Where the provisions of this chapter impose a standard different than that set forth in any other ordinance of the City or under the laws of the State, the most restrictive standard shall prevail.  
5.07 - RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
All premises shall be maintained in compliance with the standards in this section. 
 
5.07.01 - Standards for improved property. 
(a)  Foundation: The building foundation system shall be adequately maintained and capable of supporting the load for which it was designed. 
(1)  Wood supports shall be sound and free from insect infestation and rot. 
(2)  Metal supports and connections shall be free from rust and the equivalent of new supports. 
(3)  Skirting shall be maintained free from broken or missing sections, pieces or cross members. Skirting shall be securely attached and sized from the ground to the lower outside perimeter of the structure. 
(b)  Exterior walls: Exterior walls of buildings shall be: 
(1)  Maintained free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials: and 
(2)  Maintained, weatherproofed and surfaces properly coated as needed to prevent deterioration. Decorative features such as cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage. Any graffiti shall be removed or repainted to match existing surfaces. 
(c)  Windows: 
(1)  Every window shall be maintained in sound working condition and good repair to be substantially weather-tight and rodent-proof. 
(2)  Openings originally designed as windows shall be maintained as windows unless approved by the Building Official for enclosure. The enclosure of a window shall be by either bricking the opening, blocking the opening with concrete blocks and stuccoing the exterior, or boarding the opening. When boarding is used, it shall be of trim fit, sealed to prevent water intrusion, and painted or stained to conform to the other exterior portions of the building. The boarding shall remain in place and be properly maintained. 
(d)  Shutters: All shutters shall be maintained in good repair and securely attached to a structure. Peeling paint or preservatives is prohibited. 
(e)  Exterior doors: Every exterior door and hatchway or garage door shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(f)  Exterior doorframes and storefronts: Exterior doorframes and storefronts shall be maintained in good condition. All moldings shall be securely attached to the structure and maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration. 
(g)  Exterior surface treatment: All exterior surfaces, including by way of example and not limitation, doors and window frames, cornices, porches, decks, trim, balconies, fences and docks, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay- resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective treatment. Peeling paint is prohibited and surfaces shall be repainted. All metal surfaces shall be coated to inhibit rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated. 
(h)  Structural supports: Every structural element of a dwelling shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and shall not show evidence of deterioration that would make it incapable of carrying normal loads. 
(i)  Porches and balconies: All exterior porches, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall include banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling and installed to withstand the loads prescribed by the Florida Building Code. All exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from defects. Paint and other finishes shall be in good condition. 
(j)  Stairs: All stairs shall be maintained safe and free from tripping hazards. Treads shall be sound, without broken or chipped edges. Wooden stairs shall be free from decay or substantial wear that could cause a tripping hazard or have an unsightly appearance. Handrails and guardrails shall be maintained to withstand loads prescribed by the Florida Building Code. 
(k)  Roofs: Roofs shall be maintained in a structurally sound and safe manner. Roofs shall be repaired using like materials to existing materials. 
(l)  Gutters and downspouts: Gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and shall be neatly located and securely installed. 
(m)  Chimneys, flues, and vent attachments: Chimneys, flues, and vent attachments shall be maintained in a structurally sound manner, free from defects to capably perform the functions for which they were designed. 
(n)  Overhang extensions: All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes, and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and properly anchored to remain in sound condition. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements, decay or rust. 
(o)  Insect screens: All windows and other outside openings required for ventilation of food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per twenty-five (25) mm. Every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
(p)  Accessory structures: Garages, storage buildings and all other accessory structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound structural condition. 
(q)  Swimming pools: All swimming pools, spas and architectural pools, ponds or bodies of water shall be properly maintained so as not to create a safety hazard or harbor insect infestation. Water shall not be allowed to stagnate or to become polluted. All pools shall be free from unsightly appearance. 
(r)  Rodent harborage: All structures and exterior premises shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, the owner shall promptly exterminate rodents through a process which will not be injurious to human health. 
(s)  Grass, weeds and uncultivated vegetation: All grasses or weeds, and uncultivated vegetation, shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in height on improved property, including the area between the edge of the pavement in the street and the lot line. 
(t)  Shrubbery, plants, and ground cover: All premises shall be maintained in a condition to prevent erosion of soil by: 
(1)  Landscaping with grass, trees, shrubs or other planted ground cover: or 
(2)  Such other suitable means as shall be approved by the Building Official. 
(u)  Exterior lighting: All outdoor lighting shall be in compliance with the following: 
(1)  Non-vehicular light sources that shine into the eyes of drivers of vehicles or pedestrians which could impair safe traverse are prohibited. 
(2)  All lighting shall be shielded and aimed at the owner's premises or sidewalk and street abutting the premises. 
(v)  Fences and walls: Fences and walls shall be maintained in a safe and structurally sound condition, in good repair with the surface coated or painted. Fences shall be free from loose or rotting materials. Metal fencing shall be free from rust or deterioration. 
(w)  Floors, interior walls and ceilings: All floors, interior walls and ceilings of every structure shall be maintained in a structurally sound manner and in a condition consistent with its use. 
(x)  Miscellaneous elements: All existing miscellaneous elements on building walls, roofs and surrounding premises, to include by way of example empty electrical or other conduits, or unused sign brackets, shall be removed. 
(y)  Landscape maintenance: Where landscape plans have been specifically incorporated and approved in a Development Plan, the landscape areas shall be maintained in a manner equal to the original landscaping approval.  
5.07.02 - Litter. 
(a)  Storage of litter: 
(1)  All commercial businesses shall store litter in containers to eliminate wind-driven debris. The number and size of receptacles for each commercial business shall be that number required to maintain a clean, neat, and sanitary premises. Spillage and overflow of litter around containers is a violation. 
(2)  Commercial businesses shall provide and maintain litter containers adequate to contain litter generated from such business at its loading and unloading zones. 
(3)  Commercial businesses open to the public shall provide and maintain containers adequate to contain litter generated from such business. 
(4)  Every person in possession or in control of any place, public or private, where litter is accumulated or generated shall provide and maintain adequate and suitable containers capable of holding such litter until proper final disposal is accomplished. 
(b)  Depositing litter: To throw, discard, place, drop, or deposit litter in any manner or amount in or upon any public property, private property, highway, street, right-of-way or body of water within the limits of the City, except in such containers specifically provided and designated for the disposal of litter, is a violation. Litter strewn by a pedestrian except at approved and permitted disposal sites is a violation. Litter ejected or discarded from a motor vehicle except at approved and permitted disposal sites is a violation. 
(c)  Accumulation of litter: Any accumulation of litter in or upon any property, vacant or improved, is deemed a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove the accumulation by the property owner, tenant, occupant, agent, manager or other person who owns, maintains, or controls any premises or portion thereof, whether improved or unimproved, is a violation.  
5.07.03 - Accessory structures. 
Garages, storage buildings and all other accessory structures shall be maintained in good repair and sound structural condition. Structures, attached or unattached, to the principal structure; which are found by the Building Official to be structurally deficient, shall be repaired or demolished within the timeframe set by the Building Official. Maintenance of accessory structures shall comply with the following: 
(a)  The exterior of the building and premises to include but not limited to parking areas and landscaped areas shall be maintained in a sound, clean and neat condition. 
(b)  Signs shall be maintained in good condition. Where the sign structure remains, the sign faces are to be replaced with blank panels (permit required). The design and color is subject to approval by the Building Official. 
(c)  All advertising structures, awnings and accompanying supporting members shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or safety hazard. Advertising structures or awnings not properly maintained in accordance with this subsection shall be removed. Awnings or marquees made of cloth, plastic or a similar material shall not show evidence of tearing, ripping or holes. Upon removal of an advertising structure or awning, all supporting members shall be removed. Where supporting members have been left from sign removal prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, such supporting members shall be removed within three (3) months of the effective date of such ordinance. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize any encroachments on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Where parking areas are to be barricaded to prohibit vehicular travel, it shall be accomplished by installation of parking bumpers pinned to the pavement.  
5.07.04 - Responsibilities of owner and operator. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the operator and the owner to ensure compliance with the following: 
(a)  All parts of the premises under the control of the owner or operator shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition consistent with the business use. 
(b)  The owner or operator shall not perform any acts: 
(1)  Which render other parts of the premises unsafe or unsanitary: 
(2)  Which obstruct any adjacent owner or operator from performing any duty required, or maintaining the premises in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(c)  Every owner or operator shall eliminate infestation of rodents or insects in and on the premises subject to the owner's or operator's control. 
(d)  Every owner or operator shall maintain all plumbing fixtures in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(e)  No litter shall be stored or accumulated on the premises unless placed in a container in compliance with solid waste regulations. 
(f)  Upon learning of a defect or inoperable status of any facility, utility or equipment required under this chapter which is the owner's responsibility, the operator shall provide written notice to the owner.  
5.07.05 - General maintenance. 
(a)  Nuisances and hazards: Premises shall be maintained free of nuisances and any hazards to the safety of the occupants, customers or persons utilizing the premises or to pedestrians passing by. 
(b)  Walls exposed as a result of demolition: Where a wall of a building is exposed as a result of demolition, the owner of the building shall have the wall with its doors, windows, vents or other similar openings closed with material of the type composing the wall. No protrusions or loose material shall be in the wall. The exposed wall shall be painted, stucco or bricked, and weatherproofed, if necessary, based on construction material, to prevent deterioration of the wall. 
(c)  Storage of flammable or combustible materials: There shall be no storage or accumulation of flammable or combustible liquids or other materials on the premises and only in such quantities prescribed by the regulations. 
(d)  Abandoned curb cuts: Where curb cuts are abandoned due to new construction or change of access by the owner, the curb cut shall be closed and replaced by the owner with a standard sidewalk, curb and gutter design to match original. 
(e)  Sidewalks or curbs damaged by delivery vehicles: Damage to public sidewalks or curb and gutter located in the public right-of-way shall be repaired or replaced by the owner at no expense to the City when such damage is caused by vehicles making deliveries to the commercial premises.  
5.07.06 - Applicability of standards to vacant buildings; securing vacant buildings. 
The provisions of this chapter that apply to the exterior premises include vacant structures. Vacant structures are not required to comply with the interior requirements of this chapter. All vacant structures shall be secured to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons or the formation of nuisance conditions. Securing a vacant structure may include boarding of the building as determined by the Building Official. If required by the Building Official, windows and doors shall be boarded by the owner and the boarding shall be maintained to keep the building secured. The design and color of boarding is subject to approval by the Building Official and shall be designed so that the building does not appear to be abandoned.  
5.07.07 - Unsightly conditions. 
The following conditions are hereby deemed to be unsightly conditions and are prohibited. The following conditions are prohibited on any premises in the City: 
(a)  Structures that are: 
(1)  Partially destroyed; or 
(2)  Left in a state of disrepair; or 
(3)  Left in a state of partial construction beyond the valid timeframe of the permit. 
(b)  Abandoned or broken equipment; broken or discarded furniture and household appliances in visible yard areas. 
(c)  Building exteriors in a condition of deterioration or disrepair such that the condition causes measurable diminution of surrounding property values. 
(d)  Property exteriors with trash, litter, debris, packing boxes, lumber, construction material, solid waste, horticulture debris, salvage materials, appliances, machinery, equipment and any furniture, excluding furniture specifically designed for outdoor use. Failure to maintain the premises in a clean, safe and sanitary condition is a violation. The owner and operator shall keep that part of the exterior property subject to its control or occupancy in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(e)  Clotheslines visible from the street. 
(f)  Garbage and trash containers stored in a manner visible from the street.  
5.07.08 - Demolition of commercial and residential buildings. 
(a)  A building in any zoning district may be demolished by the owner provided that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  A demolition permit from the building official shall be obtained. 
(2)  All sewer, gas, water and similar taps or connections shall be properly closed and disconnected in compliance with the regulations of the appropriate utility. 
(3)  All debris and litter from the building shall be removed from the site. This requirement is for the removal of all debris that is above the street level of the building. 
(4)  The lot shall be graded to a smooth, even, finished grade, free from building materials, debris, holes and depressions. Where building debris such as foundations remain on the site below street level, the owner shall backfill the lot with twelve (12) inches of clean fill, which shall be graded to a smooth, even, finished grade. 
(5)  Where walls of adjacent buildings or a portion of existing buildings become exposed as a result of the demolition, all doors, windows, vents or other similar openings in the remaining walls shall be closed with material of the type composing the wall. No protrusions or loose material shall remain. The exposed wall shall be painted, stucco or bricked and weatherproofed to prevent deterioration of the wall and in a manner compatible with the remaining building. 
(b)  Prior to issuance of a demolition permit for a building where commercial activity is a permitted use, a performance bond or equivalent security shall be filed with the City, payable to the City, in the amount defined below. The performance bond or equivalent security shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and shall be in an amount which is one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the cost estimate. The performance bond or equivalent security amount shall be based upon a certification by the contractor of the following: 
(1)  Total demolition: The amount to demolish the building, and remove all debris from the site, and disposal cost for the debris and grading the lot in compliance with the Land Development Code; or 
(2)  Partial demolition: The amount to demolish the building, and remove all debris from the site, and disposal cost for the debris, grading the lot and the cost of additional construction or reconstruction so the exterior of any partially demolished building or building abutting an adjacent building that results in repair or reconstruction is in compliance with 5.07.08 subsection A. above. 
(c)  Where buildings in any zoning district are destroyed by fire, disaster or other acts of God, the requirements of this section shall apply.  
5.08 - VACANT LOT MAINTENANCE 
 
5.08.01 - Vegetation. 
All vacant lots, including the area between the edge of pavement in the street and the lot line, shall be kept free from dry vegetation, accumulation of weeds, grass and uncultivated vegetation: 
(a)  Which present a visual blight upon neighborhoods; or 
(b)  Which may harbor insect or rodent infestations; or 
(c)  Which may likely become a fire hazard; or 
(d)  Which result in a condition which may threaten the health and safety or the economic welfare of abutting or adjacent property owners or occupants.  
5.08.02 - General standards. 
(a)  All vacant lots shall be free from potential fire hazards, to include but not be limited to dead trees, loose branches and palm fronds. 
(b)  All grasses or weeds, and uncultivated vegetation, shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in height on vacant lots including the area between the edge of the pavement in the street and the lot line. 
(c)  Motor vehicles are prohibited from parking on or driving across any portion of a vacant lot, except for: 
(1)  Areas designated and approved by the Building Official: and 
(2)  Where the owner of the vacant lot has given written permission to the vehicle owner or operator. 
(d)  Nuisances are prohibited on all lots to include by way of example but not limitation: abandoned or broken equipment, discarded furniture, household appliances, trash, litter, debris, packing boxes, lumber, construction material, solid waste, horticulture debris, salvage materials and machinery.  
5.09 - COLD WEATHER SHELTERS 
 
5.09.01 - Definitions. 
Cold Weather Shelter: Churches, recreation centers, and other civic or community facilities that are open for brief intervals during cold weather emergencies to shelter homeless individuals and families from the elements; facilities may be open during the daytime and/or evening hours as well as provide overnight accommodations.  
5.09.02 - Permit Required. 
(a)  A permit shall be required prior to operating a cold weather shelter. The property owner or authorized representative shall apply for a permit on a form provided by the City. 
(b)  The permit must be posted in a conspicuous place during hours of operation. 
(c)  Occupant load restrictions must be obeyed at all times.  
5.09.03 - Penalties. 
(a)  Failure to meet the above requirements may result in revocation of the permit for operation of a cold weather shelter as well as other code enforcement action. 
CHAPTER 5 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
2005 Code Section 	1992 Code Section 	State Law References/Other Historical Notes 
5.01 	17-1; 20-2601 	Code 1985, § 1810.99); see chs. 381—427, F.S. 
	17-2, 17-3 	Repeal 
5.02 	5-1, 5-2 	Ord. 1224, § 4 (5-25-93); Ord. 1816 (11-10-09) 
5.02.01 		Ord. 1816 (11-10-09) 
5.02.02 		Ord. 1816 (11-10-09); Ord. 1867 
5.02.03 		Ord. 1816 (11-10-09) 
5.02.04 		Ord 1816 (11-10-09), 
5.02.05 		Ord 1816 (11-10-09), Repeal-Renumber Ord 1858 1-19-12) 
5.03 	36-316 	Code 1985, § 1840.01; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.03.01 	36-316 	Code 1985, § 1840.01; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.03.02 	36-317 	Code 1985, § 1840.99; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.03.03 	36-318(a-b) 	Code 1985, § 1840.08; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.03.04 	36-318(c) 	Code 1985, § 1840.08; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.03.05 	36-319 	Code 1985, § 1840.09; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.03.06 	36-319 	Code 1985, § 1840.08; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.03.07 	36-320 	Code 1985, § 1840.08; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.03.08 	36-321 	Code 1985, § 1840.08; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.03.09 	36-322 	Code 1985, § 1840.08; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.03.10 	36-323(a) 	Code 1985, § 1840.08; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.03.11 	36-323(b) 	Code 1985, § 1840.08; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.03.12 	36-323(c) 	Code 1985, § 1840.08; Ord. 779 (7-10-84) 
5.04 	20-2602 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.04.01 	20-2602 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.04.02 	20-2603; 36-324(in part) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99), Ord. 1867 (9-11-12) 
5.04.03 	20-2602 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.04.04 	36-324 (in part) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.04.05 	20-2603 (a) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.04.06 	20-2604(a) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.04.07 	20-2604(a) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.04.08 	20-2604(b) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.04.09 	20-2604(c) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.04.10 	20-2604(d) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.04.11 	20-2604(e-f) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.04.12 	20-2604(g) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.04.13 	23-41 	
5.04.14 	20-2612 	Ord. 1251 (10-11-94) 
5.04.15 	36-112 	Code 1985, § 1860.06 
5.05 	20-2601 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.01 	20-2610 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.02 	20-2605(a) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.03 	20-2605 (b) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.04 	20-2605(c) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.05 	20-2606(a) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.06 	20-2606(b) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.07 	20-2607(a) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.08 	20-2607(b-c) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.09 	20-2607(d) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.10 	20-2607(e) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.11 	20-2607(f) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.12 	20-2607(g) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.13 	20-2608 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.14 	20-2609(a) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.15 	20-2609(b) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.05.16 	20-2609(c) 	Ord. 1370 (2-23-99) 
5.06 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.06.01 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.06.02 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.07 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.07.01 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.07.02 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.07.03 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.07.04 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.07.05 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.07.06 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.07.07 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.07.08 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.08 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.08.01 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.08.02 		Ord. 1867 (09-11-12) 
5.09 		Ord. 1884 (02-11-14) 
5.09.01 		Ord. 1884 (02-11-14) 
5.09.02 		Ord. 1884 (02-11-14) 
5.09.03 		Ord. 1884 (02-11-14) 
  
CHAPTER 6 - HUMAN RESOURCES, PERSONNEL, AND CIVIL RIGHTS  
6.01 - HUMAN RIGHTS, NON-DISCRIMINATION POLICY 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city, in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health and general welfare, to ensure equal opportunity to all citizens, regardless of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, place of birth, age (provided the person has the capacity to contract), marital status, ancestry, military status or physical disability. The city manager shall adopt administrative rules and procedures to carry out this policy.  
6.02 - PERSONNEL 
 
6.02.01 - Expenses for City Personnel. 
The amount of expenses which may be paid from public funds for per diem, mileage or meals shall be established by administrative policy. The city manager shall develop, issue, maintain and amend from time to time an administrative policy regulating the administration of the expenditure of public funds for the payment of travel expenses by the city.  
6.02.02 - Benefits Options for Terminating Employees. 
City administrative personnel are hereby directed to instruct all terminating employees who have accrued retirement benefits available, of their options to receive a lump sum payment or to defer, at their discretion, the receipt of all benefits until the normal retirement date.  
6.03 - BENEFITS FOR MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
 
6.03.01 - Entitlement to Coverage. 
The mayor and any councilmember, during their respective terms of office, are each eligible, at their request, for enrollment in the city's medical, dental and life insurance plans then in existence, individual or family coverage, with 100 percent of the premium paid by the city.  
6.03.02 - Continuation of Coverage. 
The mayor and any councilmember enrolled in such plans, upon termination of their term of office, regardless of reason, are each eligible, at their request, for continued enrollment in the plan, individual or family coverage, with 100 percent of the premium paid by the enrolled member.  
6.03.03 - No Adverse Effects on Rights to COBRA. 
Nothing in this section is intended to adversely affect the rights inuring to a councilmember or the mayor during or after each respective term of office pursuant to 42 USC Section 300 (COBRA).  
6.03.04 - City's Right to Alter or Cancel. 
Neither application nor acceptance for enrollment in the plan shall be construed as granting a contractual right or entitlement to enrollment in the plan. Continuance of eligibility to enroll in the plan is not assumed as a contractual obligation of the city, and the right is reserved, at any time, to alter, reduce, suspend or discontinue the plan or eligibility for enrollment in the plan by the mayor and council members, past or then so serving. 
CHAPTER 6 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
2005 Code Section 	1992 Code Section 	State Law References/Other Historical Notes 
6.01 	Ch 19 	Ord. 1676 (11-22-05) [Amended to be consistent with general law] 
6.02.01 	27-1 (a, c) 	Code 1985, § 280.01; Ord. 1119, § 1(1-22-91); Ord. 1327, §§ I, II (10-14-97) Ord 1849 (4-26-11) 
6.02.02 	27-1 (a) (in part) 	Code 1985, § 280.01; Ord. 1119, § 1(1-22-91); Ord. 1327, §§ I, II (10-14-97)Ord. 1849 (4-26-11) 
6.02.03 	27-1(b, d) 	Code 1985, § 280.01; Ord. 1119, § 1(1-22-91); Ord. 1327, §§ I, II (10-14-97)Ord. 1849 (4-26-11) 
6.02.04 	27-3 	Code 1985, § 280.03; Res. 86-42 (9-9-86) 
6.03.01 	27-4(a) 	Code 1985, § 280.04; Ord. 1038 (5-23-89); Ord. 1644 (6-30-05) 
6.03.02 	27-4(b) 	Code 1985, § 280.04; Ord. 1038 (5-23-89) 
6.03.03 	27-4(c) 	Code 1985, § 280.04; Ord. 1038 (5-23-89) 
6.03.04 	27-4(d, e) 	Code 1985, § 280.04; Ord. 1038 (5-23-89) 
  
CHAPTER 7 - LEISURE & RECREATION SERVICES  
7.01 - PARKS & RECREATION SERVICES 
 
7.01.01 - Definitions & Designations; Violations. 
The following words, terms and phrases, shall have the meanings ascribed to them and the stated parks shall be so designated as stated in this section, and violations of this title are punishable as provided in chapter 1.05. 
Community Parks: Community parks generally serve an area encompassing several neighborhoods. The service area for a community park is designed to serve all citizens within the area. The recommended size of a community park is five (5) acres. Those facilities provided at a community park generally serve various types of athletic activities and may include all of those available at the neighborhood level plus some facilities which are usually not found in neighborhood parks. The following are community parks: City Hall Athletic Fields, Ferry Park, Seabreeze Park, Fred Hedrick Athletic Complex, Jet Stadium, Municipal Softball Complex, Oakland Heights School Athletic Fields and the Tennis Center Complex. 
Mini-parks: Mini-parks are the smallest types of parks. The service radius for a mini-park is approximately a quarter (¼) of a mile. Mini-parks are located on small tracks of land primarily serving the public with tot lot play equipment and passive recreation areas. The following are mini-parks: Briarwood Park, Cecelia Park, Comet Park, Gardenia Court Park, Mimosa Park and Vandegriff Park. 
Neighborhood Parks: Neighborhood parks generally are developed for the residents of a particular neighborhood with a general service area between a quarter (¼) and a half (½) mile. Neighborhood parks typically are located in areas easily accessible by bicycle or pedestrian ways. Neighborhood parks may serve up to several thousand people and their minimum area is generally two (2) acres. The facilities provided at neighborhood parks vary with the size of the park. The following are neighborhood parks: Garniers Beach Park, Jet and Holmes Park, Kenwood Park, Vesta Heights Park and Villa Russ Park. 
Special Use Community Parks: Special use community parks are recreational facilities that generally serve special event activities. They can be a facility separated from other recreational areas. The following are special use community parks: Fort Walton Landing, Liza Jackson Park and Chester Pruitt Park. 
Cultural Centers: Cultural centers are those facilities that are used primarily to enhance the public awareness, enjoyment, and pursuit of arts, music, science, history, cultural diversity, the literary arts, and similar and related activities. Cultural centers are the Municipal Auditorium, the Fort Walton Beach Library, Indian Temple Mound Museum, Camp Walton Schoolhouse Museum, and the Garnier's Post Office Museum. 
Recreational Centers: Recreational centers are those facilities that are used primarily to enhance the public awareness, enjoyment, and pursuit of athletic contests, sports, arts and crafts, and similar and related activities. The City's recreational centers are the Fred B. Hedrick Recreation Center; Theo Docie Bass Recreation Center; Chester Pruitt Recreation Center; Creative Senior Community Center; Municipal Tennis Center; the Dirt and Vert Bike and Skate Park.  
7.01.02 - Recreational Programs, Fees, Procedures. 
All parks, recreational centers, and cultural centers shall be under the direction of the parks and recreation Director under supervision of the City Manager. Fees for participation in recreational and cultural events, use of parks and facilities, and attendance at City sponsored recreational and cultural events shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the council. Recreational programs, procedures for use, hours of operations, and related administrative policies and procedures shall be prepared by the city manager.  
7.02 - PERMITTED USE OF PARKS & RECREATIONAL FACILITIES 
 
7.02.01 - Use by Residents, Nonresidents. 
Park and recreational facilities are primarily provided for the use of bona fide residents of the City. The use of these facilities by other than residents of the City shall be as prescribed from time to time by resolution of the Council and recommendation of the City Manager.  
7.02.02 - Evidence of Residence. 
The use of the recreational facilities of the City shall be as prescribed in other sections of this Code. In addition to compliance with such sections, any applicant who desires to use such facilities and be entitled to pay fees charged to residents of the City; county residents, or non-county residents, may be required to furnish proof of residency. Post office box numbers are not acceptable for addresses.  
7.02.03 - Designation, Operation of Swimming Areas. 
Swimming areas shall be properly designated and maintained by the parks and recreation Director.  
7.02.04 - Reservation, Rental, Lease of Facilities: 
A permit, issued pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 8.3 of the code, is required to reserve, rent, or lease any area of any park, recreational, or cultural facilities for use by a group or individual for any special event.  
7.03 - RECREATIONAL POLICY 
 
7.03.01 - Waterfront Facility Maintenance and Parking. 
Fees for docking, boat launch and recovery and all administrative policies and procedures for enforcement shall be pursuant to section 7.02.01 and the applicable enforcement provisions of chapter 11.40 of the Code. 
For the purpose of this section, "residents" are those citizens who live in the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida, and have submitted proof of residence and received a decal for boat launch and recovery.  
7.03.02 - Informational Signs. 
The City shall erect and maintain informational signs denoting regulations with respect to usage of public access ways to shorelines within the City. In addition, such access ways shall be noted on the appropriate city map.  
7.03.03 - Acquisition of Open Space. 
The City shall, to its fiscal ability and as reasonably able, continue to acquire, through lease, acquisition or dedication, open space and natural areas so as to maintain and improve recreational opportunities for all residents and the natural function of open space, wetlands and other sensitive lands within the City.  
7.03.04 - Beach Renourishment. 
Beaches renourished at public expense shall be made available for use by the public.  
7.03.05 - Accessibility for Disabled. 
The City shall continue efforts to ensure that all recreational facilities are accessible by all age groups, the handicapped and the physically disabled.  
7.04 - MUSIC IN CITY PARKS 
 
7.04.01 - Permitted Uses. 
No person shall play musical instruments or equipment capable of producing high noise levels in City parks without first obtaining a permit, issued pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 8.3 of the code.  
7.04.02 - Time for Music in Parks. 
Permits may be issued authorizing the playing of music in City parks from 9:30 a.m. through sunset each day, except as permitted in the Downtown Business and Entertainment District in Section 8.09.  
7.05 - BEHAVIOR AND CONDUCT IN PARKS, RECREATIONAL, CULTURAL CENTERS 
 
7.05.01 - Misuse of Park Property. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Disfigure or Remove Property. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fire places, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, fences, gates or other structures of equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Misuse of Restrooms. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of five (5) years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designed for the opposite sex. 
(3)  Erect Structures. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon, or across such lands, except as permitted pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 8.3 of the code, as amended. 
(4)  Injury to Trees, etc. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(5)  Injury to Animals. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall he remove or have in his or her possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or bird. Exception to the foregoing is made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous, such as rattlesnakes, moccasins or coral snakes may be killed on sight.  
7.05.02 - Proper Sanitation in Parks. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Water Pollution. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, canal, bayou, bay, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(2)  Litter, Trash Disposal. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.  
7.05.03 - Traffic in Parks. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  State Vehicle Laws Apply. Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the State motor vehicles traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles together with such regulations as are contained in this chapter or other ordinances. 
(2)  Motor Vehicles in Parks. Operate any motorized vehicle other than in designated parking areas, except as permitted pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 8.3 of the code, as amended. 
(3)  Enforcement of Traffic Regulations. Fail to obey all traffic officers and such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
(4)  Failure to Obey Traffic Signs. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution stopping, parking, and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
(5)  Overnight Parking of Boats Prohibited. No person shall park any craft on City waterfront property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. Exceptions to City waterfront parking restrictions at the Fort Walton Landing may be approved by the City Manager.  
7.05.04 - Certain Recreational Activities Prohibited. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Bathing and Swimming. Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may hereafter be adopted. Nor shall any person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat when such activity is prohibited by the City upon a finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable. 
(2)  Structures on Beach. Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or bathing area any tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there shall be an unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or structure from at least two (2) sides; nor shall any guy wire, rope or extension or exterior brace or support be connected or fastened from any such structure to any other object outside thereof. 
(3)  Bath-Houses. Dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(4)  Boating in Designated Areas. Bring into or operate any boat, raft, or other water craft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places designated for boating by the City. Such activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are now or may hereafter be adopted.  
7.05.05 - Prohibited Behavior. 
No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Alcoholic Beverage in Parks Prohibited. Consume or possess any alcoholic beverage in any City park, recreational, or cultural center except as permitted pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 8.3 or 8.09 of the code, as amended. 
(2)  Glass Containers Prohibited. Possess a beverage in a glass container in any park in the City. 
(3)  Fires Prohibited. Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas designated for fires. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material, within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(4)  Closed Areas. Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person use, or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices. 
(5)  Loitering and Boisterousness. Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats, or benches, or other areas, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace. 
(6)  Interference with Others. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area, or participating in any activity, under the authority of a permit.  
7.05.06 - Animal Control. 
7.05.061  Definitions: 
Animal: Shall be construed to include every living dumb creature. 
Custodian: Any person or agent designated by the owner of an animal to provide care, shelter, protection, refuge or food and otherwise control the animal's actions. 
Direct control: The immediate, continuous physical control of a dog or cat by means of a leash or other tether of sufficient strength to restrain the animal. Direct control shall not include verbal or aural control. 
Owner: Any natural person, firm, association or corporation who owns, keeps, harbors or controls an animal, and the knowledge and acts of agents and employees of corporations in regard to animals transported, owned, employed by or in the custody of a corporation shall be held to be the knowledge and acts of such corporation. 
7.05.062  Direct Control: The owner or custodian of an animal shall have direct control at all times an animal is in a Community or Special Use Community park or near a recreational and cultural center. 
7.05.063  Not Permitted in Certain Areas: Animals, other than dogs used to aid the blind, are not permitted inside any recreational or cultural center. 
7.05.064  Other Conditions of Animal Presence: 
(1)  No animal shall be permitted to run at large at City parks. No animal shall be permitted to destroy or damage public real or personal property, or interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the parks. 
(2)  The owner or custodian of an animal shall immediately remove and dispose of the animal's waste upon any public or private property when the owner or custodian of the animal could reasonably be expected to be aware of the waste or has received notice of the existence of the waste. 
(3)  No owner or custodian shall leave an animal closed in or confined to a vehicle at a park, recreational, or cultural center unless the animal is confined in a cage or container or temporarily securely tethered by a device that will not permit the animal to fall or jump from the vehicle, and that provides adequate air for its consumption. 
(4)  No person shall conduct, sponsor or participate in a performing animal exhibition, display, circus or rodeo in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering. All equipment on performing animals shall fit properly and be in good working condition.  
7.05.07 - Use by Sexual Predators Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for a sexual predator to use, enter into, be in or remain in any City community park, mini-park, neighborhood park, special use community park, cultural center, or recreational center. For the purpose of this section, "sexual predator" shall have the meaning defined in section 775.21 of the Florida Statutes (2007), as amended. 
CHAPTER 7 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
2005 Code Section 	1992 Code Section 	State Law References/Other Historical Notes 
	21-1 to 21-6 	
	24-1, 24-26 to 24-29; 26-1, 26-2, 26-3, 26-4, 26-5, 26-21, 26-22, 26-23, 26-24, 26-28, 26-29, 26-30, 26-31 	Repealed: Ord. 1669 (11-8-05) 
7.01 		Ord. 1669 (11-8-05) 
7.02 		Ord. 1669 (11-8-05) 
7.02.04 		Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
7.03 		Ord. 1669 (11-8-05) 
7.03.01 		Ord. 1770, § II (9-23-08) 
7.04 		Ord. 1669 (11-8-05) 
7.04.01 		Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
7.04.02 		Ord. 1823 (3-9-10), Ord. 1892 (3-25-14) 
7.04.03 		Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
7.05 		Ord. 1669 (11-8-05) 
7.05.01 		Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
7.05.03 		Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
7.05.04 		Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
7.05.05 		Ord. 1692, § 2, (3-14-06); Ord. 1823 (3-9-10), Ord. 1892 (3-25-14) 
7.05.07 		Ord. 1753, § 3 (2-26-08) 
  
CHAPTER 8 - LICENSES & BUSINESS REGULATIONS  
8.00. - VIOLATIONS 
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in chapter 1.05 of this Code.  
8.01. - BUSINESS TAX REQUIREMENTS 
 
8.01.01. - Scope. 
Any person who maintains a permanent or temporary business location or branch office within the City, for the privilege of transacting or engaging in or managing any business, profession, or occupation shall be required to pay a business tax pursuant to this chapter.  
8.01.02. - Evidence of Business Activity Requiring Tax Receipt. 
The fact that a person represents, exhibits a sign, or advertises that the person is engaged in a business, calling, profession or occupation, for which business tax is required, shall be evidence of the liability of such person to pay a business tax.  
8.01.03. - Separate Tax Receipt Required for Each Person, Each Business. 
A separate tax receipt is required for each person engaged in each profession, trade, shop or business, whether or not such businesses are co-located, connected, or operated in conjunction with any other business requiring a tax receipt.  
8.01.04. - Corporate Officers' Liability. 
It is the responsibility of all officers and agents of any corporation to ensure that such corporation complies with the provisions of this chapter.  
8.01.05. - Application Process. 
New applicants shall pay the business tax at least 24 hours prior to opening the business. Such application for payment shall be on a form and by procedures prescribed by the City Manager.  
8.01.06. - New Location. 
A business shall not transfer to a new location under a current business tax receipt without first obtaining, in writing, from the Building Official, a verification of correct zoning for such business at the proposed new location, and paying the appropriate full tax for such business.  
8.01.07. - Hazardous Materials. 
Each applicant shall identify, to include quantities, any and all hazardous waste or materials used, stored, generated or disposed of by the business, profession or occupation. In addition, the applicant shall describe the handling and disposal of such materials.  
8.01.08. - Denial of Business Tax Receipt. 
The City may deny issuance of a business tax receipt to a business that uses, stores, generates, or disposes of hazardous materials to conserve and protect soils, minerals and vegetation within the City.  
8.01.09 - Business Tax Schedule. 
A tax classification and rate schedule for all business taxes has been established as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule, and may be amended from time to time, by ordinance of the City Council and pursuant to Florida Statutes.  
8.01.10. - Expiration of Business Tax Receipts. 
Business tax receipts shall expire on September 30 of each year. No receipt shall be effective for more than one (1) year. For each receipt obtained between October 1 and April 1, the full tax for one (1) year shall be paid, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and for each receipt obtained between April 1 to June 30, one-half (½) the full tax for one year shall be paid, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. For each receipt obtained from July 1 to September 30, one-quarter (¼) of the full tax for one year shall be paid, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.  
8.01.11. - Business Tax Basis. 
In all cases where the amount required to be paid for a business tax receipt depends upon the amount of capital invested or the value of goods, stock or property used in the business, it shall be the duty of the person applying for such tax receipt to render to the City Manager or his or her authorized representative a sworn statement of the amount of such capital or the value of such stock, goods or other property. Further, as a condition of obtaining a tax receipt, the applicant shall also submit proof, including insurance carried, for inspection and examination by the City Manager or his or her authorized representative, either before or after the tax receipt is issued, of the amount of capital invested or the value of the stock, goods, wares, merchandise or other property carried or used in such business, such proof to consist of inventories last taken or stock books.  
8.01.12. - Business Tax Rebate. 
No portion of any business tax assessed under this chapter shall be rebated unless it clearly appears that such business tax was collected by mistake or error. Before making such a rebate, all amounts proper tax amounts required shall be paid.  
8.01.13. - Specially Classified Business Taxes. 
Any person engaged in selling goods, wares and merchandise, who or which is specially classified under this chapter, shall pay the specially classified business tax and not the merchants' business tax. A person engaged in a business that is not specially taxed under this chapter shall pay the merchants' business tax.  
8.01.14. - Limitations of Payment of Business Tax. 
The business tax required by this chapter means the fees charged and the method by which the city grants the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession, or occupation within the city's jurisdiction. It does not mean any fees or licenses paid to any board, commission, or officer for permits, registration, examination, or inspection, which unless otherwise provided by law, are deemed to be regulatory and in addition to, but not in lieu of, any business tax imposed by this chapter.  
8.01.15. - Delinquent Tax Charge. 
All business tax receipts shall be sold beginning July 1 of each year, shall be due and payable on October 1 of each year and expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. Those business tax receipts not renewed by October 1 shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) for the month of October, plus an additional five percent (5%) penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent (25%) of the business tax fee for the delinquent establishment. Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation or profession without first obtaining a local business tax receipt, if required under this chapter, shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent (25%) of the business tax fee determined to be due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. Any person who engages in any business, occupation, or profession covered by this chapter, who does not pay the required business tax within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due, and who does not obtain the required business tax receipt is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorney's fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts.  
8.01.16. - Exhibition, Display of Tax Receipt. 
Every person who pays the business tax and receives a receipt shall exhibit it when called upon to do so by an authorized officer of the City, and all receipts must be conspicuously displayed at all times.  
8.01.17. - Posting of Tax Receipts. 
Every person exercising the privilege or conducting a business, occupation or profession for which a business tax receipt is required shall post his or her receipt in a conspicuous place in or about his or her place of business where it may be seen upon inspection by any official of the City.  
8.01.18. - Tax Receipt Affixed to Vehicles, Machines. 
Whenever a business tax receipt is required or a tax is required to be paid for any machine or vehicle, such tax receipt or other evidence of payment of the tax must be affixed in a prominent place upon such machine or vehicle, as designated by the City.  
8.01.19. - City Inspector. 
The City Manager shall designate an Inspector who shall have the authority to investigate all businesses, occupations and professions in the City and to make such inquiry as is necessary to determine whether or not a business tax has been paid for such business, occupation or profession. The Inspector shall report to the City Code Enforcement Board the names of all persons engaged in a business, occupation or profession without a business tax receipt. 
Such Inspector shall have the power to arrest any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter. No person shall refuse to allow such Inspector to investigate and inquire for the purpose of determining whether such person has paid the required business tax.  
8.02. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
8.02.00. - Definitions. 
Alarm system: A system of devices which includes a control panel that emits, transmits or relays a signal intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon, police, emergency medical services or fire services of the city, including local alarms. Alarm system does not include: 
(1)  An alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site; or 
(2)  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premise within the interior of that premises. 
Alarm user or user: Any person or business on whose premises alarm systems are maintained within the city, except for alarms on motor vehicles or property systems. 
Automatic dialing device: An alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection, or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
Central station: A location to which remote alarm or signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise circuits or where employees are maintained continuously to investigate signals. 
Communications console: The instrumentation on an alarm console at the receiving terminal of a signal line which, through visual or audible signals, indicates activation of an alarm system at a particular location, or which indicates line trouble. 
Direct connect: An alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to and receiving them at the police communication center. 
False alarm: shall mean: 
(1)  The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, system malfunction, improper installation or negligence of the user of an alarm system or the user's employees or agents; or 
(2)  Any signal or oral communications requesting, requiring or resulting in a response on the part of the police department or fire department when in fact, there has been no unauthorized intrusion or attempted intrusion into a premises or no robbery, attempted robbery, products of combustion or emergency medical response. 
(3)  Excluded from this definition are activations of alarms systems caused by power outages, weather conditions, or any other conditions determined not to be a result of equipment failure or neglect of the user. 
Fire Alarm System: A signal initiated by a fire alarm-initiating device such as a manual fire alarm box, automatic fire detector, water flow switch or other devices which activation is indicative of a fire or fire signature and transmits signal to strobe and horn devices to evacuate the premises. Also transmits or relays a signal intended to summon fire services, including local alarms. 
Fire Chief shall mean the Fire Chief of the City or his or her designated representative. 
Fire Department shall mean the City Fire Department or any authorized agent. 
Police Chief shall mean the Chief of Police of the City or his or her designated representative. 
Police Department shall mean the City of Fort Walton Beach Police Department or any authorized agent. 
Public nuisance shall mean anything which annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of a considerable number of persons or of any community or neighborhood. 
Utility Company shall mean any public service company authorized to work on telephone, TV cable, or power lines, including but not limited to the telephone, TV cable, or power companies. 
Non-Response shall mean that a Police Officer shall not be dispatched to an alarm location based solely on an alarm system signal, unless it has been verified by an independent secondary source that a criminal act or attempted criminal act is in progress or has occurred.  
8.02.01. - Alarm Permit Required. 
All alarm users in the City, whether connected directly to the Police Communications Center or to a private alarm monitoring company, shall be required to maintain an alarm permit. The cost of such annual permit shall be in such amount as is established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
All alarm users in the City, whether connected directly to the Police Communications Center or to a private alarm monitoring company, shall be required to maintain an alarm permit. There shall be no charge for first time registration and the annual renewal fee shall be in such amount as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Such permit shall expire at the end of the calendar year and the fee shall be prorated on a quarterly basis beginning from the date of purchase. 
Any alarm user not in possession of a current permit shall be notified by the Police Department that a permit is required. The alarm user shall obtain a permit and pay the appropriate fee within ten (10) working days after notification, unless an appeal is filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any alarm user who refuses to secure an alarm permit shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 1-5, of the Code of Ordinances.  
8.02.02. - Display Required. 
Alarm permits shall be visibly displayed in all businesses in conjunction with any other City or State permit. Alarm permits for residential users shall be presented upon demand of a Police Officer or Firefighter.  
8.02.03. - Failure to Present. 
Failure to present an alarm permit will be prima facie evidence that the user is not in possession of a current permit.  
8.02.04. - Reserved.  
8.02.10. - Operational Reliability Requirements. 
The purpose of this chapter is to require alarm users and alarm businesses (sales, installation, customer service and/or monitoring) to maintain the operational reliability and the proper use of alarm systems in limiting unnecessary police or fire emergency responses to false alarms/alarm malfunctions. This chapter governs all burglary, robbery, medical, and fire alarm systems requiring permits, establishes authority for fees, establishes a system for administration, and sets forth conditions for suspension or loss of permits and non-response to activations.  
8.02.11. - Rules for Use. 
The Police Chief and Fire Chief may promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the implementation of this chapter. Each alarm user and any fire alarm contractor, sprinkler contractor, employee of such contractors, or entity licensed to perform maintenance or testing of an alarm system will abide by this chapter and any instructions as required by the City. 
(1)  All automatic dialing devices shall be prohibited from calling or dialing the Police Department ninety (90) days after adoption of this ordinance. 
(2)  All alarm systems transmitting signals to the Communications Console in the Police Department shall be disconnected/removed from the Police Department ninety (90) days after adoption of this ordinance. 
(3)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all alarm users except the various departments of the City. 
(4)  Every alarm user shall submit to the Chief of Police the names and telephone numbers of at least two (2) persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, who are authorized to respond to an emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system, and who can open the premises wherein the alarm system is installed. 
(5)  All alarm systems installed after the effective date of this ordinance, that use an audible horn, bell, or other signaling device shall be equipped with a device that will shutoff such horn or bell within ten (10) minutes after activation of the alarm system. This shall not apply to fire alarm systems. 
(6)  Any alarm system emitting a continuous and uninterrupted signal for more than twenty (20) minutes from the time the Police or Fire Department is notified, which cannot be shut off or otherwise curtailed due to the absence or unavailability of the alarm user or those persons designated by the alarm user, and which disturbs the peace, comfort, or repose of a community, neighborhood, or considerable number of inhabitants of the area where the alarm system is located, shall constitute a public nuisance. 
Upon receiving complaints regarding such a continuous and uninterrupted signal, the Police Chief shall endeavor to contact the alarm user or those persons designated by the alarm user in an effort to abate the nuisance. The Police Chief shall record the name and addresses of all complainants and the time each complaint was made. If the Police Chief or Fire Chief is unable to contact the alarm user or those persons designated by the alarm user, or if such person cannot or will not curtail the audible signal being emitted by the alarm system and if the Police Chief is otherwise unable to abate the nuisance, he shall direct a Police Officer, Firefighter, or a qualified alarm technician to enter upon the property or premises and take any reasonable action necessary to abate the nuisance. 
If entry upon the property or premises in which the alarm system is located is made in accordance with this subsection, the person so entering upon such property: shall not conduct, engage in, or undertake any unwarranted search, seizure, inspection, or investigation while upon the property; shall not cause any unnecessary damage to the alarm system or to any part of the premises; and shall leave the property as soon as practical after the audible signal has ceased. 
(7)  After an entry upon property has been made in accordance with this section, the Police Chief or Fire Chief shall have the property secured, if necessary. The Fire Department may have a key box or lock box installed in accordance with NFPA 1.3-6 at the expense of the alarm user. The reasonable costs and expenses of abating a nuisance in accordance with this section shall be assessed to the alarm user. 
Within ten (10) days after abatement of a nuisance in accordance with this section, the alarm user may request a hearing before the Police Chief or Fire Chief and may present evidence showing that the signal emitted by his or her alarm system was not a public nuisance at the time of the abatement, that unnecessary damage was caused to his or her property in the course of the abatement, that the cost of the abatement should not be assessed to him, or that the requirements of this section were not fulfilled. 
The Police Chief or Fire Chief shall hear all interested parties and may, at his or her discretion, reimburse the alarm user for the repairs to his or her property necessitated by the abatement or excuse the alarm user from paying the cost of abatement. 
(8)  Any fire alarm contractor, sprinkler contractor, employee of such contractors, or entity licensed to perform maintenance or testing of an alarm system, shall contact the Okaloosa County Emergency Dispatch System and the Fort Walton Beach Fire Department to inform them that maintenance or testing will be conducted on any system in the city prior to the beginning of any maintenance or testing.  
8.02.12. - False Alarms. 
When the Police or Fire Department responds to an emergency messages or signal of a burglar, robbery, medical, or fire alarm, and the responding department determines that the message or signal was false alarm, the following procedures shall apply. 
8.02.121.  False Alarm Report and Citation . The Police Department or Fire Department, upon receiving notification of an alarm activation, shall dispatch personnel to the scene of the activation. If the activation is determined to be false, the Officer shall complete a " false alarm report and citation " and leave a copy of the report and citation with the user or designated person on the property. In the event the user or the designee is not present, the Officer shall leave a copy of the report and citation in a conspicuous place on the premises and mail a copy of the report and citation to the permit holder at the address on file for the alarm permit. 
8.02.122.  Record of Activations . The Police Department and Fire Department shall keep a record of all false alarm activations for the past two (2) calendar years, in addition to a list of all alarmed premises, users and designated contacts. 
8.02.123.  Violations, Police Department Responses . If the Police Department records more than three (3) false alarms in a calendar year, from an alarm system or alarm monitoring company who monitors an alarm system, the user shall be fined, per false alarm, as follows: 
a.  For the first three (3) violations within any twelve-(12) month period, there is no charge. 
b.  For the fourth, fifth and sixth violation within any twelve-(12) month period, the fine is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per violation. 
c.  For the seventh, eighth and ninth violation within any twelve-(12) month period, the fine is fifty dollars ($50.00) per violation. 
d.  For the tenth and each subsequent violation within any twelve-(12) month period, the fine is seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per violation. 
e.  Alarm activations exceeding twelve (12) false alarms shall be cause for the alarm permit to be revoked by the Police Chief. 
8.02.124.  Violations, Fire Department Responses . 
(1)  If the fire department issues a false alarm report and citation, the user shall be fined, per false alarm, as follows: 
a.  For the first violation within any twelve-(12) month period, there is no charge 
b.  For the second violation within any twelve-(12) month period, the fine is fifty dollars ($50.00). 
c.  For the third violation within any twelve-(12) month period, the fine is one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
d.  For the fourth and each subsequent violation within any twelve (12)-month period, the fine may be up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation, at the discretion of the Fre Chief and based upon the user's history of false alarms, compliance with this ordinance, and efforts to remedy the cause of the false alarms. 
(2)  If any false alarm is the result of any fire alarm contractor, sprinkler contractor, employee of such contractors, or entity licensed to perform maintenance or testing of an alarm system who has not provided maintenance and testing notice as required in section 8.02.11(8), the contractor or entity shall be fined, per false alarm, as follows: 
a.  For the first violation within any twelve-(12) month period, the fine is one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
b.  For the second violation within any twelve (12) -month period, the fine is two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
c.  For the third violation within any twelve-(12) month period, the fine is three hundred dollars ($300.00) per violation. 
d.  For the fourth and each subsequent violation within any twelve-month period, the fine may be up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation, at the discretion of the Fire Chief and based upon the contractor's or licensed entity's history of false alarms, compliance with this ordinance, and efforts to remedy the cause of the false alarms. 
8.02.125.  User Responsibility of Proof . The burden of proof shall be with the alarm user to show that a false alarm was not through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, maintenance or negligence of the user or other persons authorized to be on the premises. Alarm users are responsible for the training of persons authorized to be on the premises to insure proper operation of the alarm system. 
8.02.126.  Continuous Malfunctions . Any burglar or robbery alarm system that continuously malfunctions or otherwise causes false alarms may be ordered disconnected by the Chief of Police. Any alarm user who fails or refuses to disconnect their alarm system after being notified by the Chief of Police to do so shall be notified by certified mail that there shall be a "non-response" to any future activations. 
Upon satisfaction of all unpaid charges, renewal of the alarm permit, and repairs and certified by a licensed alarm installation company to the alarm system as required to bring the system back into proper working order have been completed the Chief of Police shall rescind the "nonresponse" order.  
8.02.13. - Alarm Citation Appeals. 
The Board of Adjustment shall hear, pursuant to the rules and procedures provided by the City's Codes for administrative appeals, all appeals regarding fines imposed by the Police Department or Fire Department pursuant to this chapter.  
8.03. - TEMPORARY AND SPECIAL EVENTS; PERMITTING 
 
8.03.01. - Definitions. 
Farmers Market. A group of vendors principally involved in the sale of locally produced and grown fruits, vegetables, meats, and other goods intended for consumption. 
Itinerant vendor. All persons, firms and corporations, as well as their agents and employees, who engage in the temporary or transient business in this City, of selling, or offering for sale, any goods, or merchandise including but not limited to meat, art, music, photographs and portraits, or exhibiting the same for sale or exhibiting the same for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof; and who, for the purpose of carrying on the business or conducting the exhibits thereof, either hire, rent, lease or occupy any room or space in any parking lot, building, structure or other enclosure in the City in, through, or from which any goods, or merchandise, may be sold, offered for sale, exhibited for sale or exhibited for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof. 
Temporary business. Any business transacted, operated, or conducted in the City for which a written contract, agreement, or lease has not been made for the hire, rental or lease, for at least sixteen (16) days, of premises in or upon which the business is to be transacted, operated, or conducted. 
Transient business. Any business transacted, operated, or conducted in the City by persons, including their agents or employees, who do not have a permanent place of business in the City, or who have their headquarters in places other than the City but move stocks of goods or merchandise or samples thereof into the City for sale and consumption but with the intention of removing the stocks of goods or merchandise or samples thereof away from the City before the expiration of sixteen (16) days. 
Special event. A special event is an event such as art or historical displays or performances, music events and performances, parades, fairs, carnivals, bazaars, festivals, contests, rodeos, grand opening events for new businesses, that generally is intended for entertainment, arts and history education, church events, and other types of community building activities, and at which the sale of services products, food, drinks, stocks and goods, is incidental to the purpose of the special event. 
Temporary event. A temporary event is an event such as farmers markets, fruit stands, open air markets, sidewalk sales, liquidation sales, push cart vendors, performers working for tips, concession stands, itinerant exhibitions, temporary businesses, transient businesses, and seasonal holiday sales lots, that generally is intended for commercial purposes and at which the sale of food and drinks is incidental to the main commercial purpose. This definition does not include garage sales conducted on residential properties.  
8.03.02. - Prohibition. 
The following temporary and special events shall be prohibited on city or private property unless a temporary or special event permit is obtained from the city manager: farmers markets, fruit stands, open air markets, sidewalk sales, liquidation sales, push cart vendors, concession stands, intinerant exhibitions, temporary businesses, transient businesses, art and history displays and performances, music events and performances, parades, fairs, carnivals, bazaars, festivals, contests, rodeos, grand opening events for new businesses, seasonal holiday sales lots for items such as pumpkins, fireworks, trees, etc., or any other activity or event tending to create or cause crowds, impede traffic or otherwise pose a detrimental effect on the public health, safety and welfare.  
8.03.03. - Permit Process. 
(1)  Any person planning to host, sponsor, or hold a temporary or special event shall apply for a permit for that temporary or special event no less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the proposed event or activity. The application shall be on a form provided by the City Manager, accompanied by the appropriate application fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule, and shall contain at least the following information: 
(a)  name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
(b)  name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property where the event is to be held and an owner's affidavit granting agency authority if the applicant is not the owner of the property; 
(c)  the specific location of the event, to include the location on the property and physical dimensions of any structure, vehicle, tent or apparatus that will be used for the event; 
(d)  the nature and purpose of the event; 
(e)  the days and hours of activities for the event; and 
(f)  any other information requested by the City Manager that is necessary to properly review the application. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the application, the City Manager shall acknowledge receipt of the application and confirm in writing to the applicant that all necessary information was received and the application is sufficient for review. 
(3)  The City Manager and, if necessary, the Department Directors, Fire Chief, and Police Chief, shall review the application. Review of the application shall include consideration of the following criteria: 
(a)  the applicant is over the age of 18; 
(b)  the applicant has paid the appropriate fee for the application review; 
(c)  the applicant must provide proper traffic control, sanitation and litter control, and restroom facilities for the event; 
(d)  there is sufficient parking on-site or provisions for parking off-site for the event and no public right of way, including sidewalks, will be blocked during the event; 
(e)  the applicant will provide sufficient crowd control; 
(f)  the proposed signage is appropriate for the site on which the event will be held; 
(g)  the applicant has sufficient State and City licenses to conduct the event or make sales at the event; and 
(h)  the applicant can provide sufficient insurance to protect the City from liability as a result of the event. 
(4)  Upon the determination that the applicant has met the requirements set forth in this section and other applicable parts of the Code of Ordinances and Land Development Code, the City Manager may grant the temporary or special event permit. If the City Manager determines that the application does not satisfy the criteria above, in the best interests of the City to issue the permit, he shall as soon as reasonably possible notify the applicant in writing for the reasons for the denial.  
8.03.04. - Number of Days Permitted. 
A special event permit shall not exceed seven (7) consecutive days. A temporary event shall not exceed fifteen (15) days in any one month.  
8.03.05. - Licenses. 
Any person that hosts, sponsors, or conducts a temporary or special event shall have all State and County licenses and any necessary copyright permission, and a City business tax receipt, required for the activities to be conducted at the event or for the sale of any goods or materials, including alcohol, that will be available for sale or consumption during the event.  
8.03.06. - Limitation on Music Events. 
The City Manager may deny a special event application for a music event for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  there are other scheduled events in the City park; 
(b)  it is proposed to play music during a prime time for groups using the City park for picnics; 
(c)  two musical events are scheduled within a ten (10) day period; 
(d)  events by the same group are to be held more than twice a year.  
8.03.07. - Motorized Vehicles in Parks. 
During special event activities at a City park, recreational, or cultural center, motorized vehicles may be allowed to park on the park grounds for assembly and disassembly of vendor areas and to establish temporary parking areas.  
8.03.08. - Alcohol Use for Events. 
During temporary or special events to be conducted at, upon, or on any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, parking lot, in any alley, City park, City recreational or cultural center, City softball complex, City tennis complex, or other public property, the City Manager may permit temporary authority for individuals to consume or possess any alcoholic beverage in any cup, can, bottle, or other open container.  
8.03.09. - Appeals. 
If an application for a temporary or special event permit is denied, the applicant shall have five (5) days from the date of the written denial to request that the City Council review the denial. The applicant must be physically present or represented by an agent, authorized in writing to represent the applicant, at the Council Meeting during which the application will be reviewed. After consideration of the application and the reasons for denial, the City Council shall have the authority to grant or deny the application.  
8.04. - CONTRACTORS & TRADESMEN 
 
8.04.01. - Registration and License Required. 
All service contractors, specialty contractors and construction industry contractors shall obtain a City license prior to commencement of any work in the City.  
8.04.02. - Hold Harmless. 
Prior to the issuance of a City license, each contractor shall execute a hold harmless agreement holding the City and its officers, agents, employees or assigns, both individually and collectively, harmless from any liability caused by the contractor or his or her agents, employees or assigns. This hold harmless agreement will be on a form provided by the City.  
8.04.03. - Conditions of Issuance. 
Upon presentation of a valid copy of his or her liability insurance policy and evidence of Okaloosa County or State of Florida registration or certification, the City shall issue such contractor a business tax receipt in such form as is prescribed, to be valid from the date of purchase through September 30 of the current fiscal year.  
8.04.04. - Certification or Registration Required. 
Certification or registration by the Florida Construction Industry Licensing Board shall be required for general contractors, building contractors, residential building contractors, electrical contractors, plumbing contractors, mechanical contractors, swimming pool contractors, sheet metal contractors and roofing contractors.  
8.04.05. - Business Tax. 
An annual business tax receipt for all persons required to be registered with the City shall be established by resolution by the City Council.  
8.04.06. - Annual Business Tax Receipt; Expiration. 
All business tax receipts shall be sold by the City Manager or his or her authorized representative, beginning September 1 of each year, shall be due and payable on October 1 of each year and shall expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. A business tax receipt not renewed by October 1 shall be considered delinquent and shall be subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) for the month of October, plus an additional penalty of five percent (5%) for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent (25%) of the business tax.  
8.04.07. - Liability Insurance Required. 
Contractors doing business in the City shall be required to carry bodily injury and property damage insurance in the amounts shown below: 
Class 	Bodily Injury 	Property Damage 
General, building and residential contractors 	$300,000.00 	$50,000.00 
Class A and B air conditioning and mechanical contractors 	 100,000.00 	 25,000.00 
Electrical contractors 	 100,000.00 	 25,000.00 
Plumbing contractors 	 100,000.00 	 25,000.00 
Roofing contractors 	  50,000.00 	 25,000.00 
All other contractors 	  50,000.00 	 25,000.00 
  
8.04.08. - Policy Requirements; Additional Insureds. 
Such liability insurance shall be issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State, shall name the City as an additional insured by endorsement (on the appropriate insurance form or equivalent) and shall provide for a ten-day (10) notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage to the tax department of the City. 
Evidence of insurance complying with this section shall be provided by a copy of the policy or by a certificate of insurance stating the company name; agent or agency name; policy number; inception and expiration date; limits of liability; that coverage is provided for the hold harmless agreement executed by the contractor; that the City is named as an additional insured by endorsement; and that the ten-day (10) notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage will be provided.  
8.04.09. - Reciprocity of Insurance. 
A contractor subject to these requirements who presently carries liability insurance in the amounts stated for work performed in the County or the State is not required to carry additional amounts of insurance required by this section.  
8.04.10. - Insurance Required to Issue Permit. 
Persons engaged in occupations relating to construction, repair, modification or other services in connection with maintenance and upkeep of buildings, equipment and facilities in the City are required to provide proof of insurance or a surety bond in the amounts shown in this chapter prior to issuance of necessary permits to proceed with work.  
8.04.11. - Master Certificate, Prerequisite. 
The City shall not issue a business tax receipt to any person to engage in the business of electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas construction and installation, unless such person holds a valid, un-revoked and unsuspended master's certificate of competency, or has in his or her regular employ a person who holds such master's certificate. The City shall also refuse to issue to any partnership a business tax receipt to engage in such business, unless such partnership has in its regular employ, or as a member, a person who holds such master's certificate. The City shall also refuse a business tax receipt to any corporation, which does not have in its regular employ a person who holds a master's certificate.  
8.04.12. - Use of Name or License by Another Prohibited. 
No person engaged in the electrical, mechanical, plumbing, fuel-gas or construction business in the City shall allow his or her name to be used by any other person, directly or indirectly, either to obtain a permit or for the construction of any work under his or her license. No person shall make any misrepresentation or omission in his or her application. Anyone violating this section shall have his or her license revoked for one (1) year, in addition to the penalty provided in section 1-8, or otherwise punishable by law.  
8.05. - FIRE SAFETY INSPECTION 
 
8.05.01. - Annual Inspection Required. 
All commercial, industrial, public assembly, and private schools shall have an annual fire safety inspection conducted by the City Fire Department to ensure such structures are in compliance with the City Code and applicable state statutes.  
8.05.02. - Inspection Fee; Time for Payment. 
An annual fire safety inspection fee, as established in the general fee schedule, shall be paid to cover the administrative costs of conducting the inspection. Such fee shall be paid within twenty (20) days of the inspection date.  
8.06. - LOCKSMITHS 
 
8.06.01. - Conditions for Locksmith's License. 
Before any business tax receipt is issued for a locksmith, the applicant must first present to the City a certificate from the Police Department showing that the applicant has been fingerprinted and that he has no past record of a felony conviction.  
8.06.02. - Bond Required. 
All locksmiths operating within the City are required to post a $1,000 surety bond payable to the Mayor for the benefit of any resident of the City who suffers any loss resulting from proven acts of negligence upon the part of any such locksmith. Any person now holding a locksmith business tax receipt who fails to post the bond required by subsection (a) of this section shall have his or her business tax receipt revoked, and the tax receipt shall not be renewed, nor shall any new tax receipt be issued to any person, unless and until such a bond is first posted.  
8.07. - MOTOR VEHICLE TITLE LOANS 
 
8.07.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
Motor vehicle. An automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, semitrailer, truck tractor and semitrailer combination, or any other vehicle operated on the roads of this State, used to transport persons or property, and propelled by power other than muscular power, but the term does not include traction engines, road rollers, such vehicle as run only upon a track, bicycles or mopeds. 
Title loan. A loan of money secured by a bailment of title to a motor vehicle. 
Title loan agreement. A written agreement whereby the title loan lender agrees to make a loan of a specific sum of money to a borrower and the borrower agrees to give the title loan lender a security interest in an unencumbered motor vehicle certificate of title owned by the borrower. 
Title loan lender. Any person who is engaged in the business of making title loans or engaging in title loan agreements with borrowers, and includes but is not limited to, second-hand dealers as defined in Chapter 538, F.S., as may be amended from time to time.  
8.07.02. - Conditions of Transactions. 
A title loan lender may engage in a title loan transaction only if the following conditions are met. 
8.07.021.  Borrower Holding Certificate . If the title loan lender takes the certificate, the lender maintains physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title until the outstanding loan is satisfied. The borrower maintains possession of, or control over, the motor vehicle throughout the term of the loan. The borrower is not required to pay rent or any other charge for the use of the motor vehicle. The borrower is 18 years of age or older. 
8.07.022.  Title Loan Agreements . The title loan lender delivers to the borrower, at the time the loan is made, a written title loan agreement that contains the following information: 
(1)  The make, model and year of the motor vehicle to which the loan relates. 
(2)  The vehicle identification number, or other comparable identification number, along with the license plate number, if applicable, of the motor vehicle to which the loan relates. 
(3)  The name, address, date of birth, physical description, and Social Security account number of the borrower. 
(4)  The date of the transaction. 
(5)  The identification number and the type of identification, including the issuing agency, accepted from the borrower. 
(6)  The amount of money financed, designated as the "amount financed." 
(7)  The maturity date of the title loan agreement which shall be no fewer than 30 days after the date of the title loan agreement is executed by the title loan agreement is executed by the title loan lender and the borrower. 
(8)  The total loan charge payable on the maturity date, designated as the "finance charge." 
(9)  The total amount financed plus finance charge, which must be paid to redeem the loan property on the maturity date, designated as the "total number of all payments." 
(10)  The annual percentage rate computed in accordance with the regulations adopted by the Federal Reserve Board pursuant to the Federal Truth-in-Lending Act. 
(11)  The name and address of the title loan office issuing the loan. 
(12)  A statement printed on not less than (14) point, bold type that: states Your vehicle has been pledged as security for this loan and if you do not repay this loan in full by (insert due date), including the interest accrued (finance charge), then YOU WILL LOSE YOUR VEHICLE. You are encouraged to repay this loan at the end of the 30-day period. The lender is not required to extend or renew your loan and may then repossess your vehicle if you do not repay the loan and the accrued interest. It is important that you plan your finances so that you can repay this loan as soon as possible. THIS LOAN HAS A VERY HIGH INTEREST RATE. DO NOT COMPLETE THIS LOAN IF YOU HAVE THE ABILITY TO BORROW FROM ANOTHER SOURCE AT A RATE LOWER THAN TWO AND ONE HALF PERCENT (2 ½%) PER MONTH OR AN ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE OF LOWER THAN THIRTY PERCENT (30%). 
(13)  A statement that "The borrower represents and warrants that the motor vehicle and the certificate of title is not stolen, it has no liens or encumbrances against it, the borrower has the right to enter into this transaction, and the borrower will not attempt to sell the motor vehicle or apply for a duplicate certificate of title while the loan is in effect." 
(14)  Immediately above the signature of the borrower, on the same page, a statement that "I, the borrower, declare that the information I have provided is true and correct and I have read and understand the foregoing document." 
(15)  A blank line for the signature of the borrower. 
8.07.023.  Sign to Be Displayed . The title loan lender displays in a prominent place in the title loan premises, a sign no smaller than three feet by five feet with the following message written in letters no less than three inches high: "IF YOU RECEIVE A TITLE LOAN, YOUR VEHICLE WILL BE PLEDGED AS SECURITY FOR THE LOAN. IF YOU DO NOT REPAY THIS LOAN IN FULL, INCLUDING ALL FINANCE CHARGES, YOU WILL LOSE YOUR VEHICLE. THIS LOAN HAS A VERY HIGH INTEREST RATE. DO NOT COMPLETE A TITLE LOAN TRANSACTION IF YOU HAVE THE ABILITY TO BORROW MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE AT AN INTEREST RATE LOWER THAN 0.08219 PERCENT PER DAY, 2.5 PERCENT PER MONTH, OR AN ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE OF 30 PERCENT."  
8.07.03. - Maximum Interest Rate, 30 Days. 
A title loan lender may not charge an interest rate in excess of 0.08219 percent per day, or two and five-tenths percent per 30-day period that the title loan agreement remains outstanding and unsatisfied. In determining compliance with the minimum interest and finance charges, the computation must be simple interest and not add-on interest or any other interest computation.  
8.07.04. - Maximum Interest Rate, 360 Days. 
If the title loan agreement has not been satisfied within 360 days, a title loan lender may not charge an interest rate in excess of 18 percent per annum or the maximum interest rate permitted by state statutes for consumer loans for the time the title loan agreement remains outstanding and unsatisfied beyond 360 days regardless of whether the loan is in default.  
8.07.05. - Compliance with Federal Regulations. 
The annual percentage rate that may be charged in a motor vehicle title loan may equal, but not exceed, the annual percentage rate that must be computed and disclosed as required by the Federal Truth-in-Lending Act and Regulation of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. When the period for which the charge is computed is more or less than one month, the minimum rate for the period must be computed on a basis of one-thirtieth of the applicable monthly interest rate, multiplied by the number of days of the period.  
8.07.06. - Prohibited Agreements. 
Any transaction involving a borrower's delivery of a motor vehicle certificate of title in exchange for the advancement of funds on condition that the borrower shall or may redeem or repurchase the certificate of title upon the payment of a sum of money, whether the transaction be characterized as a "buy-sell agreement", "sales-lease back agreement", or otherwise, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter if such sum exceeds the amount that a title loan lender may collect in a title loan agreement under this chapter, or if the terms of the transaction otherwise conflict with the permitted terms and conditions of a title loan agreement under this chapter.  
8.07.07. - Limitation on Charges. 
No charges, including interest, in excess of the combined total of all charges permitted by this chapter shall be allowed.  
8.07.08. - Prepayment Allowed. 
Prepayment or advance payment (partial or total) of principal shall be allowed without penalty after all accrued finance charges have been paid.  
8.07.09. - Loan Amount Limited by Value of Collateral. 
The maximum amount of any motor vehicle title loan secured by a single certificate of title may not exceed one third the wholesale value of the pledged automobile as determined by the most current appropriate edition of an N.A.D.A. Official Used Vehicle Guide.  
8.07.10. - Satisfaction Clears Encumbrances. 
When the title loan has been paid in full, the title loan lender must deliver to the borrower a certificate of title clear of all encumbrances placed upon the title by the title loan lender within 30 days of such payment in full. 
8.07.101.  Repossession Upon Default . A title loan lender who engages in title loan transactions may take possession of the motor vehicle upon the borrower's default under the title loan agreement following the time guidelines of section 538.16, F.S. Unless the borrower voluntarily surrenders the motor vehicle, the title loan lender may only take possession of a motor vehicle through an agent licensed by the State of Florida to repossess motor vehicles. 
8.07.102.  Compliance with Florida Law . A title loan lender who takes possession of a motor vehicle pursuant to this section shall comply with the applicable requirements of chapter 679, part V, F.S. Disposition of the motor vehicle may be by public or private proceedings and may be made by way of one or more contracts. Sale or other disposition may be as a unit or in parts and at any time and on any terms, but every aspect of the disposition including the method, manner, time, place and terms including surplus of the debt must be commercially reasonable and conducted in compliance with chapter 679, part V, F.S., which includes, among other requirements, borrower notification requirements as to manner, method of sale as well as an accounting to the borrower of any surplus from the sale. Any surplus shall be paid to the borrower within thirty days of the sale or disposition. 
8.07.103.  Right to Redemption . Following repossession but prior to disposition of the motor vehicle by sale, the borrower shall have the right to redeem the motor vehicle by payment of the full amount due as of the date of tender of the redemption offer plus the reasonable costs of repossession. The title loan lender shall return the motor vehicle immediately and release the certificate of title with all of the title lender's liens on the property released within 30 days of the full amount due.  
8.07.11. - Records Maintained at Location. 
Every title loan lender shall maintain, at the location at which the title loan was made, all books, accounts, records, receipts for expenses, each contract signed by a borrower, all other documents associated with each title loans transaction and any other documents necessary to determine the title loan lender's compliance with this chapter for a period of two years from the date the loan was satisfied. Each title loan lender shall designate and maintain an agent in this state for service of process.  
8.07.12. - Effective Date; Impairment. 
No part of this chapter may be construed to impair or affect the obligation of any title loan agreement that was lawfully entered into prior to the effective date of this chapter.  
8.07.13. - Violations. 
The following acts are violations of this chapter and chapter 501, part II, F.S., "Florida Fair and Deceptive Trade Practices Act:" 
(1)  Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter. 
(2)  Failing to comply with any applicable provision of chapter 538, F.S., to the extent not preempted by a provision of this chapter, or chapter 679, part V, F.S., as it may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  Committing any act of fraud, misrepresentation, deceit or gross negligence regardless of reliance by or to a borrower, or any illegal activity in connection with a title loan. 
(4)  Fraudulently misrepresenting, circumventing, or concealing any matter required to be stated or furnished to a borrower pursuant to this chapter. 
(5)  Willful imposition of illegal charges on any title loan transaction. 
(6)  Engaging in false, deceptive, or misleading advertising with respect to title loans. 
(7)  Failure to maintain, preserve and keep available for examination all books, accounts, or other documents required by this chapter, state or federal law. 
(8)  Aiding, abetting, or conspiring with an individual to circumvent or violate any requirements of this chapter or state or federal law regulating title loan lenders. 
(9)  Engaging in criminal conduct in the course of a business as a title loan lender. 
(10)  Knowingly entering into a title loan agreement with a person under the age of 18 years. 
(11)  Making any agreement requiring or allowing for the personal liability of a pledgor or the waiver of any of the provisions of this chapter or chapter 679, part V, F.S. 
(12)  Knowingly entering into a title loan agreement with any person who is under the influence of drugs or alcohol when such condition is visible or apparent, or with any person using a name other than his or her own name or the registered name of a business. 
(13)  Entering into a title loan agreement in which the amount of money advanced in consideration for the loan secured by any single certificate exceeds the maximum allowed under this chapter. 
(14)  Failing to exercise reasonable care in the safekeeping of the certificate of title. 
(15)  Failing to return the certificate of title or motor vehicle taken into possession but prior to its disposal under chapter 679, part V, F.S., to a borrower, with any and all of the title lender's liens on the property released within 30 days of the payment of the full amount due, unless the property has been seized or impounded by an authorized law enforcement agency, taken into custody by a court, or otherwise disposed of by a court order. 
(16)  Charging or receiving any finance charge, interest, cost, or fee that is not permitted by this chapter. 
(17)  Refusing to accept partial repayment of the principal amount financed when all accrued finance charges have been paid. 
(18)  Charging a prepayment penalty. 
(19)  Capitalizing any unpaid finance charge as part of the amount financed in the renewal of the title loan agreement which would cause the new principal amount to exceed the maximum amount allowed under this chapter. 
(20)  Assigning or transferring a motor vehicle title loan agreement to another person or entity.  
8.07.14. - Enforcement by City. 
Any violation of this chapter may be punished as provided in section 1.05, of the Code. 
In addition, the city may bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce or administer this chapter including seeking a temporary or permanent injunction or appointment of a receiver when it has reasonable cause to believe that a title loan lender is operating in violation of this chapter. The city shall be entitled to an award of costs and reasonable attorney's fee, including appellate fees and costs, in an action successfully enforcing the terms of this chapter.  
8.07.15. - Violation as Misdemeanor. 
In addition to any civil remedy available to the City of Fort Walton Beach under this chapter, the violation of any part of this chapter shall be a second-degree misdemeanor punishable in the manner provided by general Florida law.  
8.07.16. - Borrower's Remedy. 
A recipient/borrower of a title loan transaction may bring a civil action against the title loan lender violating the provisions of this chapter in a court of competent jurisdiction in Okaloosa County. Upon adverse adjudication, the defendant shall forfeit the entire interest so charged or contracted to be charged and shall be liable to the borrower for two times the original loan amount, together with court cost and attorney's fees incurred by the borrower. If the court finds that the suit fails to raise a justifiable issue of law or fact, the defendant shall be entitled to court cost and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the defendant.  
8.08. - SOLICITORS 
For the purpose of this section, solicit and solicitation shall be construed as any attempt to obtain charitable contributions, or attempts to sell any good or service, for the benefit of the solicitor or on behalf of an individual or organization. 
No person shall solicit or conduct solicitation activities within the city limits of Fort Walton Beach without applying for and receiving a permit and paying the applicable business tax, if necessary, for such activity. When soliciting in residential areas, solicitors shall use only the front door to the dwelling house and shall not solicit at any side or back door. Door-to-door solicitors are authorized to solicit their goods and/or wares in the city only between 9:00 a.m. and official sunset as established by the US Naval Observatory on weekdays. Soliciting on Saturday, Sunday, New Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day is prohibited. No person shall solicit, with or without a permit, at any residence, dwelling, or any commercial establishment that displays a "no soliciting" sign.  
8.09. - DOWNTOWN BUSINESS AND ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT 
 
8.09.01. - District, Boundaries Created. 
There is hereby created a downtown business and entertainment district in the City of Fort Walton Beach in order to encourage commercial and entertainment activities in the downtown. The district shall include all property as depicted in the figure below. 
 
Figure 8.09.01. Downtown Business and Entertainment District 
Boundaries  
8.09.02. - District Hours of Operation. 
The Downtown Business and Entertainment District shall only be in effect during the following days/times: 
(a)  Thursdays — 4:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(b)  Fridays — 4:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(c)  Saturdays — 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(d)  Sundays — 12:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(e)  Federally Recognized Holidays — 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.  
8.09.03. - Noise. 
Within the District, no person shall cause or allow the making of any sound that causes a noise disturbance in excess of the sound level limits as stated in the table below: 
Noise Disturbance Levels 
Days/Hours 	Sound Level (DBA) 
Monday through Thursday 
7:00 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. 
12:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. 	  
80 
70 
Friday through Sunday 
7:00 a.m. to 1:59 p.m. 
2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. 	  
80 
70 
 
Sound level measurements are taken 100 feet from the source of the sound or 50 feet from the property line of the property where the noise is generated, whichever is greater. The sound is considered to be in excess of the sound level limit when it exceeds the stated DBA for more than 15 seconds per minute. 
Temporary relief from the maximum sound level limits may be granted through a special event permit approved by the City. The City shall consider the days/hours of the event, as well as any other relevant information, when determining whether to grant the temporary relief.  
8.09.04. - Open Alcoholic Beverages Allowed. 
Within the Downtown Business and Entertainment Overlay District, patrons and guests may exit licensed establishments with open containers of alcoholic beverages and may consume those beverages anywhere within the confines of the District in accordance with the following: 
(1)  One (1) alcoholic beverage is allowed per person in a plastic cup no greater than 16 oz. as approved by the City. 
(2)  Patrons may not enter another licensed premise with open or closed containers of alcoholic beverages acquired elsewhere. 
Properties located in the Downtown Business and Entertainment District are not subject to the distance separation requirements as outlined in Section 9.01.02 of the Code of Ordinances.  
8.09.05. - Roadside Vendors Allowed. 
Within the District, there is hereby established a roadside vendor program whereby vendors and/or street performers may be allowed within the District by permit only. 
The applicant must submit an application to the City on a form provided by the City. 
The City will issue no more than twenty-five (25) permits on an annual basis. Priority will be given to establishments which have a permanent business location within the District. The remaining permits will be issued on a first come, first serve basis. 
The days and hours of operation will be determined by the permit conditions issued by the City and may vary depending on the season and planned activities within the District.  
8.09.06. - Temporary Road Closures. 
During District Hours, the City may permit the temporary closure of a City street in the District for certain events and activities. 
An application must be submitted on a form provided by the City along with an approved Maintenance of Traffic plan which insures access to all properties along the closed section of road. 
The City will review the request and determine if and when the street shall be closed. Applications for temporary closure of a State road must be submitted to the Florida Department of Transportation.  
8.10. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
 
8.10.01. - License, Photograph, Fingerprints Required. 
No person shall operate a vehicle for hire in the City without first obtaining a business occupational operator's license from the City that identifies the driver and has a photograph of the driver. In addition, all drivers shall be fingerprinted.  
8.10.02. - Display of License. 
A licensed operator of a vehicle for hire shall display the taxicab operator's license when operating a taxicab in the City.  
8.10.03. - Posting, Filing of Rates. 
Every vehicle for hire operated in the City shall have its rates posted in a conspicuous place in such taxicab, including a complete schedule of all rates and charges for transportation of persons, packages and baggage. 
A copy of such rate schedule shall be filed with the City Clerk, and such rates shall not be changed unless a copy of the new rate schedule is filed with the City.  
8.12. - CONSTRUCTION & DEMOLITION DEBRIS HAULING SERVICES 
 
8.12.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction and demolition debris : Discarded materials generally considered to be not water-soluble and non-hazardous in nature including, but not limited to, steel, brick, concrete, asphalt roofing material, pipe, gypsum wallboard, and lumber from the construction or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure; and including rocks, soil, tree remains, trees, shrubbery, and other vegetative matter that normally results from clearing or land development operations for a construction project, including such debris from construction of structures at a site remote from the construction or demolition project site. 
Construction and demolition debris collection vehicle : A vehicle specifically designed for the collection and transport of Construction and Demolition Debris. Such vehicle may be equipped with a permanently mounted debris collection container, or equipped with a detachable container capable of being offloaded, loaded, and transported to and from the construction and demolition debris collection point. All vehicles approved for this type of service shall be equipped with appropriate dust/debris covers to ensure that collected materials are secured within the container during transport. 
Construction and demolition debris container : A container used for the collection, storing, and transport of construction and demolition debris to and from residential, commercial, and industrial properties within the incorporated boundaries of the City of Fort Walton Beach. For the purposes defined herein, such container shall either be detached and able to be hauled to and from the service site by a motor vehicle, or permanently attached to a motor vehicle for loading, transport, and disposal. 
Construction and demolition debris hauler : A business enterprise properly licensed through the City of Fort Walton Beach and operated for the expressed purpose of collecting, transporting, and disposing of construction and demolition debris. 
Business tax receipt : That license and the fees paid that are associated with operating, within the City limits, a construction and demolition debris hauling service, being more particularly described in the city's Comprehensive Fee Schedule, Appendix A, Page 1, "Contractors", "Category A".  
8.12.02. - Owner and vehicle registration provisions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to perform any services associated with the collection, storage, and transportation of construction and demolition debris without first obtaining a business tax receipt from the City's Customer Services Division and registering the company, owner, and service vehicles with the City's Solid Waste Division, using a format approved by the City Manager. The information for registration shall include, but not be limited to, the license plate number, make, model and manufacturer's serial number of each vehicle that will be used or deployed in the City limits; the date each vehicle was put into service in the City limits; the driver's license number of the owner and any operator for each vehicle; the name of the insurance company or companies with which the owner and operators have liability insurance coverage for the operation of the vehicle as required by law; and such other information as may be required.  
8.12.03. - Permitted Activity. 
Those business enterprises with a valid business tax receipt and that are properly registered with the city to perform construction and demolition debris hauling services shall be permitted for the following activities within the corporate boundaries of the City of Fort Walton Beach: 
(1)  The right to contract directly with residential property owners or tenants, commercial property owners or tenants, and industrial property owners or tenants for the collection, storage, and transportation of construction and demolition debris. 
(2)  After entering into a contract for services with the owner or tenant, the right to deposit a construction and demolition debris container on a residential, commercial, or industrial property for the express purpose of collecting construction and demolition debris. 
(3)  After entering into a contract for services with the owner or tenant, the right to store construction and demolition debris materials in an approved container as outlined in 8.12.03(2) for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days. 
(4)  After entering into a contract for services with the owner or tenant, the right to transport collected construction and demolition debris materials from the point of collection through the city to an approved construction and demolition debris receiving station, provided safeguards are in place to ensure that collected materials remain in place within the hauling container during transport.  
8.12.04. - Prohibited Activity. 
Those business enterprises properly registered with the City of Fort Walton Beach to perform construction and demolition debris hauling services are prohibited from performing any other service or activity, within the city limits, unless such hauling service has obtained the proper business tax receipt. Other service or activity shall be construed to mean those hauling services that are consistent with other forms of solid waste collection and disposal including, but not limited to, collection and disposal of garbage/refuse, recyclables other than construction and demolition debris, white goods, hazardous wastes, or the operation of a solid waste transfer station or landfill disposal site.  
8.12.05. - Insurance Requirements. 
It is a violation of this chapter to operate a construction and demolition debris collection vehicle without maintaining insurance coverage in the following minimum amounts: 
(1)  General liability insurance in an amount of not less than $300,000 combined single limit liability. 
(2)  Bodily injury liability insurance and property damage liability insurance in amounts of: not less than $50,000.00 per occurrence for a construction and demolition debris collection vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of less than 35,000 pounds; not less than $100,000.00 per occurrence for a construction and demolition debris collection vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of 35,000 pounds or more but less than 44,000 pounds; and not less than $300,000.00 per occurrence for a construction and demolition debris collection vehicle with a gross weight of more than 44,000 pounds.  
8.12.06. - Violations. 
Violations of this or section shall be prosecuted pursuant to chapter 1.05 of the city code. 
CHAPTER 8 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
2005 Code Section 	1992 Code Section 	State Law References/Other Historical Notes 
	22-81 through 22-98 	Repealed: Ord. 1679 (11-8-05) 
8.00—8.01 	20-44 	Ord. 1679 (11-8-05) 
8.01.01—8.01.19 		Ord. 1725, § II (4-24-07) 
8.01.15 		Ord. 1725, § II (4-24-07); Ord. 1749, § II (1-8-08) 
8.01.19 	20-44 	Code 1985, § 804.02; Ord. 1725, § II (4-24-07) 
8.02 		§ 489.501 et seq., F.S., Alarm systems contractors; Ord. 1667 (11-8-05) 
8.02.01 		Ord. 1787, § 2 (1-13-09) 
8.02.04 		Repealed Ord. 1787, § 3 (1-13-09) 
8.02.11 		Ord. 1787, § 4 (1-13-09) 
8.02.12 		Ord. 1787, § 5 (1-13-09) 
8.02.121 		Ord. 1787, § 5 (1-13-09) 
8.02.122 		Ord. 1787, § 5 (1-13-09) 
8.02.123 		Ord. 1787, § 5 (1-13-09) 
8.02.124 		Ord. 1787, § 5 (1-13-09) 
8.02.125 		Ord. 1787, § 5 (1-13-09) 
8.02.126 		Ord. 1787, § 5 (1-13-09) 
8.02.13 		Ord. 1787, § 6 (1-13-09) 
8.03 		Ch. 546, F.S., Amusement facilities; Ch. 555, F.S., Outdoor theaters; Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
8.03.01 	22-197 	Code 1985, § 858.01; Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
8.03.02 	22-123 	Code 1985, § 808.02; Ord. 1725, § III (4-24-07); Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
8.03.03 	22-122 	Code 1985, § 808.01; Ord. 1725, § III (4-24-07); Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
8.03.04 	22-198 	Code 1985, § 858.02; Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
8.03.05 	22-124 	Code 1985, § 808.03; Ord. 1725, § III (4-24-07); Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
8.03.051 	22-121 	Repealed: Ord. 1676 (11-22-05) 
8.03.052 	22-196 	Repealed: Ord. 1676 (11-22-05) 
8.03.06 		Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
8.03.07 		Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
8.03.08 		Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
8.03.09 		Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
8.04 		Ord. 1623, (3-22-05); Repealed Ord. 
8.04.03 		Ord. 1725, § III, (4-24-07) 
8.04.05 		Ord. 1725, § III, (4-24-07) 
8.04.06 		Ord. 1725, § III, (4-24-07) 
8.04.11 		Ord. 1725, § III, (4-24-07) 
8.05.01 	16-2 	Ord. 1559, (6-24-03); Ord. 1726, § III (9-11-07) 
8.05.02 	16-2(b-c) 	Ord. 1559, (6-24-03) 
8.05.021 	22-171 	Repealed: Ord. 1676 (11-22-05) 
8.06.01 	22-172 	Code 1985, § 846.01; Ord. 1725, § III, (4-24-07) 
8.06.02 	22-173 	Code 1985, § 846.02; Ord. 1725, § III, (4-24-07) 
8.07 		§ 538.17, F.S. 
8.07.01 	23-141 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.02 	23-142 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.021 		Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.022 		Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.023 		Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.03 	23-143 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.04 	23-143(b) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.05 	23-143(c) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.06 	23-143(d) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.07 	23-143(e) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.08 	23-143(f) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.09 	23-143(g) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.10 	23-144(a-e) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.101 		Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.102 		Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.103 		Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.11 	23-144(f-g) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.12 	23-144(h) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.13 	23-145(a) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.14 	23-146(a-b) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.15 	23-146(c) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
8.07.16 	23-146(d) 	Ord. 1405 (4-11-00) 
	22-221 	Repealed: Ord. 1676 (11-22-05) 
8.08 	22-222 	Code 1985, § 872.02; Ord. 947 (6-9-87); Ord. 1723, § 2 (4-24-07) 
8.09 	22-147, 22-148 	Code 1985, § 844.01; Ord. 171.23 (6-12-84) Reserved, Ord 1892 (3-25-14) 
8.09.01 	22-146 	Repealed: Ord. 1676 (11-22-05) Reserved, Ord 1892 (3-25-14) 
8.09.02 	37-26 	Repealed: Ord. 1676 (11-22-05) Reserved, Ord 1892 (3-25-14) 
8.09.03 		Ord 1892 (3-25-14) 
8.09.04 		Ord 1892 (3-25-14) 
8.09.05 		Ord 1892 (3-25-14) 
8.09.06 		Ord 1892 (3-25-14) 
8.10.01 	37-27 	Code 1985, § 878.01 
8.10.02 	37-28 	Code 1985, § 878.02 
	37-29 	Repealed: Ord. 1676 (11-22-05) 
8.10.03 	37-30 	Code 1985, § 878.04 
8.11 		Ord. 1671, § 3, adopted June 13, 2006, repealed the former Ch. 8.11, §§ 8.11.01—8.11.08, which pertained to wreckers and was derived unamended from the 2006 codification.Section 4 of Ord. No. 1671 enacted new provisions pertaining to similar subject matter and designated as Ch. 11.12, §§ 11.12.01—11.12.13., Reserved 
8.11.01 	38-1 	Code 1985, § 886.01; Ord. 1557 (8-12-03), 
8.11.02 	38-2 	Code 1985, § 886.99; Ord. 1557 (8-12-03), 
8.11.03 	38-3 	Code 1985, § 886.02; Ord. 974 (12-8-87); Ord. 1283 (5-9-95); Ord. 1557 (8-12-03), 
8.11.04 	38-4 	Code 1985, § 886.03; Ord. 933 (4-28-87); Ord. 1283 (5-9-95); Ord. 1557 (8-12-03), 
8.11.05 	38-5 	Code 1985, § 886.04; Ord. 933 (4-28-87); Ord. 974 (12-8-87); Ord. 1283 (5-9-95); Ord. 1557 (8-12-03) 
8.11.06 	38-6 	Code 1985, § 886.05; Ord. 933 (4-28-87); Ord. 1283 (5-9-95); Ord. 1557 (8-12-03) 
8.11.07 	38-7 	Code 1985, § 886.06; Ord. 974 (12-8-87); Ord. 1283 (5-9-95); Ord. 1557 (8-12-03) 
8.11.08 	38-8 	Ord. No. 1283, § 6, 5-9-95; Ord. 1557 (8-12-03) 
8.12 		Ord. 1807 (1-26-10) 
8.12.01 		Ord. 1807 (1-26-10) 
8.12.02 		Ord. 1807 (1-26-10) 
8.12.03 		Ord. 1807 (1-26-10) 
8.12.04 		Ord. 1807 (1-26-10) 
8.12.05 		Ord. 1807 (1-26-10) 
8.12.06 		Ord. 1807 (1-26-10) 
  
CHAPTER 9 - OFFENSES  
9.00 - GENERAL 
 
9.00.01 - Violations. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in section 1.05.  
9.00.02 - State Misdemeanors Incorporated. 
No person shall commit, within the City, any act which is recognized by the laws of the State as a misdemeanor, and the commission of any such act is hereby prohibited.  
9.01 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
9.01.02 - Prohibited Locations for Sales. 
(a)  An establishment with on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages may not be located within 500 feet of the main entrance of a public or private elementary school, middle school, or secondary school, except as allowed in the Downtown Business and Entertainment District in Section 8.09 of the code. 
(b)  "School, public or private" shall mean premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning, whether public or private, that conducts regular classes and courses of study required for accreditation as an elementary, secondary, or post-secondary school by the State of Florida. 
(c)  "Main entrance" shall be defined as the opening of a structure, such as a door, passage, or gate which allows principle access to a place. 
(d)  The 500 feet distance shall be measured over the nearest usually traveled pedestrian route between the school and the main entrance of the alcohol sales establishment. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to any location that is licensed as a restaurant which derives at least 51 percent of its gross revenues from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages pursuant to chapter 509, or establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption only, or establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the effective date of this Ordinance, or any person obtaining a special events permit from the City. 
(f)  Should a school existing on the effective day of this ordinance, expand or otherwise move within 500 feet of any existing establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, the existing establishment shall be exempt from the provisions of this section and such establishment shall be permitted to expand its facility from time to time irrespective of the distance restrictions in this section. 
(g)  Uses in existence as of the effective date of this section shall not be rendered nonconforming by these provisions, nor shall the provisions of this section preclude the reconstruction of an alcoholic beverage establishment following a disaster (fire, flood, etc.), provided all other applicable building, zoning, and other codes are met.  
9.01.03 - Reserved.  
9.01.04 - Hours for Sales. 
Alcoholic beverages, regardless of the alcoholic content, may be sold, consumed, served, or permitted to be served or permitted to be consumed in any establishment holding an appropriate and valid license under the Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco of the Department of Business and Professional Regulation, except between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.  
9.01.05 - Conduct in Sales Establishments. 
It is hereby declared that the following prohibited acts encourage conduct in and around establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages which results in violation of law and is dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of the public, and it is the intent of this section to prohibit nudity, gross sexuality and the simulation and depiction thereof in establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
9.01.051  Definition: As used in this section, "establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages" means any business establishment operating within the corporate limits of the city which sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
9.01.052  Nudity & Sexual Conduct Prohibited: No person shall violate the following prohibitions: 
(1)  No person shall expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or any simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  No female person shall expose to public view any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola or any simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any person to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or simulation thereof within such establishment. 
(4)  No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any female person to expose to public view any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola or any simulation thereof within such establishment. 
(5)  No person shall engage in, and no person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit, any sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, sexual act prohibited by law, or touching, caressing or fondling of human breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals, or any simulation thereof, within an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  No person shall cause, and no person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit, the exposition of any graphic representation, including pictures or the projection of film, which depicts human genitals, the human pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, the female breasts below the top of the areola, sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, a sexual act prohibited by law, or touching, caressing or fondling of human breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals, or any simulation thereof, within any establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages except that the exhibition or showing of motion picture films which have received a rating of "General," "Parental Guidance," "Parental Guidance 13" or "Restricted" from the Motion Picture Association of America shall not be restricted or prohibited.  
9.01.06 - Consumption, Possession, Open Containers Restricted. 
An open container means any container of alcoholic beverage which is immediately capable of being consumed from, or the seal of which has been broken. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume, induce, assist or aid another to consume any alcoholic beverage or possess in any cup, can, bottle, or other open container any alcoholic beverage upon or on any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, parking lot, in any alley, City park, City Recreation Center, City Stadium, City softball complex, City tennis complex, or other public property within the City except as permitted pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 8.3 and 8.09 of the code, as amended.  
9.01.07 - On-premise Consumption Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed by the City and State to sell such alcoholic beverages only for consumption off the premises.  
9.02 - STRUCTURES ON CITY PROPERTY PROHIBITED 
No person shall have, maintain, occupy or use, or cause to be maintained, occupied or used, any fence, enclosure, building, house, shed, tent or other structure or obstruction, on any street, park or other property, or on any part thereof, of the City, except as authorized by the City Council or permitted pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 8.3 of the code, as amended.  
9.03 - INJURY TO REAL PROPERTY PROHIBITED 
No person shall remove dirt or topsoil from the property of another or in any way molest the real property of another.  
9.04 - ASSEMBLIES OBSTRUCTING STREETS, SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED 
 
9.04.01 - Loitering Defined. 
Loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around."  
9.04.02 - Obstructive Loitering Prohibited. 
Unless otherwise permitted under lawful authority of the City, it shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand, or remain idle, either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public sidewalk, or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic, or pedestrians. 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or any other public place or building, all of which prevents free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress, therein, thereon, and thereto.  
9.04.03 - Order to Cease, Desist Required. 
When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated above, a Police Officer or any Law Enforcement Officer shall order that person or those persons to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section.  
9.05 - LOITERING RELATED TO DRUG ACTIVITY PROHIBITED 
 
9.05.01 - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of illegally using, possessing, transferring or selling any controlled substance as that term is defined in the Florida Statutes.  
9.05.02 - Circumstances Evidencing Purposes. 
Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such a purpose is manifested are: 
(1)  The person is a known illegal user, possessor or seller of controlled substances, or the person is at a location frequented by persons who illegally use, possess, transfer or sell controlled substances. A "known illegal user, possessor or seller of controlled substances" is a person who, within one (1) year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, has within the knowledge of the Arresting Officer been convicted of illegally manufacturing, using, possessing, selling, purchasing or delivering any controlled substance. 
(2)  The person repeatedly beckons to, stops, attempts to stop or engage in conversation with passersby, whether such passersby are on foot or in a motor vehicle, for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to illegally possess, transfer or buy any controlled substance. 
(3)  The person repeatedly passes to or receives from passersby, whether such passersby are on foot or in a motor vehicle, money, objects or written material for the purposes of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to illegally possess, transfer or buy any controlled substance.  
9.05.02(A) - Demonstration of Intent Required for Violation. 
In order for there to be a violation of this chapter, the person's affirmative language or conduct must be such as to demonstrate by its express or implied content or appearance a specific intent to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to illegally possess, transfer or buy a controlled substance.  
9.05.03 - Opportunity to Explain Required. 
No arrest shall be made for a violation of this section unless the Arresting Officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain his or her conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose.  
9.06 - LOUD AND UNUSUAL NOISES PROHIBITED 
 
9.06.01 - Prohibition. 
No person shall maliciously or willfully disturb the quiet of any street or neighborhood, or of any family of persons, by making loud or unusual noises; by blowing horns or other instruments; by the beating of drums, pans or other things of like nature; by loud and boisterous laughing, singing or screaming; or by using any other device or means whatever to disturb the peace.  
9.06.02 - Prohibited Noises Defined. 
The following acts and omissions are hereby prohibited: 
(1)  Horns and other signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or other signaling device on any motor vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as specifically permitted or required by law, or as a danger warning, and the sounding of any such device for any unnecessary period of time. 
(2)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary or portable internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler in good repair or other device that effectively prevents loud or disturbing noises, provided that where such steam engine, stationary or portable internal combustion engine or motor vehicle is enclosed within a building used for industrial or commercial purposes, a reasonable level of such noise will be permitted. This subsection shall not apply to aircraft or to supporting ground equipment for aircraft. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers or noise devices for advertising. The use of any radio or television set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, bell, drum, horn or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound directed upon public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building, structure or tent. Temporary exceptions for civic events, for civic or religious organizations or for the playing of music during the Christmas season only may be authorized by the city manager for such periods of time and under such conditions as may be consistent with the public interest. 
(4)  Radios, television sets, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio or television receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for producing or reproducing sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants. 
(5)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, or at any other place, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity. 
(6)  Domestic pets. The keeping of any domestic bird or animal which emits frequent or long continued noise so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants. 
(7)  Tools. The use in a residential zone or in the vicinity of a hotel or motel of hand or power tools or machinery, resulting in loud and disturbing noises, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(8)  Hawkers, peddlers and vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers or vendors on any public street or place or on private property so closely adjacent thereto that crowds may be collected and traffic obstructed thereon, except as permitted pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 8.3 of the code, as amended. 
(9)  Sirens. The sounding of sirens on escort services, except where specifically required or permitted by law and not for the purpose of calling attention to a vehicle or caravan, and the sounding of a siren on an ambulance, except when operated in response to an emergency call and when reasonably necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.  
9.06.03 - Exceptions to Prohibited Noises. 
None of the preceding provisions shall apply to emergency situations where life, health or property is at stake or to intermittent situations arising out of industrial research and development work carried on in areas zoned for industrial purposes, nor to those normal situations of community life where noise is inherent and has long been accepted by the community, such as activities during school recess and at public parks and athletic contests, and otherwise as permitted pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 8.3 of the code, as amended.  
9.07 - THREATENING, INTIMIDATING, HARASSING BEHAVIOR FOR SOLICITATION PROHIBITED 
 
9.07.01 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this section the term, solicit and solicitation shall be construed to include attempts to obtain charitable contributions, or attempts to sell any good or service, for the benefit of the solicitor or on behalf of an individual or organization.  
9.07.02 - Prohibited Conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or conduct solicitation activities in the following manner or under these stated conditions: 
(1)  By any act or language constituting an express or implied threat of injury to any person or of damage to or loss of any property owned by or in lawful possession of the solicited person; 
(2)  By endeavoring to maintain contact with the solicited person and continuing to verbally demand, ask or beg for, or to solicit, donations or payment from any person after the solicited person has made a negative response to an initial demand or solicitation; 
(3)  By any act intended to impede the passage or free movement of the solicited person who is on foot, bicycle, in a wheelchair, operating a motor vehicle or attempting to enter or exit a motor vehicles; 
(4)  When either the solicitor or the person being solicited is at a bus stop or sidewalk cafe, in a public transportation vehicle or facility, in a vehicle parked or stopped on a public street or alley, within 20 feet from any ATM machine or entrance to a bank, within 20 feet of a public toilet facility; 
(5)  In an aggressive manner, to include: 
a.  Touching the solicited person without the solicited person's consent; 
b.  Soliciting a person while such person is standing in line and waiting to be admitted to a commercial establishment; 
c.  Blocking the path of a person being solicited, or the entrance to any building or vehicle; 
d.  Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away from the panhandler after being solicited; 
e.  Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following a refusal to make a donation, or making any statement, gesture, or other communication which would cause a reasonable person to be fearful or feel compelled; 
f.  By a group of more than two solicitors approaching one individual; or 
(6)  By failing for a second time to produce a business tax receipt, as required by section 8.08 of this Code, upon request by a Law Enforcement Officer.  
9.07.03 - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating this section shall be prosecuted in the same manner as a misdemeanor in the second degree, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment, not to exceed 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.  
9.08 - OBEDIENCE TO CIVIL AUTHORITY REQUIRED 
 
9.08.01 - Authority of Police Acting in Line of Duty. 
No person shall disregard or disobey a police officer while he is acting in the performance of his or her duties within the city.  
9.08.02. - Crime Scene Regulation. 
The chief of police or such police officer as he may direct shall regulate all crime scenes and may establish such police lines, by the means of ropes, tapes, signs, barricades or other similar devices or materials, as he deems necessary to protect persons and property and to permit the police to carry out their lawful duties. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, disregard, cross, or otherwise interfere with an established police line, without the permission of the chief of police or such officer as he may direct.  
9.09 - TATTOOING OF MINORS PROHIBITED 
No person shall tattoo any other person under the age of 18 years. 
CHAPTER 9 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
2005 Code Section 	1992 Code Section 	State Law References/Other Historical Notes 
9.00.01 	23-1 	Code 1985, §§ 648.99, 664.99, 668.99, 682.99 
9.00.02 	23-2 	Code 1985, § 648.03 
	4-1 	Repeal 
9.01.01 	4-2 	§§ 561.01(5), 563.01, 564.01, F.S.;Code 1985, § 606.01; Ord. 1825 (5-11-10) 
9.01.02 	4-3, in part 	Code 1985, § 606.02; Ord. 983 (3-8-88); Ord. 1028 (5-9-89); Ord. 1183 (4-14-92); Ord. 1825 (5-11-10), Ord. 1892 (3-25-14) 
9.01.03 	4-3, in part 	Code 1985, § 606.02; Ord. 983 (3-8-88); Ord. 1028 (5-9-89); Ord. 1183 (4-14-92); Ord. 1825 (5-11-10), Reserved 
9.01.04 	4-4 	§§ 562.14(1), 562.45(2), F.S.; Code 1985, § 606.03; Ord. 61.4 (8-10-82); Ord. 1386, (7-27-99); Ord. 1796 (10-27-09) 
9.01.05 	4-5 	Code 1985, § 606.04 
9.01.051 		Code 1985, § 606.04 
9.01.052 		Code 1985, § 606.04 
9.01.06 	4-6 	§ 562.45(2), F.S.; Code 1985, § 606.05; Ord. 1009 (9-27-88); Ord. 1368 (1-12-99); Ord. 1514 (8-27-02); Ord. 1823 (3-9-10), Ord 1892 (3-25-14) 
9.01.07 	4-7(a) 	Ord. 1368, § 4 (1-12-99) 
	4-7(b) 	Repeal 
9.02 	23-21 	Code 1985, § 1020.05; Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
9.03 	23-22 	Code 1985, § 664.04 
9.04.01 	23-60(a) 	Ord. 1365 (1-12-99) 
9.04.02 	23-60(b) 	Ord. 1365 (1-12-99) 
9.04.03 	23-60(c) 	Ord. 1365 (1-12-99) 
	23-60(d) 	Repeal 
9.05.01 	23-61(a, d) 	§ 895.02, F.S.; Ord. 1141 (3-12-91) 
9.05.02 	23-61(b) 	§ 895.02, F.S.; Ord. 1141 (3-12-91) 
9.05.02(A) 		§ 895.02, F.S.; Ord. 1141 (3-12-91) 
9.05.03 	23-61(d) 	§ 895.02, F.S.; Ord. 1141 (3-12-91) 
	23-61(e) 	Repeal 
9.06.01 	23-62(a) 	Code 1985, §§ 668.01, 668.02 
9.06.02 	23-62(b) 	Code 1985, §§ 668.01, 668.02 
9.06.03 	23-62(c) 	Code 1985, §§ 668.01, 668.02; Ord. 1823 (3-9-10) 
9.07.01 	23-63(a) 	Ord. 1364 (1-12-99); Ord. 1723, § 3, (4-24-07) 
9.07.02 	23-63(b) 	Ord. 1364 (1-12-99); Ord. 1723, § 3, (4-24-07) 
	23-63(c) 	Repeal 
9.07.03 		Ord. 1723, § 3, (4-24-07) 
9.08.01 	23-106 	Code 1985, § 648.01 
	23-107(a-b) 	Ord. 1366 (1-12-99) 
	23-107(c) 	Repeal 
9.09 	23-126 	Code 1985, § 876.01 
  
CHAPTER 10 - PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES  
10.00 - GENERAL 
 
10.00.01 - Violations. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this title are punishable as provided in section 1.05 of the Code.  
10.00.02 - Authority to Establish Fees. 
The council shall establish all fees, rates, and charges applicable in this title by resolution in the general fee schedule.  
10.10 - CEMETERY—BEAL MEMORIAL CEMETERY 
 
10.10.01 - Beal Memorial Cemetery. 
The Beal Memorial Cemetery is operated by the City. A cemetery supervisor shall be employed, and he/she shall be responsible to the director of public works for the operation and maintenance of the cemetery and for the enforcement of this Chapter.  
10.10.02 - Use of Roadways, Entrances. 
No person shall use the roadways of Beal Memorial Cemetery as public thoroughfares for passage through the cemetery or for any other purposes, other than for attendance at funerals, memorial occasions, visits to graves or cemetery lots, or other similar uses and purposes, including official business. No person shall climb over, go through or go over any wall, fence or hedge in the cemetery; trespass in any manner upon cemetery property; or enter or leave the cemetery at any place other than at regularly established gateways or entrances and at such times as are established by the City manager by administrative policy for visitation. Persons within the cemetery grounds shall use only the walkways, avenues, and roads and shall not walk, drive, or ride upon the lots, plots, and spaces.  
10.10.03 - Burial Permits. 
It shall be the duty of the family or friends of any person about to be buried in the cemetery to furnish a proper burial permit prior to burial and give the place of birth, age and residence at the time of death, sex and date of death of the deceased, so far as is known.  
10.10.04 - Notice of Interment. 
Notice to the cemetery sexton [supervisor] of an interment must be accomplished by directions as to the lot and the particular spot on the lot where the grave is to be opened and such notice must be presented within eight working hours of the interment.  
10.10.05 - Work Orders. 
No person shall erect or place any memorial marker or do any work in the cemetery without first presenting a written order from the lot owner to the cemetery supervisor and obtaining written permission from the cemetery supervisor for the work contemplated. All monument contractors must contact the cemetery supervisor 48 hours before setting any monument. All monuments must be approved by the cemetery supervisor.  
10.10.06 - Waste Materials. 
All soil removed by contractors excavating graves shall be placed on a cover adjacent to the opened grave or moved to a location specified by the cemetery supervisor. No soil will be allowed on grassed areas. Upon closure, graves shall be tamped to original compaction and made level with the existing ground around the grave.  
10.10.07 - Unsightly Debris. 
The cemetery sexton [supervisor] and/or any person employed by him and acting under his or her direction shall have the right to go upon any lot and to cut down or remove any and all weeds, tall grasses, underbrush, trash, etc., or to proceed in any manner as deemed necessary to put the lot or cemetery premises in good condition and to render the cemetery premises sightly.  
10.10.08 - Lot Enclosures. 
No lot owner shall erect any fence, wall or curbing around any lot or place thereon any cement or stone slab or any walkway leading to or from such lot.  
10.10.09 - Markers and Tombstones. 
10.10.091  General Requirements: All temporary markers will be removed at the time a permanent stone or monument has been placed. No marker, tombstone or monument shall be erected on grave space until the lot is paid for in full. 
10.10.092  Upright Markers or Tombstones: Upright markers or tombstones may be erected in that portion of Beal Memorial Cemetery designated for tombstones, but such markers shall not exceed three feet in height or exceed 12 inches in width or cover more than two-thirds of the width of the grave space (single lot is 42 inches wide, marker can be no more than 28 inches long; double lot is 84 inches wide, marker can be no more than 56 inches long; and triple lot is 126 inches wide, marker can be no more than 84 inches long). 
10.10.093  Flat Markers: In the section of the cemetery wherein only the installation of grass level markers is permitted, such markers shall not exceed 12 inches in width and 24 inches in length, and shall be installed with the top surface flush with the ground level. Only one marker is permitted per grave space in the flat marker sections of the cemetery.  
10.10.10 - Permanent Maintenance Fund. 
Twenty percent of the purchase money for all Beal Memorial Cemetery lots sold shall be set aside to establish a permanent maintenance fund.  
10.10.11 - Vaults. 
A cement, steel or equivalent strength vault shall be provided, at the cost of the lot owner, for all burials except newborn infants and cremations. Such vaults shall be of such specifications and weight as to prevent retention of water and cave-ins in the grave space.  
10.10.12 - Care of Grave Space. 
The City shall not be responsible for any damage caused during normal maintenance activities. The following rules for the care of grave space shall be enforced by the cemetery supervisor: 
(1)  Flowers from burial services can be removed by the cemetery supervisor or his or her/her agent after three days. 
(2)  One portable container or one potted plant per grave is permitted. 
(3)  Easels and stands are not permitted. 
(4)  Permanent plantings are not permitted. 
(5)  Faded flowers, plastic, potted or fresh, can be removed from the grave space and discarded. The containers shall be held for a reasonable time (14 days) at the cemetery administrative office. 
(6)  The City does not recommend and will not be responsible for pictures placed on flat grave markers.  
10.10.13 - Pauper Burials. 
When it is made to appear to the City, by proof submitted to the City by the cemetery sexton, that a City resident has died and does not have an estate sufficient to pay the purchase price of a grave space in the Beal Memorial Cemetery, and that the nearest relative or representative of such deceased person desires to have the deceased interred in the cemetery, any four members of the council may authorize burial space for such deceased person. Strangers without funds who die in the City, and paupers who die in the City, may be accorded the privilege granted in this section. 
10.10.131  Lazarus Field: Plots 370 (C, D, E, and F) and 371 (A, B, and C) in the Good Shepherd Section shall be designated as the "Lazarus Field". 
(Ord. No. 1957 , § 2, 10-25-16)  
10.10.14 - Reservation of Grave Space. 
The cemetery sexton may reserve grave space, at the request of a prospective purchaser, for a period of ten days without a formal agreement or payment of the price of the lot. A record shall be kept of any such reservation made. At the expiration of the time period, a formal agreement to purchase such space must be signed or the space paid for. In the absence of a formal agreement or payment for the space, the space may be sold to any purchaser.  
10.10.15 - Cost, Payment for Lots, Crypts, Niches. 
Any cemetery lot, mausoleum crypt or cremains niche must be paid for prior to interment. Any cemetery lot, mausoleum crypt or cremains niche shall be paid for in full or by an agreement to purchase the same in installments which shall be executed with the City. Such agreements shall be prepared by the City Manager and shall designate the type of interment, specific location, and price and terms. 
A minimum down payment of 20 percent, the number of months of the agreement, the interest rate of nine and one-half (9-1/2) percent (simple interest) and the payment amount shall be specified in the installment purchase agreement. 
"Immediate family," as used in this section, means a spouse, parent, child, grandparent, brother, sister, mother-in-law or father-in-law. 
10.10.151  Exemption For Certain Persons: Any sworn police officer or certified firefighter employed by the City at the time of death and any active duty, Reserve or National Guard member of the United States Armed Forces (Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Coast Guard) whose residence at the time of death is within the City limits, who has been killed in the line of duty is eligible for a City cemetery plot or wall niche at no cost. Prior to the commencement of interment, the City shall verify the eligibility of any person whose remains are to be interred pursuant to this policy. 
The City reserves the right to determine which City cemetery plot(s) or wall niche(s) are available for use by eligible persons and to assign a plot or niche.  
10.10.16 - Multiple Interments. 
10.10.161  Multiple Cremation Interments: Multiple cremation interments shall be permitted within a single grave space up to a maximum of five. The lot cost for multiple burials of this type (up to five) shall be the per lot cost shown for one lot. Each time an individual grave or lot of this classification is reopened to accommodate this type of multiple burials; an additional fee shall be paid. 
10.10.162  Multiple Burial Vault Interments: Interments of one adult and one infant child, or of newborn infant children, or of children of sufficiently small stature that would permit use of a single burial vault in a grave space, shall be permitted as a single interment. Existing grave spaces shall not be reopened to accommodate additional burials. The per lot cost for this type of grave shall be as for one lot. 
10.10.163  Other Restrictions: No other multiple interments are authorized. Monuments or markers for burials described in this section must be consistent with the overall plan of Beal Memorial Cemetery. 
10.10.164  Those plots located within the Lazarus Field shall be allowed unlimited cremains; however, all cremation interments in the Lazarus Field shall be a minimum of 12 inches below the existing grade elevation. 
(Ord. No. 1957 , § 2, 10-25-16)  
10.10.17 - Transfer or Exchange of Ownership. 
Transfer of ownership or exchange of interment spaces within Beal Memorial Cemetery may be accomplished by the payment of a minimum charge of ten percent of the cost of the original interment space or $25.00, whichever is greater.  
10.10.18 - City's Right to Repurchase. 
The City shall have the first option to repurchase cemetery space at the original purchase price, less ten percent for administrative costs. The City shall have the first option to repurchase mausoleum space and niches at 50 percent of the original purchase price.  
10.10.19 - Fee for Opening After Interment. 
When any interment space is opened after interment of the deceased, a fee will be charged.  
10.10.20 - Decorum Required in Cemetery. 
The City shall regulate the use of the Beal Memorial Cemetery grounds, require strict decorum to be observed at all times, and prohibit bicycles and motorcycles, except such as may be in attendance at funerals, on business or to visit gravesites; dogs, except seeing-eye dogs; and firearms, except by duly constituted authorities and military honor guards.  
10.10.21 - Specified Sections for Religious Denominations. 
Religious denominations having a church, synagogue or principal place of worship in the City, when that denomination requires designation of separate burial spaces to accommodate religious requirements of isolation, may apply for reservation of a section of the Beal Memorial Cemetery for burial of their members. The size of these sections shall be not less than 40 feet of road frontage and not greater than 100 feet of road frontage with the depth extending to the buffer area at the south side of section 3D. The layout and lot sizes shall be determined by the City. 
10.10.211  Location Within Cemetery Designated: The specified sections in the cemetery shall be confined to the portion of the facility, south of the south road, beginning west of section 3C and ending on the west boundary of section 3D. Once the area (section 3D) is completely reserved, no other sections of the cemetery shall be available to religious institutions as specified burial sections. 
10.10.212  Application for Specific Section: Religious organization requesting a specified burial section shall make application with the cemetery sexton [supervisor]. The City manager shall review the application and, if necessary, conduct the necessary research to ensure compliance with the intent of this section. The City manager is hereby authorized to approve or deny requests. If a request is denied, the religious organization may appeal the denial to the Council. 
10.10.213  Other Regulations: All appropriate sections of this title shall apply to specified burial sections.  
10.10.22 - Disinterment. 
No disinterment shall be made except on express permission of the cemetery supervisor. The City will assume no liability for damage to any casket, burial case, vault, or urn, incurred in making the disinterment. There shall be a fee for this service, to include contractor cost.  
10.11 - CEMETERY—BROOKS CEMETERY 
 
10.11.01 - Brooks Cemetery. 
The Brooks Cemetery is operated by the City. The Brooks Cemetery shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter regarding the Beal Memorial Cemetery except as modified, by this Chapter.  
10.11.02 - Subdivision. 
The City council shall have sole authority to subdivide the cemetery into blocks, lots, grave spaces, and streets and to determine the dimensions and locations of each. 
Old Section is the western 200.4 foot × 230.0 foot parcel as depicted on Drawing 15-24, dated May 3, 2000, entitled "Brooks Cemetery". Only descendants/relatives of family members currently interred in the Old Section can be buried in the Old Section of the cemetery. 
New Section is the eastern 99.4 foot × 230.0 foot parcel as depicted in Drawing 15-24, dated May 3, 2000, entitled "Brooks Cemetery".  
10.11.03 - Lot Enclosures. 
Plot enclosures, fences, curbings, coping, slabs and ornamental gravel are permitted in the Old Section only. Care and maintenance of said enclosures is the total responsibility of the plot owners. If such existing enclosures or curbings are not properly maintained, they may be removed at the direction of the public works director or a designee.  
10.11.04 - Markers and Tombstones. 
Family (private) mausoleums are permitted in the Old Section only.  
10.20 - COMMUNICATIONS IN RIGHT-OF-WAY AREAS 
 
10.20.01 - Title. 
This title shall be known and may be cited as the Fort Walton Beach Communications Rights-of-Way Ordinance.  
10.20.02 - Intent, Purpose. 
It is the intent of the City to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by: providing for the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way within the City; adopting and administering reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with state and federal law, including F.S. § 337.401, (2000), as it may be amended, the City's home rule authority, and in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, the Advanced Wireless Infrastructure Deployment Act of 2017, and other federal and state law; establishing reasonable rules and regulations necessary to manage the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way by all communications services providers; and minimizing disruption to the public rights-of-way. In regulating its public rights-of-way, the City shall be governed by and shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 1998 , § 2, 11-27-18)  
10.20.03 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given. Where not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined shall be construed to mean the common and ordinary meaning. 
Abandonment. The permanent cessation of all uses of a Communications Facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a Facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used. By way of example, and not limitation, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used, shall not be "abandonment" of a Facility in Public Rights-of-Way. 
City. Fort Walton Beach, Florida, a municipality incorporated under the laws of the State of Florida. 
Collocate or collocation . Means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace one or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. The term does not include the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure in the public rights-of-way. 
Communications services. The transmission, conveyance or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, by or through any electronic, radio, satellite, cable, optical, microwave, or other medium or method now in existence or hereafter devised, regardless of the protocol used for such transmission or conveyance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of this Chapter "cable service", as defined in F.S. § 202.11(2), 2000, as it may be amended, is not included in the definition of "communications services," and cable service providers may be subject to other ordinances of the City. 
Communications services provider. Any person including a municipality or county providing communications services to the general public through the placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way. "Communications services provider" shall also include any person including a municipality or county that places or maintains a Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way but does not provide communications services. 
Communications facility or facility or system. Any permanent or temporary plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, fiber optics, poles, antennas, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults, drains, surface location markers, appurtenances, and other equipment or pathway placed or maintained or to be placed or maintained in the Public Rights-of-Way of the City and used or capable of being used to transmit, convey, route, receive, distribute, provide or offer communications services. 
Emergency. A condition that affects the public's health, safety or welfare, which includes an unplanned out-of-service condition of a pre-existing service. 
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission. 
In Public Rights-of-Way or in the Public Rights-of-Way. In, on, over, under or across the public rights-of-way. 
Ordinance [Chapter]. Ordinance 1459 [this Chapter]. Ordinance 1998. 
Person. Any individual, children, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, organization or legal entity of any kind, successor, assignee, transferee, personal representative, and all other groups or combinations, and shall include the City to the extent the City acts as a communications services provider. 
Place or maintain or placement or maintenance or placing or maintaining. To erect, construct, install, maintain, place, repair, extend, expand, remove, occupy, locate or relocate. A Communications Services Provider that owns or exercises physical control over Communications Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way, such as the physical control to maintain and repair, is "placing or maintaining" the facilities. A person providing service only through resale or only through use of a third party's unbundled network elements is not "placing or maintaining" the Communications Facilities through which such service is provided. The transmission and receipt of radiofrequency signals through the airspace of the Public Rights-of-Way does not constitute "placing or maintaining" facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. 
Public Rights-of-Way. A public right-of-way, public utility easement, highway, street, bridge, tunnel or alley for which the City is the authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to pursuant to applicable law, and includes the surface, the air space over the surface and the area below the surface. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include private property. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal City property except as described above and shall not include City buildings, fixtures, poles, conduits, facilities or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
Registrant. A Communications Services Provider that has registered with the City in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
Registration or register. The process described in this Chapter whereby a Communications Services Provider provides certain information to the City. 
Small Wireless Facility. A communications facility or system with an antenna enclosure no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, if lacking an enclosure, could fit within an enclosure equal or less than six (6) cubic feet in volume, and whose wireless equipment that is more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume less antenna, electric meters, concealment elements, ground based enclosures, grounding equipment, telecommunications demarcation boxes, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, vertical cable runs, the utility pole and support structure(s). 
Stealth technology. Communications facilities designed in such a way that the facilities and their various component parts (antennas, cables, wires, lattice support) are camouflaged and compatible with the structure upon which they are mounted. 
Utility Pole . A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part to provide communications services or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function. The term includes the vertical support structure for traffic lights but does not include a horizontal structure to which signal lights or other traffic control devices are attached and does not include a pole or similar structure fifteen (15) feet in height or less unless an authority grants a waiver for such pole. 
Wireless support structure : A freestanding structure, such as a monopole, a guyed or self-supporting tower, or another existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. The term does not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 1998 , § 2, 11-27-18)  
10.20.04 - Registration Required. 
A communications services provider that desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the City shall first register with the City in accordance with this Chapter. Subject to the terms and conditions prescribed in this Chapter, a registrant may place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way.  
10.20.05 - Legal Effect of Registration. 
A registration shall not convey any title, equitable or legal, to the registrant in the Public Rights-of-Way. Registration under this Chapter governs only the placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities in public rights-of-way. Other Chapters, codes or regulations may apply to the placement or maintenance in the Public Rights-of-Way of facilities that are not Communications Facilities. Registration does not excuse a Communications Services Provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before locating its facilities on the City or another person's facilities. Registration does not excuse a Communications Services Provider from complying with all applicable City ordinances, codes or regulations.  
10.20.06 - Application for Registration. 
Each Communications Services Provider that desires to place or maintain a Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way in the City shall file a single registration with the City on a registration form that shall include following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's primary contact person in connection with the registration, and the person to contact in case of an emergency; the registrant shall ensure that the City always has current contact information. 
(3)  For registrations submitted prior to October 1, 2001, the applicant shall state whether it provides local service or toll service or both; 
(4)  Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this Chapter and acknowledgment that registrant has received and reviewed a copy of this Chapter, which acknowledgment shall not be deemed an agreement; and 
(5)  The number of the applicant's certificate of authorization or license to provide Communications Services issued by the Florida Public Service Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or other federal or state authority, if any. 
(6)  For an applicant that does not provide a Florida Public Service Commission certificate of authorization number, if the applicant is a corporation, proof of authority to do business in the State of Florida, such as the number of the certificate from or filing with the Florida Department of State.  
10.20.07 - City Manager's Review. 
The City Manager or designee shall review the registration information submitted by the applicant. If the applicant submits information in accordance with the registration form, the registration shall be effective and the City shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of registration in writing. If the City determines that the information has not been submitted in accordance with the form, the City shall notify the applicant of the non-effectiveness of registration, and reasons for the non-effectiveness, in writing. The City shall so reply to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of registration information from the applicant. Non-effectiveness of registration shall not preclude an applicant from filing subsequent applications for registration under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1998 , § 2, 11-27-18)  
10.20.08 - Registration Cancellation. 
A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the City stating that it will no longer place or maintain any Communications Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way within the City and will no longer need to obtain permits to perform work in Public Rights-of-Way. A registrant cannot cancel a registration if the registrant continues to place or maintain any Communications Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way.  
10.20.09 - Limitations of Registration. 
Registration does not in and of itself establish a right to place or maintain or priority for the placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way within the City but shall establish for the registrant a right to apply for a permit. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this Chapter and further subject to any additional City ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted.  
10.20.10 - Registration Renewal. 
A registrant shall renew its registration with the City every two (2) years. If no information in the then-existing registration has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure to renew a registration may result in the City restricting the issuance of additional permits until the Communications Services Provider has complied with the registration requirements.  
10.20.11 - Permit Required. 
In accordance with applicable City ordinances, codes or regulations, a permit shall be required of a Communications Services Provider that desires to place or maintain a Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way. An effective registration shall be a condition of obtaining a permit. Notwithstanding an effective registration, permitting requirements shall apply. A permit may be obtained by or on behalf of a registrant having an effective registration if all permitting requirements are met.  
10.20.12 - Notice of Transfer, Sale or Assignment. 
If a registrant transfers, sells or assigns its assets located in Public Rights-of-Way incident to a transfer, sale or assignment of the registrant's assets, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the terms of this Chapter. Written notice of any such transfer, sale or assignment shall be provided by such registrant to the City thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the transfer, sale or assignment. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee is not required to re-register. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is not a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee shall register as provided in this Chapter within thirty (30) days of the transfer, sale or assignment. If permit applications are pending in the registrant's name, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall notify the City Manager or a designee that the transferee, buyer or assignee is the new applicant.  
10.20.13 - Compliance with Laws Required. 
A registrant shall at all times comply with and abide by all applicable provisions of the state and federal law and City ordinances, codes and regulations in placing or maintaining a Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way.  
10.20.14 - Permit Required Prior to Commencement. 
A registrant shall not commence to place or maintain a communications facility in Public Rights-of-Way until all applicable permits, if any, have been issued by the City or other appropriate authority, except in the case of an emergency. Registrant shall provide prompt notice to the City of the placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way in the event of an emergency and shall be required to obtain an after-the-fact permit if a permit would have originally been required to perform the work undertaken in Public Rights-of-Way in connection with the emergency. Registrant acknowledges that as a condition of granting such permits, the City may impose reasonable rules or regulations governing the placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way. Permits shall apply only to the areas of Public Rights-of-Way specifically identified in the permit. The City may issue a blanket permit to cover certain activities, such as routine maintenance and repair activities that may otherwise require individual permits.  
10.20.15 - Permit Application. 
As part of the permit application to place a new or replace an existing Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way, the registrant shall provide all documentation required by the permit as follows: 
(1)  Engineering drawings of facilities located in the Public Rights-of-Way, including, but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Desired location of the proposed facilities including dimensions to the right-of-way line or back of curb; 
(b)  Description of the facilities to be installed; 
(c)  Approximate size of the facilities; 
(d)  Plans must show that the proposed work is within the limits of the right-of-way or easement; 
(e)  All existing utilities, underground or aboveground, must be located and drawn on the plan in the area of the proposed work; 
(f)  For directional boring installations, a cross-section drawing, drawn to scale, at every location involving a main utility line crossing (such as intersections); 
(g)  Upon completion of construction of the Facilities, provide to the City at no cost, revised as-built plans, based upon actual installation, in a hard copy format or an electronic format specified by the City (provided such electronic format is maintained by the registrant); and 
(h)  Any other information deemed necessary by the City. 
(2)  A description of the manner in which the facility will be installed (i.e. anticipated construction methods or techniques); 
(3)  A maintenance of traffic plan for any disruption of the Public Rights-of-Way; 
(4)  Information demonstrating the ability of the Public Rights-of-Way to accommodate the proposed facility; 
(5)  If appropriate given the Facility proposed, an estimate of the cost of restoration to the Public Rights-of-Way; 
(6)  The timetable for construction of the project or each phase thereof, and the areas of the City which will be affected; 
(7)  Such additional information as the City finds reasonably necessary with respect to the placement or maintenance of the Communications Facility that is the subject of the permit application to review such permit application; and 
(8)  A pre-construction conference shall be required at the discretion of the Public Works Director.  
10.20.16 - Discretion to Prohibit. 
To the extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the City shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional Communications Facilities within a particular area of Public Rights-of-Way.  
10.20.17 - Noninterference with Others. 
All Communications Facilities shall be placed or maintained so as not to unreasonably interfere, as determined at the sole discretion of the City, with the use of the Public Rights-of-Way by the public and by the City for installation of its utilities, with the rights and convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the Public Rights-of-Way. The use of trenchless technology (i.e., directional bore method), with the proper subsurface engineering, for the installation of Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way as well as joint trenching or the co-location of facilities in existing conduit is strongly encouraged, and should be employed wherever feasible. The City may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations concerning the placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way consistent with this Chapter and other applicable law.  
10.20.18 - Safety Practices. 
All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry practices and standards shall be used during the placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities.  
10.20.19 - Restoration of Right-of-Way. 
After the completion of any placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way or each phase thereof, a registrant shall, at its own expense, restore the Public Rights-of-Way to its original condition before such work to the satisfaction of the City. If the registrant fails to make such restoration within fourteen (14) calendar days, or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required under the circumstances, following the completion of such placement or maintenance, the City may perform restoration and charge the costs of the restoration against the registrant in accordance with § 337.402, F.S., as it may be amended. For twelve (12) months following the original completion of the work, the registrant shall guarantee its restoration work and shall correct any restoration work that does not satisfy the requirements of this Chapter at its own expense.  
10.20.20 - Removal, Relocation of Facility. 
Removal or relocation at the direction of the City of a registrant's Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way shall be governed by the provisions of § 337.403 and § 337.404, F.S., as they may be amended.  
10.20.21 - Permit Authority. 
A permit from the City constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities in Public Rights-of-Way in accordance with this Chapter, and does not create a property right or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the Public Rights-of-Way.  
10.20.22 - Industry Standards Apply. 
A registrant shall maintain its Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way in a manner consistent with accepted industry practice and applicable law and to the satisfaction of the City.  
10.20.23 - Compliance with F.S. Chapter 556. 
In connection with excavation in the Public Rights-of-Way, a registrant shall, where applicable, comply with the Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act set forth in Chapter 556, F.S., as it may be amended.  
10.20.24 - Due Care & Skill. 
Registrant shall use and exercise due caution, care and skill in performing work in the Public Rights-of-Way and shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard work site areas and the general public.  
10.20.25 - Coordination with Other Work. 
Upon request of the City, and as notified by the City of the other work, construction, installation or repairs referenced below, a registrant may be required to coordinate placement or maintenance activities under a permit with any other work, construction, installation or repairs that may be occurring or scheduled to occur within a reasonable time frame in the subject Public Rights-of-Way, and registrant may be required to reasonably alter its placement or maintenance schedule as necessary so as to minimize disruptions and disturbance in the Public Rights-of-Way.  
10.20.26 - Care Required in Placing, Maintaining Facilities. 
A registrant shall not place or maintain its Communications Facilities so as to interfere with, displace, damage or destroy any facilities, including but not limited to, sewers, gas or water mains, storm drains, pipes, cables or conduits of the City or any other person's facilities lawfully occupying the Public Rights-of-Way of the City.  
10.20.27 - No Warranty or Representations of Fitness. 
The City makes no warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability, or availability of the City's Public Rights-of-Way for the registrant's Communications Facilities and any performance of work, costs incurred or services provided by registrant shall be at registrant's sole risk. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the City's authority to add, vacate or abandon Public Rights-of-Way, and the City makes no warranties or representations regarding the availability of any added, vacated or abandoned Public Rights-of-Way for Communications Facilities.  
10.20.28 - Right to Inspect. 
The City shall have the right to make such inspections of Communications Facilities placed or maintained in Public Rights-of-Way as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter.  
10.20.29 - Right to Require Relocation. 
The City reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage, communications, and other types of facilities, cables or conduit, and to do, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the City in Public Rights-of-Way occupied by the registrant. The registrant shall be responsible for relocating (at its own expense) its facilities lying within the Public Rights-of-Way of the City, in the event that the City determines in its sole discretion that they interfere with the installation or maintenance of the City's sewer, water, storm drainage, communications or other types of facilities. The City further reserves without limitation the right to alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation, relocation, or width of the Public Rights-of-Way within the limits of the City and within said limits as same may from time to time be altered.  
10.20.30 - Cooperation with Other Permittees. 
A registrant shall, on the request of any person holding a permit issued by the City, temporarily raise, lower or otherwise adjust its Communications Facilities to permit the work authorized by the permit. The expense of such temporary raising, lowering or other adjustment of facilities shall be paid by any person (other than the City) requesting the same and the registrant shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The registrant shall be given not less than thirty (30) days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary relocation.  
10.20.31 - Wireless Facilities. 
A wireless facility that is a portion of a Communication Facility, such as an antenna ("Wireless Facility(ies)"), which is attached to a legally maintained vertical structure in the Public Rights-of-Way, such as a light pole or utility pole ("vertical structure(s)"), shall be subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  Such wireless facilities may not extend more than ten (10) feet above the highest point of the vertical structure; 
(a)  Additionally, for small wireless facilities, unless waived by the City, the height for a new utility pole is limited to the tallest existing utility pole as of July 1, 2017, located in the same right-of-way, other than a utility pole for which a waiver has previously been granted, measured from grade in place within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed location of the small wireless facility. If there is no utility pole within five hundred (500) feet, the City shall limit the height of the utility pole to fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Such wireless facilities that are attached to a vertical structure located in Public Rights-of-Way shall utilize stealth technology; 
(3)  Such wireless facilities shall not have any type of lighted signal, lights, or illuminations unless required by an applicable federal, state, or local rule, regulation or law; 
(4)  Such wireless facilities shall comply with any applicable Federal Communications Commission Emissions Standards; 
(5)  The design, construction, and installation of such wireless facilities shall comply with any applicable local building codes; 
(6)  No commercial advertising shall be allowed on such wireless facilities; and 
(7)  Any accessory equipment and related housing in the Public Rights-of-Way that are used in conjunction with such a wireless facility shall comply with any applicable local rules, regulations, ordinances, or laws governing the placement and design of such equipment. 
(8)  Small Wireless Facilities and any accessory equipment and related housing in the Public-Rights-of-Way must comply with Chapter 10.20 unless specifically addressed in section 10.20.31(8)(a)—(g). 
(a)  Below regulations do not apply to small wireless facilities on: 
i)  Utility poles owned by a municipal electric utility; 
ii)  Utility poles used to support municipally owned or operated electric distribution facilities; 
iii)  Utility poles located in the right-of-way within an age restricted by deed retirement community of more than five thousand (5,000) residents what has underground utilities for electric transmission or distribution; 
iv)  Utility poles fifteen (15) feet or less in height; 
v)  The horizontal portion of a utility pole supporting traffic lights; or 
vi)  Florida Department of Transportation right-of-ways. 
(b)  Placement of the facility: 
i)  The City may not limit the placement of small wireless facilities by minimum separation distances but may request an alternate location for placement. Procedures to request alternative placement of wireless facility are set forth in F.S. chapter 337.4017(d)4, as it may be amended. 
ii)  The City may not require the placement of small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole or category of poles or require multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. 
iii)  Placement may be denied if it materially interferes with: 
iv)  The safe operation of traffic control equipment; 
v)  Sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes; 
vi)  Compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement; 
vii)  Materially fails to comply with the 2010 edition of the Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual; 
viii)  Or, fails to meet historic preservation zoning regulations in areas designated by state or local authority for historic preservation. (subject to National Historic preservation act of 1966, 47 USC s 332(c)(7) and s 1455(a)). 
(c)  Placement of New Utility Poles: 
i)  A wireless infrastructure provider may apply to an authority to place utility poles in the public rights-of-way to support the collocation of small wireless facilities. The application must include an attestation that small wireless facilities will be collocated on the utility pole or structure and will be used by a wireless services provider to provide service within nine (9) months after the date the application is approved. 
(d)  Fees and Rates and Taxes: 
i)  Fees cannot be charged for Routine maintenance; or 
ii)  Replacement of existing wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar or of the same or smaller size; or 
iii)  Installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable codes by or for a communications services provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way and who is remitting taxes under chapter 202. 
(e)  Rates to collocate a small wireless facility on an authority utility pole may not exceed $150.00 annually. 
(f)  An ad valorem tax cannot be placed on an authority utility pole due to the presence/collocation of a small wireless facility. 
(g)  An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of a single authority may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to thirty (30) small wireless facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1998 , § 2, 11-27-18)  
10.20.32 - Vertical Antennae Mounts Prohibited. 
Vertical structures, such as towers, whose sole purpose is to serve as a mounting device for antennae, are expressly prohibited from being placed in the Public Rights-of-Way.  
10.20.33 - Hours of Work. 
Construction work (excluding restoration work) shall be performed during normal work hours (7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday). Construction work after normal work hours, on weekends and national holidays, shall be on an emergency basis only.  
10.20.34 - Suspension of Permits. 
The City may suspend a permit for work in the Public Rights-of-Way for one or more of the following reasons. The City Manager shall provide notice and an opportunity to cure, which is reasonable under the circumstances, any of these violations. 
(1)  Violation of permit conditions, including conditions set forth in the permit, this Chapter or other applicable City ordinances, codes or regulations governing placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way; 
(2)  Misrepresentation or fraud by registrant in a registration or permit application to the City; 
(3)  Failure to properly renew or ineffectiveness of registration; or 
(4)  Failure to relocate or remove facilities as may be lawfully required by the City.  
10.20.35 - Suspension during Hurricanes. 
In the event of a hurricane or other emergency, construction permits shall be automatically suspended for the duration of the hurricane or other emergency, the site shall be cleaned and obstructions in the Rights-of-Way shall be removed.  
10.20.36 - Appeals. 
Final, written decisions of the City Manager or his or her designee suspending or denying a permit, denying an application for a registration or denying an application for renewal of a registration are subject to appeal. An appeal must be filed with the City Manager within thirty (30) days of the date of the final, written decision to be appealed. Any appeal not timely filed as set forth above shall be waived. The City shall consider, or appoint a hearing officer to consider, the appeal. The hearing shall occur within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal, unless waived by the registrant, and a written decision shall be rendered within twenty (20) days of the hearing. Upon correction of the grounds that gave rise to a suspension or denial, the suspension or denial shall be lifted.  
10.20.37 - Involuntary Termination. 
The City may terminate a registration if 
(1)  A Federal or State authority suspends, denies, or revokes a registrant's certification or license to provide Communications Services; 
(2)  The registrant's placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way presents a danger to the general public or other users of the Public Rights-of-Way and the registrant fails to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written notice; 
(3)  The registrant ceases to use all of its Communications Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way and has not complied with procedures for abandonment.  
10.20.38 - Termination Procedures. 
Prior to termination, the registrant shall be notified by the City Manager with a written notice setting forth all matters pertinent to the proposed termination action, including the reason for termination, and describing the proposed action of the City with respect thereto. The registrant shall have sixty (60) days after receipt of such notice within which to address or eliminate the reason or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the City Manager, to accomplish the same. If the plan is rejected, the City Manager shall provide written notice of such rejection to the registrant and shall make a recommendation to the City Council regarding a decision as to termination of registration. A decision by the City to terminate a registration may only be accomplished by an action of the City Council. A registrant shall be notified by written notice of any decision by the City Council to terminate its registration. Such written notice shall be sent within seven (7) days after the decision.  
10.20.39 - Actions Upon Termination Required. 
In the event of termination, the former registrant shall notify the City of the assumption or anticipated assumption by another registrant of ownership of the registrant's Communications Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way; or provide the City with an acceptable plan for disposition of its Communications Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way. The registrant shall be responsible for any damage in the Rights-of-Way prior to termination. If a registrant fails to comply with this subsection, which determination of noncompliance is subject to appeal, the City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including but not limited to taking possession of the facilities where another person has not assumed the ownership or physical control of the facilities or requiring the registrant within ninety (90) days of the termination, or such longer period as may be agreed to by the registrant, to remove some or all of the facilities from the Public Rights-of-Way and restore the Public Rights-of-Way to its original condition before the removal. 
In any event, a terminated registrant shall take such steps as are necessary to render safe every portion of the Communications Facilities remaining in the Public Rights-of-Way of the City.  
10.20.40 - Removal Limited to Terminated Registrant. 
In the event of termination of a registration, this section does not authorize the City to cause the removal of Communications Facilities used to provide another service for which the registrant or another person who owns or exercises physical control over the facilities holds a valid certification or license with the governing Federal or State agency, if required for provision of such service, and is registered with the City, if required.  
10.20.41 - Existing Facilities. 
A Communications Services Provider with an existing Communications Facility in the Public Rights-of-Way of the City has sixty (60) days from the effective date of this Chapter [November 27, 2001] to comply with the terms of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, registration, or be in violation thereof.  
10.20.42 - Insurance Required. 
A registrant shall provide, pay for and maintain satisfactory to the City the types of insurance described herein. All insurance shall be from responsible companies duly authorized to do business in the State and having a rating reasonably acceptable to the City. 
All liability policies shall provide that the City is an additional insured as to the activities under this Chapter. The required coverage must be evidenced by properly executed Certificates of Insurance forms. The certificates must be signed by the authorized representative of the insurance company and shall be filed and maintained with the City annually. Thirty days (30) advance written notice by registered, certified or regular mail or facsimile as determined by the City must be given to the City of any cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in the policy coverage. The insurance requirements may be satisfied by evidence of self-insurance or other types of insurance acceptable to the City. The limits of coverage of insurance required shall be not less than the following: 
Type 	Coverage 	Amount Required 
Worker's Compensation 		Florida Statutory Requirements 
Employer's Liability 		$500,000 limit each accident 
Comprehensive General Liability 	Property damage per occurrence 	$1,000,000 
	Property damage aggregate 	$2,000,000 
	Personal bodily injury or death to any one person 	$5,000,000 
	Bodily injury or death aggregate per single accident or occurrence 	$10,000,000 
	Aggregate products and completed operations coverage 	$2,000,000 
Automobile liability 	Bodily injury and consequent death per occurrence 	$1,000,000 
	Bodily injury and consequent death to any one person 	$1,000,000 
	Property damage per occurrence 	$500,000 
  
10.20.43 - Indemnification. 
A registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City, its officials, boards, members, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses incurred by the City arising out of the placement or maintenance of its Communications System or Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Chapter, provided, however, that a registrant's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the negligence, gross negligence or wanton or willful acts of the City. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the City's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings. The City agrees to notify the registrant, in writing, within a reasonable time of the City receiving notice, of any issue it determines may require indemnification. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and at its own cost if in the City's reasonable belief there exists or may exist a conflict, potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted: (a) as denying to either party any remedy or defense available to such party under the laws of the State of Florida; or (b) as a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in § 768.28, F.S., as it may be amended. The indemnification requirements shall survive and be in effect after the termination or cancellation of a registration.  
10.20.44 - Construction Bond. 
Prior to issuing a permit where the work under the permit will require restoration of Public Rights-of-Way, the City may require a construction bond to secure the restoration of the Public Rights-of-Way. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a construction bond hereunder may only be required to the extent that the cost of the restoration exceeds the amount recoverable against the security fund. 
Twelve (12) months after the completion of the restoration in Public Rights-of-Way in accordance with the bond, the registrant may eliminate the bond. However, the City may subsequently require a new bond for any subsequent work in the Public Rights-of-Way. The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a rating reasonably acceptable to the City; shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager; and shall provide that: "For twelve (12) months after issuance of this bond, this bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty (60) days after receipt by the City, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew."  
10.20.45 - Reservation of Rights. 
The rights reserved by the City with respect to any construction bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the City may have under this section or at law or equity. The rights reserved to the City under this section are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved in this Chapter, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the construction bond will affect any other right the City may have.  
10.20.46 - Security Fund. 
At or prior to the time a registrant receives its first permit to place or maintain a Communications Facility in Public Rights-of-Way after the effective date of this Chapter, the registrant may be required to file with the City, for City approval, an annual bond, cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit in the sum of $25,000.00 or other appropriate amount as determined by the City having as a surety a company qualified to do business in the State of Florida, and acceptable to the City Manager, which shall be referred to as the "security fund." The security fund shall be maintained from such time through the earlier of: (a) transfer, sale, assignment or removal of all Communications Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way; or (b) twelve 12 months after the termination or cancellation of any registration. The security fund shall be conditioned on the full and faithful performance by the registrant of all requirements, duties and obligations imposed upon registrant by the provisions of this Chapter. 
The security fund shall be furnished annually or as frequently as necessary to provide a continuing guarantee of the registrant's full and faithful performance at all times. In the event a registrant fails to perform its duties and obligations imposed upon the registrant by the provisions of this Chapter, subject to section 10.26.06 of this Chapter, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the security fund, any damages or loss suffered by the City as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal, relocation or abandonment of any facilities of the registrant in Public Rights-of-Way, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys fees, up to the full amount of the security fund. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may in its discretion not require a Security Fund or may accept a corporate guarantee of the registrant or its parent company.  
10.20.47 - Enforcement Remedies. 
A registrant's failure to comply with provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a violation of this Chapter and shall subject the registrant to the code enforcement. In addition, at the City's discretion, violation of this Chapter may be punishable as provided in section 1.05, of this Code. 
Failure of the City to enforce any requirements of this Chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the City's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies.  
10.20.48 - Abandonment of Facility. 
10.20.481  Notice of Abandonment: Upon abandonment of a Communications Facility owned by a registrant in Public Rights-of-Way, the registrant shall notify the City within ninety (90) days. The City may direct the registrant by written notice to remove all or any portion of such abandoned facility at the registrant's sole expense if the City determines that the abandoned facility's presence interferes with the public health, safety or welfare, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, a determination that such facility: 
(1)  Compromises safety at any time for any Public Rights-of-Way user or during construction or maintenance in Public Rights-of-Way. 
(2)  Prevents another person from locating facilities in the area of Public Rights-of-Way where the abandoned facility is located when other alternative locations are not reasonably available. The City may require the third person to coordinate with the registrant that owns the existing facility for joint removal and placement, where agreed to by the registrant. 
(3)  Creates a maintenance condition that is disruptive to the Public Rights-of-Way's use. 
10.20.482  Consent to Removal: In the event that the City does not direct the removal of the abandoned facility, the registrant, by its notice of abandonment to the City, shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by the City or another person at such third party's cost. If the registrant fails to remove all or any portion of an abandoned facility as directed by the City within a reasonable time period as may be required by the City under the circumstances, the City may perform such removal and charge the cost of the removal against the registrant.  
10.20.49 - Force Majeure. 
In the event a registrant's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this Chapter is prevented by a cause or event not within the registrant's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result, provided, however, that such registrant uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this Chapter, causes or events not within a registrant's control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within registrant's control, and thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, registrant's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of registrant's directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents.  
10.20.50 - Reservation of Rights and Remedies. 
The City reserves the right to amend this Chapter as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers. This Chapter shall be applicable to all Communications Facilities placed in the Public Rights-of-Way on or after the effective date of this Chapter and shall apply to all existing Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way prior to the effective date of this Chapter [November 27, 2001], to the full extent permitted by State and Federal law. The adoption of this Chapter is not intended to affect any rights or defenses of the City or a communications service provider under any existing franchise, license or other agreements with a communications services provider. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the remedies the City or the registrant has available under applicable law. Any person who uses the communications facilities of a registrant, other than the registrant that owns the facilities, shall not be entitled to any rights to place or maintain such facilities in excess of the rights of the registrant that places or maintains the facilities.  
10.30 - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 
 
10.30.01 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air gap separation. An unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device, and the flood rim of the receptacle, and shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood level rim of the vessel. In no case shall the gap be less than one inch. This gap shall also be above the established 100-year flood level. 
ASSE. American Society of Sanitary Engineering. 
Atmospheric vacuum breaker. A backflow prevention device which is operated by atmospheric pressure in combination with the force of gravity. The unit is designed to work in a vertical plane only. The moving part consists of a poppet valve, which must be carefully sized to slide in a guided chamber and effectively shut off the reverse flow of water when a negative pressure exists. 
Auxiliary water supply. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary water supplies may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
AWWA. American Water Works Association. 
Backflow. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable supply of water from any source other than its intended source. 
Backflow prevention device—Approved. A device to counteract back pressure or prevent back siphonage. "Approved" are devices that have met the requirements of one or more of the following standards and that have therefore been approved by the utilities director: 
(1)  AWWA — C506. Standard for Backflow Prevention Devices, Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Types 
(2)  ASSE — 1001. Atmospheric Type Vacuum Breaker 
(3)  ASSE — 1011. Hose Connection Vacuum Breakers 
(4)  ASSE — 1020. Pressure Type Vacuum Breakers 
(5)  ASSE — 1024. Dual Check Type Backflow Preventer 
(6)  ASSE — 1013. Reduced Pressure Principle Back Pressure Backflow Preventers 
(7)  ASSE — 1015. Double Check Valve Type Back Pressure Backflow Preventers 
(8)  Manual of Cross-Connection Control. By Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research University of Southern California. 
Back pressure. Backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or other means that could create pressure greater than the supply pressure. 
Back siphonage. Backflow due to a negative or sub-atmospheric pressure within a water system. 
Containment. A method of controlling potential and/or confirmed cross connections by installation of a double check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
Cross connection. Any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply system is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality, which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over devices or any other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow could occur are considered to be cross connections. 
Double check valve assembly. An assembly composed of two single, independently acting check valves, including rightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water tightness of each check valve. 
Health hazard. Any condition, devices or particles in any water supply system or in its operation which create or may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
Isolation. A method of controlling potential and/or confirmed cross connections by installation of an air gap separation or a vacuum breaker. 
Pressure vacuum breaker. Similar to an atmospheric vacuum breaker except that the checking unit "poppet valve" is activated by a spring. This type of vacuum breaker does not require a negative pressure to react and can be used on the pressure side of a valve. 
Public water supply. Any system or water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use, including source, treatment, storage and distribution where water is furnished to any community, collection or number of individuals, or is made available to the public for human consumption or domestic use, but excluding supplies serving one single-family residence. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. A device incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two check valves or two shutoff valves and equipped with necessary appurtenances for testing. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at less than the pressure of the public water supply side of the device even at cessation of normal flow. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain this reduced pressure by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere, thereby providing an air gap in the device. This air gap shall also be above the 100-year flood level.  
10.30.02 - Intent and Purpose. 
The City, in its operation of a public potable water supply system, is required to ensure protection of public health through the provision of minimum requirements and standards for design, construction, operation and maintenance of its system. It is essential that physical cross connections, which create or have the potential to create an imminent and substantial danger to public health, be eliminated from the distribution system and plumbing systems of customers. Backflow can result in the potable water system becoming a transmitter of disease, toxic materials and other hazardous liquids. Therefore, it is necessary to establish and maintain a cross connection control program to protect the supply of water and the health of water consumers by the control of actual and/or potential cross connections through methods of containment and/or isolation.  
10.30.03 - Authority; Conflicts. 
Authority for implementing a cross connection control program is given by the Florida Safe Drinking Water Act [§ 403.850 et seq., F.S.] and the Florida Administrative Code, Chapter 17-22.107, section 4(b). In case of a conflict between any of the provisions of this Chapter and State law or regulation, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail.  
10.30.04 - City Responsibilities. 
The City is responsible for the protection of its public potable water distribution system from backflow of contaminants or pollutants through any water service connection. If, in the judgment of the City, an approved backflow prevention device is required in the water service connection to any of its customer's premises for the safety of the users of the water system, the City shall give notice in writing to the customer that an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at the customer's expense. 
Compliance testing after initial installation of a backflow prevention device shall be performed by the City.  
10.30.05 - Consumer Responsibilities. 
Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to meet the City's time schedule for installation of such device shall constitute grounds for discontinuance of water service until such device have been properly installed. Any licensed plumber licensed to do business in the City may install the proper device in the correct manner. A permit for such installation is required. 
In the event of any known or suspected accidental pollution or contamination of the City's potable water system, the consumer shall promptly take steps to confine any further spread of pollution or contamination and shall immediately notify the City of the situation. The consumer shall be responsible for each incident and bear any cost incurred by the City relating to the incident.  
10.30.06 - Requirements for Installation. 
(1)  All backflow prevention devices shall be installed at a location designated by the City. Generally, this will be immediately on the customer's side of the meter. If circumstances make this location impractical, then the backflow prevention device may be placed further downstream from the meter. However, any piping between the meter and the backflow prevention device must be either exposed or readily accessible for inspection. 
(2)  All premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not as an additional source of water to the City system shall have an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device installed in order to protect the public water supply against backflow. 
(3)  For all premises where there is water or substances that could be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation, an approved double check valve assembly, or an approved vacuum breaker. 
(4)  For all premises where there is any material dangerous to health, which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions have been found to exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
(5)  For all premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved double check valve or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
(6)  For all premises where security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions make it impossible or impractical to perform a complete in plant cross connection survey, the public water system shall be protected with an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
(7)  For all premises more than two stories high (excluding basements), the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly.  
10.30.07 - Facility-Device Requirements. 
The following types of facilities shall normally require the designated backflow prevention devices. This list is presented as a guideline and should not be construed as being final or complete. Each case will be judged on its own merits by the director of utilities. 
Facilities requiring backflow prevention devices 
A.G. — Air gap separation; R.P. — Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, D.C. — Double Check Valve Assembly, V.B. — Vacuum Breaker (type to be designated) 
Type of Facility 	Type of Device 
Car wash 	A.G. or R.P. 
Chemical plant 	A.G. or R.P. 
Dry cleaners 	A.G. or R.P. 
Film lab or development 	A.G. or R.P. 
Food or beverage processing plant 	D.C. 
Hospitals, clinics and medical buildings 	A.G. or R.P. 
Ice cream and dairy products 	A.G. or D.C. 
Irrigation systems 	D.C. 
Irrigation systems (with chemical feed) 	A.G. or R.P. 
Laboratories 	A.G. or R.P. 
Laundries 	D.C. 
Machine tool plants (health hazard) 	A.G. or R.P. 
Machine tool plants (no health hazard) 	D.C. 
Metal plating plants 	A.G. or R.P. 
Morgues, mortuaries or autopsy facilities 	A.G. or R.P. 
Multi storage buildings 	A.G. or D.C. 
Packing houses 	A.G. or R.P. 
Paper product plants 	A.G. or R.P. 
Pesticide and herbicide exterminations 	A.G. or R.P. 
Petroleum processing plants 	A.G. or R.P. 
Petroleum storage plant or yard (health hazard) 	A.G. or R.P. 
Petroleum storage plant or yard (no health hazard) 	D.C. 
Pharmaceutical or cosmetic plants 	A.G. or R.P. 
Piers, docks or waterfront facilities 	A.G. or R.P. 
Power plants 	A.G. or R.P. 
Premises having water re-circulating systems and pumps (health hazard) 	A.G. or R.P. 
Premises having water re-circulating systems and pumps (no health hazard) 	R.P. or D.C. 
Premises having boiler, cooling systems or hot water heating systems where chemical water conditioners are used 	A.G. or R.P. 
Premises having storage tanks, reservoirs, ponds, etc. 	A.G. or R.P. 
Radioactive material plants 	A.G. or R.P. 
Sand and gravel plants 	D.C. 
Schools with laboratories 	D.C. 
Swimming pools 	A.G. or R.P. 
Sewage treatment plants 	A.G. or R.P. 
Sewage pumping stations (health hazard) 	A.G. or R.P. 
Sewage pumping stations (no health hazard) 	D.C. 
Sewage pumping stations (outside hose bibs only) 	V.B. 
Veterinary establishments 	A.G. or R.P. 
Waterfront property with building 	A.G. or D.C. 
  
10.30.08 - Inspection, Service. 
The City Utilities Director, Water Supervisor or designated representative shall conduct inspections of customers' premises where suspected cross connections or potential cross connections may exist. Should any cross connections or potential cross connections be detected, the customer shall be notified in writing of the appropriate type of backflow prevention device to be installed. Refusal by a customer to allow an inspection shall be considered prima facie evidence of the existence of cross connections, thereby requiring the installation of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device or the disconnection of service. 
10.30.081  Existing Facilities: For existing facilities, customers will be asked to complete a questionnaire on their water usage in order to make a preliminary determination of the potential health hazard to the City's water distribution system. When such information or other knowledge indicates a potential health hazard, a survey of the customers' water system shall be conducted. Such surveys need not be a detailed inspection of the location or disposition of water lines, but can be confined to establishing the water use on the premises; the existence of any cross connections; the availability of auxiliary water supplies; the use or availability of pollutants, contaminants and other liquid, solid or gaseous substances that may be used industrially for stabilization of water supplies; and other procedures for determining the degree of health hazard. 
10.30.082  New Services: All new services shall be classified at the time of application to indicate the degree of hazard anticipated and, hence, the type of device required. This information shall be given to the applicant in writing. Any later change in water usage may require a change in the type of device. 
10.30.083  Changes in Water Use: All water customers of the City shall be required to notify the City, in writing, of any changes in their water usage. These changes will be evaluated to determine if there is an increase in the potential health hazard and if such increase requires the installation of a device. If a device is already in place, it will be determined if this device is adequate or if a different type of device is required.  
10.30.09 - Records. 
Appropriate records shall be maintained by the City of all potential and confirmed cross connections. Installations and tests of backflow prevention devices shall be recorded and filed for future reference.  
10.30.10 - Testing, Maintenance of Devices. 
Routine testing of backflow prevention devices shall be performed by the City. The frequency of testing will be dependent upon the type of device installed and the potential health hazard involved. 
Customers will be notified in advance of the date and approximate time that any testing will be performed. It will be necessary to shut off the water service for an approximate period not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes, and every effort will be made to schedule tests to suit the customers' convenience. If the customers' operations cannot permit an interruption of service, it will be the customers' responsibility to have two approved backflow prevention devices installed in parallel so that one may be used while the other is being tested. Bypasses around backflow prevention devices are expressly prohibited. 
If any devices tested are found to be faulty, the customer will immediately be notified and will be required to have the device promptly repaired or replaced at his or her expense. The customer shall be required to notify the Utilities Director of the progress of the repair or replacement every fifth (5 th ) work day from receipt of the notice of the failure of the device. In high hazard situations, it may be necessary to terminate service until a properly operating device is in place. The customer should notify the City as soon as any faulty device has been corrected so that it may be retested.  
10.40 - CABLE FRANCHISES 
 
10.40.01 - Purpose, Intent. 
The City of Fort Walton Beach finds that the development of Cable Communications has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the people of Fort Walton Beach. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the City further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by exercising regulatory powers which are vested in the City or such persons as the City shall designate. It is the intent of this Chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for, and specify the means to attain, the best possible public interest and public purpose in these matters and any franchise issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. 
Further, it is recognized that cable communications systems have the capaCity to provide not only entertainment and information services to the City's residents, but can provide a variety of interactive communications services to institutions and individuals. Many of these services involve City agencies and other public institutions, by providing governmental, educational or health care communications. For these purposes, the following goals underlie the regulations contained herein: 
(1)  Communications services should be made available to all City residents. 
(2)  The cable communications system should be capable of accommodating both the present and reasonably foreseeable future communications needs of the City. 
(3)  The cable communications system should be improved and upgraded as necessary during the franchise term so that the new facilities necessary for the operation of this system shall be integrated to the maximum extent possible with existing facilities. 
(4)  The cable communications system authorized by this Chapter shall be responsive to the needs and interests of the local community, and shall provide a wide diversity of information sources and services to the public. 
(5)  That the public, educational, and governmental needs for access to the cable communications system are met.  
10.40.02 - Application. 
This Chapter shall apply to all franchises granted at or after its adoption; provided, however, that the provisions hereof relating to application fees and procedures for renewal of franchises shall not apply to any such franchise for which the renewal process was begun prior to the adoption hereof.  
10.40.03 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, and words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
Additional services: Programming or services for which an additional charge is made beyond the charge for basic subscriber services, including, but not limited to: movies, concerts, variety acts, sporting events, pay-per-view programs, interactive services, leased access and any other service utilizing any facility or equipment of a cable television system operating pursuant to a franchise granted under this Chapter. 
Affiliates: When used in relation to any person, means another person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, such person. 
Audio services: Audio services such as the retransmission of broadcast FM radio signals, shortwave, weather, news, time and other similar audio services and the transmission of cablecast (non-broadcast) radio signals. 
Basic cable services: Any service tier which includes the retransmission of local broadcast signals and the public, educational and government access channels. Basic service may be further defined in the franchise agreement to include specific services or types of services to be provided by the grantee and shall be consistent with any amendment to the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 or other applicable federal law or regulation. 
Communications Policy Act of 1984 or Cable Act: The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. 98-549, 98 Stat. 2779 (1984), as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 (1996), and as it may be amended in the future. 
Cable communications system, cable system or system: A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. Such term does not include: 
(a)  a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(b)  a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; 
(c)  a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provision of Title II of the Cable Act, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
(d)  an open video system that complies with §653 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996; 
(e)  any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
Channel: A six Megahertz (MHz) frequency band, which is capable of carrying either one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or other non-video signals or some combination of such signals. 
Closed-circuit or institutional service: Such video, audio, data and other services provided to institutional users. These may include, but are not limited to: one-way video, two-way video, audio or digital signals transmitted among institutions and/or to residential subscribers. 
Commercial subscriber: A subscriber who receives a service in a place of business where the service may be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession. 
Converter: An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and any channel selector which permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated converter dial locations at the set or by remote control. 
Council: The City of Fort Walton Beach City Council. 
Days: Calendar days unless otherwise specified. 
Discrete channel: A channel which can only be received by the person and/or institution intended to receive signals on such channel. 
Downstream channel: A channel which is transmitted from the cable communications system head-end or other origination point through the cable distribution plant to subscribers. 
Drop: A coaxial connection from feeder cable to the subscriber/user television set, radio or other terminal. A standard drop shall be a drop whose length is not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
Educational channel or educational access channel: Any channel designated for non-commercial educational use and which is provided at no charge to subscribers; provided, however, that broadcast of information identifying program sponsorships is permitted. 
Fair market value: The price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing in the industry at the time. 
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or elected successor. 
Franchise: A franchise contract entered into voluntarily by the grantee, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including referenced documents and/or specifications. The franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter grants the nonexclusive rights to construct operate and maintain a cable communications system along the streets and public grounds within all or a specified area in the City limits of Fort Walton Beach. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City as required by other Chapters and laws of the City. 
Franchise area: The entire City as the same may exist from time to time. 
Franchise fee: The percentage, as specified by this Chapter, of the grantee's gross revenues from all sources payable in exchange for the rights granted pursuant to this Chapter and the franchise agreement. 
Franchisee or grantee: Any natural person(s), partnership(s), domestic and foreign corporation(s) association(s), joint venture(s), or organization(s) of any kind which has been legally granted a franchise by the City, and shall include the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of such franchisee or grantee. 
Government channel or government access channel: Any channel specifically designated or dedicated for non-commercial government use and which is provided at no charge to subscribers; provided, however, that broadcast of information identifying program sponsorships is permitted. 
Grantor: The City of Fort Walton Beach as represented by the City Council, or its designee, acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
Gross annual revenues: All revenue derived directly or indirectly by the grantee, its affiliates or subsidiaries, from the operation of the grantee's cable system pursuant to a franchise granted by the City, which shall include, but not be limited to: basic subscriber fees; subscriber fees for optional services; subscriber fees for other than basic service; installation, disconnection and reconnection fees; leased channel fees; fees, payments, or other considerations received from programmers; equipment sales and rentals (including converters and remotes); studio and production equipment rentals and other revenues derived from the use of local origination facilities provided by the grantee; advertising revenues; and the sale of, awards for, or any exchange of value for any programming developed for community service or the local origination channel for any governmental or franchising agency. This sum shall exclude bad debts. Taxes levied by Federal, State, County, City or other governments and collected on behalf of that government shall be excluded. Gross annual revenues shall include the money collected from subscribers to pay franchise fees collected in conformance to this Chapter. 
Installation: The connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers' terminal(s). 
Institutional service: See "closed circuit" definition above. 
Leased access channel or commercial access channel: Any channel designated or dedicated for use by persons unaffiliated with the grantee, at rates in accordance with the Cable Act. 
Monitoring: Observing a communications signal, or the absence of a signal, where the observer is not a party to the communication, whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever. 
Narrowcasting: The ability to distribute cable programming to a particular segment or segments of the cable subscribers. 
Person: An individual, partnership, association, organization, corporation, joint stock company, trust, or governmental entity or any lawful successor transferee of said individual, partnership, association, organization, corporation, joint stock company, trust, or governmental entity. 
Plant mile: A linear mile of strand-bearing cable as measured on the street or easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal. 
Programmer: Any person or entity who or which produces or otherwise provides program material or information for transmission by video, audio, digital or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other storage media, to users or subscribers by means of the cable communications system. 
Public access channel, community access channel or community channel: Any channel designated or dedicated for noncommercial use by the general public or noncommercial organizations which is made available for use without charge. 
Public property: Any real property owned by the City or any other government entity other than a highway, street, sidewalk, or easement or dedication. 
Public-rights-of-way or streets and public grounds: The surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkways, waterways, utility easements or other public right-of-way or hereafter held by the City which shall entitle the City and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee's cable communications system. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the "streets and public grounds" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the City that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain only such rights to use property in the City as the City may have the undisputed right and power to give. 
Reasonable notice: Written notice addressed to the grantee at its principal office or such other office as the grantee has designated to the City as the address to which notice shall be transmitted to it, which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less than fourteen (14) days prior to that day in which the party giving such notice shall commence any action which requires the giving of notice. In computing said fourteen (14) days, recognized City holidays shall be excluded. 
Resident: Any person residing in the City except as otherwise defined by applicable law. 
Residential subscriber: A subscriber who receives a service in an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession. 
Sale: Any sale, exchange, or barter transaction. 
School: Any accredited public or nonprofit educational institution including primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and private. 
Service area: The entire geographic area within the franchise territory. 
State: The State of Florida. 
Subscriber: Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who or which subscribes to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of, or in connection with, a cable communications system and who pays the charges. 
System facilities: The cable communications system constructed for use within the City, without limitation, the head-end, antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, converters, health and property security systems, equipment or facilities located within the corporate limits of the City designed, constructed or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave or other means, audio, radio, television and electronic signals to and from subscribers, in the City and any other equipment or facilities located within the corporate limits of the City intended for the use of the cable communications system; provided, however, such system facilities excludes building, contracts, facilities, and equipment where its sole use is for providing service to other system facilities located outside the City limits. 
Transfer: The disposal by the grantee, or any owner(s) thereof, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, of 25 percent or more at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the system, or 50 percent cumulatively over the term of the franchise of such interests, to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "transfer" shall not include a wholly internal reorganization in which ultimate control of the grantee does not change; provided, however, grantee shall be required to promptly notify the City of such reorganization. 
Trunk line: The major distribution cable used in cable communications, which divides into feeder lines which are tapped for service to subscribers. 
Upstream signal: A signal originating from a terminal to another point in the cable television system including video, audio or digital signals for either programs or other uses such as security alert services, etc. 
User: A person or organization utilizing a channel or equipment and facilities for purpose of producing and/or transmission of material, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.  
10.41 - GRANT OF FRANCHISE CONDITIONS 
 
10.41.01 - Grant of Franchise. 
The City has the authority to grant a revocable and non-exclusive franchise to construct and operate a cable communications system in, under, over, along, across or upon the streets and public grounds within the City of Fort Walton Beach for the purpose of reception, transmission, collection, amplification, origination, distribution, or redistribution of audio, video, data, or other signals and for the development of broadband telecommunication services in accordance with the laws of the City of Fort Walton Beach, the State of Florida, and United States of America. In exercising rights pursuant hereto, grantee shall not endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, interfere with any installations of the City, any public utility serving the City or any other person permitted to use the streets and public grounds nor unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets and public grounds. The grant of one franchise does not establish priority for use over the other present or future permit or franchise holders or the City's own use of the streets and public grounds. The City shall at all times control the distribution of space in, over, under or across all streets or public grounds occupied by the cable communications system. All rights granted for the construction and operation of the cable communications system shall be subject to the continuing right of the City to require such reconstruction, relocation, change or discontinuance, of the appliances used by the cable communications system in the streets, alleys, avenues, and highways of the City, as shall in the opinion of the City be necessary in the public interest.  
10.41.02 - Non-exclusive Grants. 
No grant of any franchise shall affect the right of the City to grant to any other person a right to occupy or use the streets, or portions thereof, for the construction and operation of a cable communications system within the City or the right of the City to permit the use of the streets or public grounds of the City for any purpose whatever. By accepting a franchise, the franchisee thereby acknowledges the City's right to make such grants and permit such uses. No privilege or power of eminent domain is bestowed on grantee by the grant of a franchise.  
10.41.03 - Conflict. 
In the event of conflict between the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise, the franchise shall control.  
10.41.04 - Subject to General Code Provisions. 
Any franchise granted by the City is hereby made subject to the general City code provisions now in effect and hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the City regarding permits, taxes, fees to be paid, or manner of construction.  
10.41.05 - Use of Public Streets and Ways. 
For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications system in the City, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the public streets and ways within the City such wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary to the operation of the cable communications system, provided, however, that grantee complies with all design, construction, safety, and performance provisions contained in this Chapter, the franchise, and other applicable laws. The grantee shall also obtain pole attachment agreements for use of any utility poles or other utility facilities required in connection with the provision of services.  
10.41.06 - Use of Grantee Facilities. 
No poles shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the City with regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole of the grantee shall be vested right; and such poles shall be removed, relocated or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the City determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. Grantee shall utilize existing poles and conduits, where possible. The City shall have the right, during the life of the franchise, to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles owned by the grantee, any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the cable system operations of the grantee.  
10.41.07 - Term of Franchise. 
The term of the franchise shall commence upon execution of the franchise by the City and the grantee and shall continue for a period specified in the franchise, unless sooner terminated as provided herein. Grantee shall have no property right upon the expiration of the franchise term.  
10.41.08 - Franchise Required. 
No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets of the City or be allowed to operate within the City without a franchise.  
10.41.09 - Police, Regulatory Powers Reserved. 
Grantee shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations enacted by the City pursuant to any such power. Any conflict between the terms of this Chapter or the franchise and any present or future lawful exercise of the City's police and regulatory powers shall be resolved in favor of the franchise.  
10.41.10 - Right of Condemnation Reserved. 
Nothing in this Chapter or the franchise shall limit any right the City may have to acquire by eminent domain or otherwise any property of grantee, provided, however, that any such acquisition shall be for a price that values grantee's property at fair market value, exclusive of the value of the grant of the franchise.  
10.41.11 - City's Right to Perform Public Works. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be a hindrance to the right of the City or any governmental authority to perform or carry on, directly or indirectly, any public works or public improvements of any description. Should the cable communications system in any way interfere with the construction, maintenance or repair of such public works or public improvements, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect or relocate its cable communications system, or part thereof, as reasonably directed by the City officials or any governmental authority.  
10.41.12 - Emergency Removal of Plant. 
If at any time, in case of fire or disaster in the City, it shall become necessary in the reasonable judgment of the City to cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances or appurtenances of the cable communications system, the City shall have the right to do so at the sole cost and expense of grantee. The grantee shall bear all costs of reinstallation, repair, and other costs resulting from or arising out of the emergency cutting or removal of the cable communications system. The Grantor will make reasonable efforts to contact grantee prior to cutting or moving any of the grantee's facilities.  
10.41.13 - Removal and Relocation. 
The City shall have the power at any time to order and require grantee to remove or relocate any pole, wire, cable, or other structure that is dangerous to life or property. Restoration shall be made to original condition. In the event that grantee, after notice, fails or refuses to act within a reasonable time, the City shall have power to remove or relocate the same at the sole cost and expense of grantee.  
10.41.14 - Removal or Abandonment. 
Upon termination of the franchise by passage of time or otherwise, the grantee shall retain ownership of the cable communication system, except as otherwise provided herein or in grantee's franchise, but shall have no right to the use of Public Rights of Way. In such event and unless grantee transfers the cable communications system to a subsequent grantee approved by the City, grantee shall remove its supporting structures, poles, transmission and distribution systems, and all other appurtenances from the streets and Public Rights of Way and shall restore any property, public or private, to their original condition prior to the installation, erection, or construction of the cable communications system. Restoration of City property, including, but not limited to, the public rights-of-way, shall be in accordance with the directions and specifications of all affected departments and agencies of the City, and all applicable law. The grantee, at the option and direction of the City, shall accomplish such restoration at its expense. Such removal shall be made with the supervision of the City. If such removal and restoration is not completed within twelve (12) months after the notice by the City delivered in writing to grantee all of the grantee's property remaining in the affected public rights-of-way shall, at the option of the City, be deemed abandoned and shall, at the option of the City, become the property of the City. In the event the grantee fails or refuses to remove its system or satisfactorily restore all areas to the condition in which they existed prior to the original construction of the system, the City, at its option, may perform such work and collect the cost thereof from the grantee. No surety on any bond shall be discharged until the City has certified to the grantee in writing that the system has been dismantled, removed, and all other property restored to the satisfaction of the City.  
10.41.15 - Limitation on Use of Financial Commitments. 
Any financial commitments obtained by the grantee which have been confirmed to the City pursuant to a franchise for use in connection with the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable communications system or the grantee's performance of the terms, obligations, and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise shall be used only for such purposes.  
10.41.16 - Transfer of Ownership or Control. 
(1)  Transfer of franchise. No franchise granted hereunder, nor any interest therein, shall be transferred without the prior consent of the City, and then only under such conditions as the City may reasonably establish, however, consent may not be unreasonably withheld. 
(2)  Notice. The grantee shall promptly notify the City of any actual or proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, ownership or control of the grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of ownership or control has occurred shall arise upon the disposal by the grantee, or any owner(s) thereof, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, of twenty-five (25) percent or more at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the system, or fifty (50) percent cumulatively over the term of the franchise of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
(3)  Conditions. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the City shall have consented thereto. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, the City may inquire into the legal, financial, character, technical qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and the grantee shall provide the City with all required information. Failure to provide all information reasonably requested by the City as part of said inquiry shall be grounds for denial of the proposed change, transfer or acquisition of control. 
(4)  Assumption of control. The City agrees that any financial institution or private entities having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the City that it will take control and operate the cable television system. If the financial institution takes possession of the cable communications system the City shall take no action to effect a termination of the franchise without first giving to the lender written notice thereof and a period of six (6) months thereafter (unless otherwise provided herein below) (i) to allow the financial institution or its agent(s) to continue operating as the franchisee under the franchise and; (ii) to request the City, and for the City to determine whether, to consent to the assignment of the grantee's rights, title, interest and obligations under the franchise to a qualified operator. The City acknowledges that in order for the financial institution to realize upon the collateral accorded to it by the loan documents, the financial institution must be entitled to a reasonable period of time after taking possession of the franchise under the loan document to obtain the City's consent to an assignment of the franchise to a qualified operator. The City agrees that such reasonable period of time is six (6) months after the financial institution takes possession of the cable communication system and, further, agrees that the City shall use its best efforts to decide upon the assignment of the franchise to the new operator proposed by the financial institution within such period of time. The financial institution shall be entitled to such possession and other rights granted under this paragraph until such time that the City determines whether to consent to such assignment (the "extended time"). If the City finds that such transfer, after considering the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the City will consent to the transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the public interest. During the six-(6) month period or extended time, the financial institution shall enjoy all the rights, benefits and privileges of the grantee under the franchise, and the City shall not disturb such possession by the financial institution, provided the financial institution complies in all respects with the terms and provisions of the franchise and the Chapter. The various rights granted to the financial institution under this paragraph are contingent upon the lender's continuous compliance with the terms and provisions of this Chapter and the franchise during the entire aforementioned six-(6) month period or extended time, if applicable. For example, should an agent of the financial institution take possession of the cable communication system pursuant to rights granted to the financial institution under this paragraph, and such agent fails to comply with the level of service requirements set forth in this Chapter or the franchise, the rights granted to the financial institution under this Chapter and the franchise may be terminated in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
(5)  Consent. The consent or approval of the City or any other public entity to any transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the City in and to the public property or public rights-of-way, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise. 
(6)  New construction. In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the City will not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion of any new construction or substantial completion of a rebuild required by a franchise. This provision shall not apply to routine minor line extensions. 
(7)  Purchase price. The City reserves the right to review the purchase price of any transfer or assignment of the cable system. Should the City decide in the future to regulate the rates of the grantee, any negotiated sale value which the City deems unreasonable will not be considered in the rate base for any subsequent request for rate increases, if permitted by applicable law. 
(8)  Approval. Any approval by the City of transfer of ownership or control shall be contingent upon the prospective controlling party becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement. 
(9)  Right of first purchase. The City reserves the right of first purchase in any transfer of the system. If the City decides to exercise this option, it shall give the grantee notice of such intent within forty-five (45) days of receipt of notice from the grantee and thereafter the City and the grantee shall effect such transfer under the same terms and conditions as the proposed transferee or on such other terms and conditions as the parties may agree.  
10.41.17 - Rights Reserved to Grantor. 
10.41.171  Right to Purchase: In the event the City revokes a franchise, pursuant to provisions of this Chapter, or fails to renew a franchise under the provisions of § 626(c)(1), F.S., (1996), the City shall have the right to purchase the franchised cable communications system. The City shall provide the grantee with notification of the City's intent to purchase within one hundred and twenty (120) days of termination. 
The date of valuation shall be no earlier than the day following the date of expiration or termination of the franchise agreement and no later than the date the City makes a fair and reasonable offer for the system or the date of transfer of ownership, whichever occurs first. 
Upon receipt of notice of the City's intent to purchase the system, the grantee and the City shall have ninety (90) days within which to negotiate the purchase price of the system. 
Upon exercise of this option, and the payment of the agreed upon sum by the City and its service of official notice of such action upon the grantee, the grantee shall immediately transfer to the City possession and title to all facilities and tangible property, real and personal, of the cable communications system, free from any and all liens and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the City in lieu of some portion of the purchase price set forth above; and the grantee shall execute such warranty, deeds or other instruments of conveyance to the City as shall be necessary for this purpose. 
10.41.172  Arbitration In the event the City and grantee are unable to agree upon the value of the cable communications system within the time limits set forth above, either party may require by written notice to the other that the value of cable communications system be submitted to arbitration in the following manner: 
(1)  The City and the grantee shall each within fifteen (15) days after such written notice select an arbitrator who shall be a disinterested person with reasonable knowledge and experience relative to cable system valuation. The two arbitrators thus selected shall immediately thereafter select a third arbitrator who shall likewise be a disinterested person having reasonable knowledge and experience relative to cable system valuation. 
(2)  Within thirty (30) days after appointment of all arbitrators and upon ten (10) days' written notice to the parties, the panel of arbitrators shall commence a hearing on the issue of valuation and shall receive all relevant information from the parties. 
(3)  The hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at the request of either party. 
(4)  If renewal of a franchise is denied, the value of the system for purposes of this subsection shall be the fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. If a franchise is revoked, the value of the system, for purposes of this subsection shall be an equitable price within the meaning of section 627 of the Cable Act. 
(5)  Within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the panel of arbitrators shall prepare findings and decision agreed upon by a majority of the panel which shall be filed with the City and served by mail upon the grantee. The decision of the panel regarding the value of the system shall be final and binding upon the parties. Should there be no majority decision, the proceedings shall become null and void and shall be started anew, unless the parties extend by mutual agreement the time which the panel of arbitrators has to make a decision. 
(6)  Either party may seek judicial relief in the following circumstances: 
a.  a party fails to select an arbitrator; 
b.  the arbitrators fail to select a third arbitrator; 
c.  one or more arbitrators is unqualified; 
d.  designated time limits have been exceeded; 
e.  the panel has not proceeded expeditiously; 
f.  the decision was procured by corruption, fraud or undue means; 
g.  there was evident partiality on the part of one or more arbitrators; 
h.  the arbitration panel exceeded its authority hereunder; 
i.  based upon the record, the panel abused its discretion. 
(7)  In the event a court of competent jurisdiction determines that judicial relief is appropriate to the circumstances set forth above, the court in its discretion may order the arbitration procedure repeated and issue findings, orders and directions. 
(8)  The expenses of the arbitrators shall be borne by the party appointing each, and the expenses of the third arbitrator and those expenses incurred by the panel as a whole shall be borne equally by the parties.  
10.41.18 - Renewal. 
Upon completion of the term of any franchise granted under this Chapter, the City shall proceed with the renewal process in accordance with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act.  
10.41.19 - Franchise Fees. 
The grantee of any franchise shall pay to the City a franchise fee in an amount designated in the franchise because 
(1)  The public rights-of-way to be used by the grantee in the operation of its system within the boundaries of the franchise area are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the county, state, and City at great expense to its taxpayers; and 
(2)  The grant to the grantee to the said streets is a valuable property right without which the grantee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions; and 
(3)  The administration of this Chapter or the franchise imposes upon the City additional regulatory responsibility and expense. 
The franchise fee shall be in addition to any other fee and commence as of the effective date of the franchise. In addition to other financial reports and statements required hereby, the City shall be furnished a statement at the end of each calendar year, certified by the chief financial officer of the grantee, reflecting total amounts of gross revenue, by revenue source; all other charges; and computation of the fee payable for each such annual period. 
10.41.191  Considered Additional Fee: The payment shall be in addition to any and all fees or assessments of general applicability which are now or may be required hereafter to be paid pursuant to any Federal, State, or local law. 
10.41.192  Acceptance: Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the City shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this Chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
10.41.193  Additional Compensation: In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified herein, grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the City primary depository bank during the period that such unpaid amount is owed. 
10.41.194  Payments: The franchise fee and any other cost or damages assessed shall be payable monthly to the City of Fort Walton Beach. The grantee shall file a complete and accurate verified statement of all gross revenue within the City during the period for which said monthly payment is made, and said payment shall be made to the City not later than fifteen (15) days after the expiration of each calendar month. 
10.41.195  Right of Inspection, Audit: The City shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income records and the right to audit and to re-compute any amounts determined to be payable under this Chapter. Audits shall be at the expense of the City unless the audit discloses an underpayment which equals or exceeds seven and one-half (7-1/2) percent of the payments made, in which case the costs of the audit shall be borne by the grantee. Any additional amount due to the City as a result of the audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee by the City which notice shall include a copy of the audit report unless written notice of disagreement if filed with the City within that time,  
10.41.20 - Forfeiture or Revocation. 
The City reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach under the Chapter and the franchise grant: 
(1)  If the grantee shall default in the performance of any of the material obligations under this Chapter or under such documents, contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the City and the grantee. 
(2)  If the grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect the liability and indemnification coverage or the performance bond as required herein. 
(3)  If the grantee shall knowingly violate any lawful orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this Chapter or the franchise. 
(4)  If the grantee is convicted, by a court of competent jurisdiction, of any fraud or deceit upon the City, fraud or deceit on cable subscribers as a whole, or fraud or deceit on any class or group of subscribers (e.g. senior citizens, basic subscribers, premium subscriber, etc.). 
(5)  The grantee's construction schedule is delayed later than the schedule contained in the franchise or beyond any extended date set by the City. 
(6)  The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged bankrupt. 
(7)  Failure to restore service after ninety-six (96) consecutive hours of total system outage interrupted service, except when approval for such interruption is obtained from the City Manager. Failure of the grantee to restore service which is the direct result of strikes, acts of nature, or other matters beyond the control of grantee shall be exempted from the computation of the ninety-six (96) consecutive hours of total system outage interrupted service time. 
(8)  Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or negotiation of the franchise or any extension or renewal thereof. 
(9)  If the grantee ceases to operate the cable communications system for any reason within the control of the grantee. 
(10)  Failure by grantee to fully comply with a pole use agreement or other appropriate agreement with the City of Fort Walton Beach and/or any other necessary parties for usage of poles or other appropriate facilities necessary to the satisfactory operation of the cable television system. 
(11)  Failure by grantee to comply with access provisions of this Chapter or the franchise. 
10.41.201  Effect of Circumstances Beyond Control of Grantee: The grantee shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this Chapter in any case, in which performance of any such provision is prevented due to acts of God and other reasons beyond the grantee's control. A fault shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee's control if committed by a corporation or other business entity in which the grantee holds a controlling interest whether held directly or indirectly. 
10.41.202  Effect of Pending Litigation: Except where permitted by law, pending litigation or any appeal to any regulatory body or court having jurisdiction over the grantee shall not excuse the grantee from the performance of its obligations under this Chapter or the franchise. Failure of the grantee to perform such obligations because of pending litigation or petition may result in forfeiture or revocation pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
10.41.203  Procedure Prior to Revocation: The City shall make written demand that the grantee comply with any such requirement, limitation, term condition, rule or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand, the City may place its request for termination of the franchise upon a regular City council meeting agenda. The City shall cause to be served upon such grantee at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of such council meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the City clerk at least once, seven (7) days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. 
The council shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, as determined by the council, the council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If the council shall determine such failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then the council shall, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be terminated and bond forfeited unless corrective action is completed or undertaken by the grantee within ninety (90) days. 
10.41.204  Disposition of Facilities: In the event a franchise expires, is revoked, or is otherwise terminated, the City may purchase the system under the procedures in this section, effect a transfer of ownership of the system to another party, or order the removal of the system facilities from the City.  
10.41.21 - Equal Opportunity Policy. 
Equal employment opportunity shall be afforded by all operators of cable communication systems to all qualified persons, and no person shall be discriminated against in employment because of race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex, or physical handicap. Grantee shall comply with all equal opportunity provisions enacted by the City, Federal, and State authorities, as well as all such provisions contained in this Chapter and the franchise. Grantee shall investigate the use of local personnel and, whenever reasonably available, all vendors for services, hardware and supplies, and will use such personnel and vendors whenever feasible, in its discretion.  
10.42 - REGULATORY PROVISIONS 
 
10.42.01 - Regulation of Franchise. 
The City shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the provisions of this Chapter and applicable law. This authority shall be vested in the council and administered through the City Manager or a designee. The City Manager or a designee shall provide day-to-day administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter and any franchise granted hereunder, and shall carry out the City's responsibilities with regard to cable communications.  
10.42.02 - Applications. 
No person or entity shall operate any cable system within the City without having first obtained a franchise from the City pursuant to this Chapter. Each application submitted for a franchise shall be accompanied by the required non-refundable application fee to offset the reasonable cost of processing and evaluating the application. Application fees shall be the following amounts, subject to amendment by resolution of the council: Initial franchise, $5,000; renewal of a franchise, $1,000; transfer of a franchise, $2,500; and for modification of a franchise, $1,000.  
10.42.03 - Governing Requirement. 
At all times during the term of the franchise, grantee shall comply with all laws, rules or regulations of the City, State or Federal governments, their regulatory agencies or commissions which are now applicable or may be applicable hereafter to the construction and operation of the cable communications system, including without limitation, all laws, ordinances, or regulations now in force or hereafter enacted. The City shall have the maximum plenary authority to regulate the cable communications system, the grantee and the franchise as may at any time be lawfully permissible. If, during the term of any franchise, regulatory authorities permit regulation of cable communication systems or services not permitted to the City on the effective date hereof, the City shall negotiate in good faith with grantee, to engage in any such additional regulation as may then be permissible whether or not contemplated by this Chapter or the franchise, including without limitation, regulation respecting franchise fees, taxes, rates charged to subscribers, consumer protection, or any other similar or dissimilar matter. 
In the event that any actions of the State or Federal government or any agency thereof, or any court of competent jurisdiction upon final adjudication, substantially reduce in any way the power or authority of the City under this Chapter or the franchise, or if in compliance with any local, State, or Federal law or regulation, the grantee finds direct and specific conflict with the terms of this Chapter, the franchise, or any law or regulation of the City, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the City of the point of conflict believed to exist between such law or regulation and the laws or regulations of the City, this Chapter and the franchise. The City, at its option, may notify the grantee that it wishes to negotiate those provisions which are affected in any way by such modification in regulations or statutory authority. Thereafter, the grantee shall negotiate in good faith with the City in the development of alternate provisions which shall fairly restore the City to the maximum level of authority and power permitted by law. The City shall have the right to modify any of the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this Chapter and the franchise.  
10.42.04 - Right to Inspect Records. 
The City shall have the right to inspect all books, records, reports, maps, plans, and financial records relating to calculation of the franchise fee, and other materials of the grantee reasonably necessary to enable the City to review and audit the grantee's performance under this Chapter and the franchise, at any time during normal business hours. Grantee shall provide such information in such form as may be required by the City for said records.  
10.42.05 - Right to Inspect Construction. 
The City shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other pertinent provisions of the law. Grantee shall not be precluded or prevented from any such inspection.  
10.42.06 - Right to Inspect Property. 
At all reasonable times, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the City, of system facilities serving the City of Fort Walton Beach, together with any appurtenant property of grantee situated within or without the City.  
10.42.07 - Right of Intervention. 
The City shall have the right of intervention in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is party relative to the cable system serving the City of Fort Walton Beach.  
10.42.08 - Expense Reimbursement to City. 
The grantee and the City shall enter into good faith negotiations for expenses incurred by the City in connection with the granting, extending, or renewing a franchise provided that the grantee may offset such expense against the franchise fee, provided, however, that the fees set forth in section 10.42.02 shall not be offset against the franchise fee.  
10.43 - SUPERVISION OF FRANCHISE 
 
10.43.01 - Supervisory Authority. 
The City shall have the following regulatory authority: 
(a)  administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter and any franchise; 
(b)  award, renewal, modification, expansion, extension or termination of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the franchise, and other applicable law; 
(c)  consent prior to sale or transfer of any franchise granted; 
(d)  performance evaluation; 
(e)  rate regulation, if applicable.  
10.43.02 - Reserved Functions. 
The City also reserves the right to perform the following functions: 
(1)  Develop objectives and coordinate activities related to the operation of government access channels; 
(2)  Approve procedures and standards for public, government and educational access and operations and services, including the use of dedicated channels and sharing of public facilities; 
(3)  Coordinate, among governmental entities, plans for expansion, interconnection and growth of cable services; 
(4)  Analyze the possibility of integrating cable communications with other City, state or regional telecommunications networks; 
(5)  Formulate and recommend long-range telecommunications policy for the City, and determine the future cable-related needs and interests of the community. 
(6)  Provide the administrative effort necessary for the conduct of performance evaluations, and any other activities required for the administration of this Chapter or the franchise. 
(7)  Monitor grantee's process for handling citizen complaints and periodically inspect and analyze the records related to such complaints. 
(8)  Receive applications for rate increases, if applicable, and provide staff assistance in the analysis and recommendations thereto. 
(9)  Monitor grantee's adherence to operational standards, service requirements and line extension policies. 
(10)  Assure compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(11)  Arrange tests and analysis of equipment and performance, as needed to insure compliance with this Chapter and the franchise. 
(12)  Assure continuity in service. 
(13)  Receive for examination all data and reports required by this Chapter or the franchise. 
(14)  Such other regulatory authority as appropriate to carry out the intent of this Chapter or the franchise.  
10.44 - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
10.44.01 - Rate Schedules. 
Grantee shall file with the City schedules which shall describe all services offered, all rates and charges of any kind, and all terms and conditions relating thereto. Rate schedules shall be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of any change in rates or charges.  
10.44.02 - Rates. 
Grantee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within the same general class of subscribers which must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee from offering: (i) discounts to commercial and multiple family dwelling subscribers billed on a bulk basis; (ii) promotional discounts; (iii) reduced installation rates for subscribers who have multiple services; or (iv) discount for senior citizens and/or low income residents.  
10.44.03 - Reserved Rights of City. 
To the extent that Federal or State law or regulation may now, or as the same may hereafter be amended to, authorize the City to regulate the rates for any particular service tiers, service packages, equipment, or any other services provided by grantee, the City shall have the right to exercise rate regulation to the full extent authorized by law, or to refrain from exercising such regulation for any period of time, at the sole discretion of the City.  
10.44.04 - Factors. 
If and when exercising rate regulation, the City shall consider to the extent permitted by applicable law, along with any other information it deems necessary or appropriate, the following factors in approving or disapproving initial rates or a rate increase request: the ability of the grantee to render system services and to derive a reasonable profit under the existing rate schedule and under the proposed rate schedule, the revenues and profits derived from system services; the efficiency of the grantee; the quality of the service offered by the grantee; the fair value cost of the system less depreciation; a fair rate of return over the life of the franchise with respect to grantee's investment; the extent to which grantee has adhered to the terms of this Chapter and the franchise; fairness to City residents, subscribers, and users. The City shall not consider any valuation based upon the franchise and the items of value shall neither be amortized as an expense nor shall a return be paid on them. The City may retain rate consultants as it deems appropriate. If permitted by law or regulation all reasonable charges for such independent consultants shall be paid by grantee and may be offset against franchise fees.  
10.44.05 - FCC Certification. 
If applicable, the City shall have the right to petition the Federal Communications Commission or other appropriate agency or organization to obtain rate regulation authority or to petition the federal body to review or regulate rates in the City.  
10.45 - PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
 
10.45.01 - Scheduled Evaluations. 
The City may, at its discretion, hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions annually. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public.  
10.45.02 - Special Evaluations. 
Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the City.  
10.45.03 - Notice of Evaluation Session. 
All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation. Grantee shall notify subscribers of all such evaluation sessions by announcement on a local origination channel on the system between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. for five (5) consecutive days preceding each session.  
10.45.04 - Topics for Session. 
Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to: system performance and construction, grantee compliance with this Chapter and the franchise, customer service and complaint response, subscriber privacy, services provided, programming offered, service rate structures, if applicable, franchise fees, penalties, free or discounted services, applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings, and line extensions.  
10.45.05 - Duty to Cooperate. 
During the review and evaluation by the City, the grantee shall fully cooperate with the City and shall provide such information and documents as the City may need to reasonably perform its review; provided, however, that grantee will not be required to create any new records solely for the purpose of providing such information, if it is otherwise available.  
10.46 - BONDS, INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION 
 
10.46.01 - Performance Bond. 
Prior to the effective date of the franchise, the grantee shall obtain and maintain during the entire term of any franchise and any extensions and renewals thereof, at its cost and expense, and file with the City, a corporate surety bond in an amount specified in the franchise to guarantee the faithful performance of the grantee of all its obligations provided under this Chapter and the franchise. Failure to timely obtain, file and maintain said bond shall constitute a violation within the meaning of this section. Such bond must be issued by a surety and in a form acceptable to the City. To the extent that a franchisee has served the City for a period of ten (10) consecutive years and has faithfully and fully performed under the terms of its franchise agreement, the City reserves the right, upon approval by the City council, to waive a performance bond. 
10.46.011  Conditions: The performance bond shall be issued by a surety licensed to do business in Florida and shall provide the following conditions: there shall be recoverable by the City jointly and severally from the principal and surety, any and all fines and liquidated damages due to the City and any and all damages, losses, costs, and expenses suffered or incurred by the City resulting from the failure of the grantee to 
(a)  faithfully comply with the provisions of this Chapter and the franchise, 
(b)  comply with all orders, permits and directives of any City agency or body having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults, 
(c)  pay fees due to the City, 
(d)  pay any claims, liens or taxes due the City which arise by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system. Such losses, costs and expenses shall include but not be limited to: attorney's fees and other associated expenses. 
10.46.012  Forfeiture of Bond: The total amount of the bond shall be forfeited as a liquidated damage paid to the City in the event: the grantee abandons the cable system or fails to initiate or complete construction of the cable system as specified in the franchise or any extension; or the grantee assigns the franchise without the express written consent of the City. 
10.46.013  Reduction of Bond: Upon written application by the grantee, the City may, at its sole option, permit the amount of the bond to be reduced or waive the requirements for a performance bond. Reductions granted or denied upon application by the grantee shall be without prejudice to the grantee's subsequent applications or to the City's right, at its sole discretion, to require the restoration of the full bond at any time thereafter. However, no application shall be made by the grantee within one (1) year of any prior application.  
10.46.02 - Letter of Credit. 
In lieu of, or addition to, the bond described above, and if approved by the City, the grantee may obtain, maintain, and file with the City an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution acceptable to the City and licensed to do business in the state in an amount specified in the franchise, naming the City as beneficiary. The form and contents of such letter of credit shall be acceptable to the City and the letter shall be released only upon expiration of the franchise or upon the replacement of the letter of credit by a successor grantee. Failure to obtain the letter of credit within the time specified herein shall constitute a violation within the meaning of this section. If a combination of performance bond and letter of credit is posted as security, the particular obligations or aspects of grantee's performance being secured by each instrument shall be identified in that instrument to the satisfaction of the City. 
10.46.021  Conditions of Letter of Credit: The City may draw upon the letter of credit if the grantee fails to: faithfully comply with the provisions of this Chapter and the franchise; comply with all orders, permits and directives of any City agency or body having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults; pay fees due to the City; or pay any claims, liens or taxes due which arise by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system.  
10.46.03 - Notice, Use of Bond or Letter. 
Prior to drawing upon the letter of credit or the performance bond for the purposes described in this section, the City shall notify the grantee in writing that payment is due and the grantee shall have ten (10) days from the receipt of such written notice to make a full and complete payment. If the grantee does not make the payment within ten (10) days, the City may withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and penalties, from the letter of credit or the performance bond. Within three (3) days of a withdrawal from the letter of credit or performance bond, the City shall send to the grantee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal. No later than thirty (30) days, after mailing to the grantee by certified mail notification of a withdrawal, the grantee shall replenish the letter of credit and/or performance bond in an amount equal to the amount so withdrawn. Failure to make timely replenishment of such amount to the letter of credit and/or performance bond shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.  
10.46.04 - Non-Renewal, Alteration, Cancellation. 
The performance bond and letter of credit required herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the City and shall require thirty (30) days' written notice of any non-renewal, alteration or cancellation to both the City and the grantee. The grantee shall, in the event of any such cancellation notice, obtain, pay all premiums for, and file with the City, written evidence of the issuance of replacement bond or policies within thirty (30) days following receipt by the City or the grantee of any notice of cancellation.  
10.46.05 - Increase in Amounts. 
To offset the effects of consumer price inflation the amounts of the bond and letter of credit provided for herein, are subject to reasonable increases not greater than increases in the Pensacola Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area at the end of every three-(3) year period of the franchise, applicable to the next three (3) year period, at the sole discretion of the City.  
10.46.06 - Liability and Insurance. 
Prior to commencement of construction, but in no event later than sixty (60) days after the effective date of the franchise and thereafter continuously throughout the duration of the franchise and any extensions or renewals thereof, the grantee shall furnish to the City, certificates of insurance, approved by the City, for all types of insurance required under this section. Failure to furnish said certificates of insurance in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. At the City's request, grantee shall furnish copies of any or all policies which are in effect from time to time.  
10.46.07 - Filing Requirements. 
Any insurance policy obtained by the grantee in compliance with this section shall be filed and maintained with the City Clerk during the term of the franchise, and from time to time the City may require, and the grantee shall furnish, changes in such policies to reflect changing liability limits and/or to compensate for inflation. Grantee shall immediately advise the City of any litigation that may develop that would affect this insurance.  
10.46.08 - No Limitation of Liability. 
Neither the provisions of this section or any damages recovered by the City hereunder, shall be construed to or limit the liability of the grantee for damages under any franchise issued hereunder.  
10.46.09 - Endorsement Required. 
All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this Chapter or the franchise shall contain the following, or a comparable, endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be modified or canceled by the insurance company nor the intention not to renew be stated by the insurance company until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City's manager, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew."  
10.46.10 - Contractual Liability Policies. 
All contractual liability insurance policies maintained pursuant to this Chapter or the franchise shall name the City as an additional insured.  
10.46.11 - Insurance Companies. 
All insurance policies provided under the provisions of this Chapter or the franchise shall be written by companies authorized to do business in the State and approved by the State Board of Insurance.  
10.46.12 - City as Additional Insured. 
At any time during the term of the franchise, the City may request and the Grantee shall comply with such request, to name the City as an additional named insured for all insurance policies written under the provisions of this Chapter or the franchise.  
10.46.13 - Coverage Increases. 
To offset the effects of inflation and to reflect changing liability limits, all of the coverage's, limits, and amounts of the insurance provided for herein are subject to reasonable increases not greater than increases in the Pensacola Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area at the end of every three (3) year period of the franchise, applicable to the next three year period, at the sole discretion of the City.  
10.46.14 - Coverage Amounts. 
10.46.141  Commercial General Liability: The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of any franchise granted specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, general liability insurance to include coverage for comprehensive form, premises-operations, explosion and collapse hazard, underground hazard, products/completed operations hazard, contractual insurance, broad form property damage, and personal injury, in the minimum of: 
(1)  $1,000,000.00 for property damage per occurrence 
(2)  $2,000,000.00 for property damage aggregate 
(3)  $5,000,000.00 for personal bodily injury or death to any one person, and 
(4)  $10,000,000.00 bodily injury or death aggregate per single accident or occurrence 
10.46.142  Automobile Liability Insurance: The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of any franchise granted specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, automobile liability insurance for owned, non-owned, or rented vehicles in the minimum amount of: 
(1)  $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and consequent death per occurrence 
(2)  $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and consequent death to any one person 
(3)  $500,000.00 for property damage per occurrence 
10.46.143  Worker's Compensation and Employer's Liability: The grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, Worker's compensation and employer's liability, valid in the State, in the minimum amount of: 
(1)  Statutory limit for worker's compensation 
(2)  $100,000.00 for employer's liability  
10.46.15 - Indemnification. 
Grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, boards and commissions, and City employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages, including expenses for reasonable legal fees and disbursements and liabilities assumed by the City, 
(1)  To persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of grantee, its servants, agents or employees, or to which grantee's negligence shall in any way contribute; 
(2)  Arising out of any claim for invasion by grantee of the right of privacy, for defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation except to the extent such claim arises out of the use or operation of any public, educational or governmental access channel; 
(3)  Arising out of grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of any federal, state, or local statute Chapters or regulation applicable to grantee in its business hereunder.  
10.46.16 - Conditions of Indemnity. 
The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the City giving grantee prompt notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the City from cooperating with grantee and participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel at its sole cost and expense.  
10.47 - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS 
 
10.47.01 - Authority to Construct. 
All necessary applications for permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations shall be applied for in a timely fashion so that such filing and processing shall not interfere with or cause delay with the construction scheduled as outlined in the franchise. Failure to make such timely application and timely filing shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. 
Upon grant of a franchise and in order to construct, rebuild, operate and maintain a cable system in the City, the grantee may enter into contracts with any public utility companies or any other owner or lessee of any poles or underground areas located within or without the City; obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate City, state, county, and federal officials necessary to cross or otherwise use highways or roads under their respective jurisdiction; obtain permission from the Federal Aviation Administration to erect and maintain antennas; and obtain whatever other permits a City, county, state or federal agency may require.  
10.47.02 - Construction, Technical Standards. 
Grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction standards or guidelines, governmental requirements and FCC technical standards as stated in FCC Rules and Regulations, Part 76, Subpart K ("Technical Standards"). The grantee shall perform all tests necessary to determine compliance with the technical standards of FCC Rule section 76.601. Written records of test results shall be maintained, and shall be available for grantor's inspection upon request. The grantee, through the system, shall provide uniform, strong signals which are free from any significant distortion and interference. The system shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained for 24-hours-a-day continuous operation. The system shall produce, for reception on subscriber's receivers which are in good working order, either monochrome or color pictures (providing the receiver is color capable) which are free from any noticeable interference or distortion which would cause any material degradation of video or audio quality.  
10.47.03 - System Standards. 
The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, and with the highest standards of the cable communications industry, such standards to include, but not limited to the following. 
The system will be a 110 channel capable system spaced to permit a minimum of 750 Mhz operation, will be capable of utilizing addressable converters, and will be compatible with cable ready television sets. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the grantee shall not be required to undertake any rebuilds in terms of channel capacity or band width in excess of any requirement in the franchise.  
10.47.04 - Notice of Installation of Tower, Pole. 
Prior to the erection of any towers, poles or conduits or the construction, upgrade or rebuild of a cable communications system authorized under this Chapter, the grantee shall first give a fifteen (15)-day written notice of the construction, upgrade or rebuild projects to the City manager and, shall make available for inspection by the City and other designated parties a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if required, together with a map and plans indicating the proposed location of all such facilities. The City shall be provided with a copy of the system's As-Built maps on a disk in a format acceptable to the City. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, underground conduit, or fixture or any rebuilds or upgrading of the cable communications system shall be commenced by any person until all required regulatory approvals and permits have been received. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the case of an emergency, the fifteen (15) day notice required above may be waived by the City Manager contingent upon the grantee providing the information as quickly as the circumstances reasonably permit.  
10.47.05 - Contractor Qualifications. 
Any contractor proposed for work or construction, installation, operation, maintenance, and repair of system equipment must be properly licensed under laws of the state, and all applicable local ordinances.  
10.47.06 - Location. 
The grantee's system and associated equipment erected by the grantee within the City shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places. No pole or other fixtures placed in any public ways by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere with normal travel on such public way.  
10.47.07 - City Maps. 
The City does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps showing the horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In public rights-of-way, where necessary, the location shall be verified by excavation.  
10.47.08 - Construction Standards. 
Construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the cable communications system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, in accordance with then current technological standards. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for aesthetic and engineering considerations.  
10.47.09 - Code Standards. 
Grantee shall at all times comply with: 
(a)  National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); 
(b)  National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); 
(c)  the Bell Blue Book; 
(d)  applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations; 
(e)  utility pole attachment agreements entered into with the City and any other entity.  
10.47.10 - General Safety Standard. 
In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the franchise area or other areas where the grantee may have equipment located.  
10.47.11 - Antenna Structures. 
Any antenna structure used in the cable communications system shall comply with construction, marking, and lighting of antenna structure standards as required by federal and state law or regulation.  
10.47.12 - OSHA. 
All worker facilities, conditions, and procedures that are used during construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the cable system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.  
10.47.13 - RF Leakage. 
R.F. leakage shall be checked at reception location for emergency radio services to prove measurable interference signal combinations are possible. Stray radiation shall be measured adjacent to any proposed aeronautical navigation radio sites to prove no measurable interference to airborne navigational reception in the normal flight pattern. FCC rules and regulations shall govern. The system shall cause no measurable interference in TV signal reception to any operating receiver not connected to and serviced by the system.  
10.47.14 - Standby Power. 
The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power for a minimum of eight (8) hours for the head-end and two (2) hours for transportation and trunk amplifiers.  
10.47.15 - System Construction Schedule. 
The franchise shall specify the construction schedule.  
10.47.16 - Extension of Service. 
The grantee shall provide service to all dwelling units and commercial entities requesting service within the City and any areas annexed to the City as provided in the franchise.  
10.47.17 - Use of Streets. 
10.47.171  Aboveground or Underground Installations: All installations shall be underground in those areas of the City where public utilities providing telephone and electric service are underground at the time of cable installation. In areas where either telephone or electric utility services are above ground at the time of cable installation, grantee may install its service above ground, provided that at such time as both telephone and electric utility services are required to be placed underground or are placed underground, the grantee shall likewise place its services underground. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by this Chapter or the franchise, the grantee's system shall be located underground at the request of the adjacent property owner, provided that the excess cost over the aerial location shall be borne by the property owner making the request. All cable passing under the roadway shall be installed in conduit. 
10.47.172  City Approval Required: Prior to construction or alteration, the grantee shall in each case file plans with the appropriate City agencies, complete use agreements with the utility companies, obtain all construction permits and receive written approval of the City before proceeding. 
10.47.173  Interference with Third Parties Prohibited: The grantee's system and facilities, including poles, lines, equipment and all appurtenances, shall be located, erected and maintained so that such facilities shall: 
(1)  Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety or lives of persons; 
(2)  Not interfere with any improvements the City, county, or state may deem proper to make; 
(3)  Not interfere with the free and proper use of public streets, alleys, bridges, easements or other public ways, places or property, except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair; 
(4)  Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private property owners, except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair; and 
(5)  Not obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas, electric, water or telephone facilities or other utilities located within the City. 
10.47.174  Restoration of Area: In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good a condition as, or better than, before said work was commenced and in a good workmanlike, timely manner in accordance with standards for such work set by the City. Such restoration shall be undertaken within no more than ten (10) business days after the damage is incurred and shall be completed as soon as possible thereafter. 
10.47.175  Relocation of Facilities: In the event that at any time during the period of the franchise, the City, County or State shall lawfully elect to alter, or change, any utility poles, or any street, alley or other public ways, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the proper authority, shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
10.47.176  Cooperation with Building Movers: The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wire to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than fifteen (15) working days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
10.47.177  Tree Trimming: The grantee shall have the authority, except when in conflict with existing local ordinances, to trim any trees upon and overhanging public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with system facilities, under the supervision of a certified forester and in accord with the principles of the Florida Urban Forestry Council and/or American Society of Landscape Architects, except that at the option of the City, such trimming may be done by it, or under its supervision and direction, at the expense of the grantee. 
10.47.178  Easements: All necessary easements over and under private property shall be arranged for by the grantee.  
10.47.18 - Erection, Removal, Common Use of Poles. 
No poles shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the City with regard to location, height, types and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of the grantee shall give rise to a vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the City determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. Where poles already exist for use by the grantee, but the grantee elects not to use them, the City may deny grantee the use of public right of way for the purpose of setting grantee's poles.  
10.47.19 - Conduit. 
Where conduit already exists for use by the grantee, but the grantee elects not to use it, the City may deny the grantee the use of Public Right of Way for the purpose of installing the grantee's conduit if the conduit is made available at reasonable terms and conditions.  
10.47.20 - Construction Reporting Requirements. 
The grantee shall provide the City with written progress reports detailing work completed to date and a schedule for completion of construction. 
Such report shall include a description of the progress in applying for any necessary agreements, licenses, or certifications and any other information the City Manager or a designee may deem necessary. The content and format of the report will be determined by the City Manager or a designee. The final content and format of the report shall be determined by the City Manager. Upon commencement of such construction or rebuild, such written progress reports shall be submitted to the City on a bi-monthly basis throughout the entire construction or rebuild process. The City Manager may require more frequent reporting if he/she determines it is necessary to better monitor the grantee's progress. Prior to the commencement of any major system construction, the grantee shall produce an informational document to be distributed to all residents of the area to be under construction, which shall describe the activity that will be taking place. The informational document shall be reviewed and approved by the City Manager prior to its distribution.  
10.47.21 - Tests and Performance Monitoring. 
(1)  Performance tests. Not later than thirty (30) days after any new or substantially rebuilt portion of the system is made available for service to subscribers, the grantee shall conduct technical performance tests to demonstrate full compliance with all technical standards contained in this Chapter and the franchise, and the technical standards and guidelines of the FCC. 
(2)  Performance test results. Such tests shall be performed by a qualified technician. A report shall be submitted to the City, describing test results, instrumentation, calibration, and test procedures, and the qualification of the technician responsible for the tests. 
(3)  Test points. System monitor test points shall be established and such periodic tests shall be made at the test points as shall be required by the FCC and/or the franchise. 
(4)  FCC performance tests. In addition to the performance test reports required herein, a copy of any performance test reports required by the FCC shall be made available to the City upon written request within sixty (60) days of completion. 
(5)  Notice of noncompliance. If the City has a reasonable basis to believe that a grantee is not complying with one or more performance standards specified in rules or regulations promulgated by the FCC, it may provide notice of such noncompliance to the grantee. The grantee shall have thirty (30) days after such notice to demonstrate that it is complying with applicable FCC standards. Thereafter, the City may conduct proof-of-performance tests to determine if the grantee is in compliance with FCC performance standards. The grantee shall have the right to conduct such proof-of-performance tests jointly with the City; provided, however, that the grantee's participation shall not unreasonably delay the testing. If the City's proof-of-performance testing demonstrates that the grantee does not comply with any performance standard, the grantee shall, within thirty (30) days, reimburse the City for its testing costs and bring the cable system into compliance with such standards. 
(6)  Consultants. The City shall have the right to employ qualified consultants if necessary or desirable to assist in the review, evaluation, and monitoring of grantee's performance under this or any other section of this Chapter or the franchise.  
10.48 - SERVICE PROVISIONS 
 
10.48.01 - Service to Subscribers and Institutions. 
Concurrently with the activation of the cable communications system in the City, the grantee shall provide all services to subscribers as described herein. 
(1)  The system shall carry the broad categories of programming and services listed in the franchise. Should the grantee desire to change the programming and services listed in the franchise, it shall maintain the mix, quality and level of services provided over the system. Any such change in programs or services offered shall comply with the conditions and procedures contained in the franchise, and shall be reported to the City at least thirty (30) days prior to the proposed implementation. The grantee shall use its best efforts to ensure diversity of programming. 
(2)  Basic cable services shall be offered to subscribers throughout the term of the franchise. 
(3)  The grantee may provide and maintain the following access channels, the number of which shall be specified in the franchise. 
a.  "Government access channel" which shall be a specifically designated channel scheduled and programmed exclusively by the City. 
b.  "Educational channel" which shall be a specifically designated channel managed, scheduled and programmed exclusively by local public and private school authorities. 
c.  A "Public access channel," which will be a specifically designated channel available on a first-come, first-served, non-discriminatory basis. 
(4)  The grantee shall make available leased access channels to assure that the widest possible diversity of information sources are made available to subscribers. Such channels shall be specially designated for leased access use by persons unaffiliated with the grantee, at rates which are fair and reasonable. The number of such channels shall be determined by the provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 or other applicable federal or state law. Grantee shall advertise periodically the availability of such channels. Grantee shall not exercise any editorial control over any programming provided over such channels, except that grantee may consider such content to the minimum extent necessary to establish a fair and reasonable price for the use of such channels. 
(5)  The grantee shall provide for adequate equipment for emergency alert capability as specified in the franchise. 
(6)  The grantee shall fully provide, at a minimum, services, facilities and equipment for public, educational and government access as indicated in the franchise. 
(7)  The grantee shall provide such institutional network facilities and service as may be required by the franchise. 
(8)  The grantee shall, without charge, provide service and maintain public emergency transmission facilities to the City, as described in the franchise.  
10.48.02 - Conditions of Installations, Connections, Services. 
(1)  Standard installations. Standard installation shall consist of a drop one hundred-fifty (150) feet from a single point or pedestal attachment to the customer's residence. For installation of service in excess of one hundred-fifty (150) feet and concealed wiring, subscriber shall be charged only for the cost exceeding normal installation costs. The desire of the subscriber as to the point of entry into the residence or commercial establishment and location of pedestal shall be observed whenever possible. Runs in building interiors shall be as unobtrusive as possible. The grantee shall use due care in the process of installation and shall repair any damage to the subscriber's property caused by said installation. Such restoration shall be initiated as soon as possible thereafter. 
(2)  Antennas and antenna switches. The grantee shall not, as a condition to providing cable communications service, require any subscriber or potential subscriber, to remove any existing antenna structures for the receipt of over-the-air television signals. 
(3)  Lockout devices. The grantee shall provide to the subscriber, as part of its general literature, subscriber information concerning the availability of a lockout device for use by a subscriber. The lockout device shall be made available to all subscribers requesting it beginning on the first day that any cable service is provided. 
(4)  Reconnection. Grantee shall restore service to customers wishing restoration of service provided customer shall first satisfy any previous obligations owed. 
(5)  Free disconnection. Subscribers shall have the right to have cable service disconnected without charge. A refund of unused service charges shall be paid to the customer within thirty (30) days from the date of termination of service. 
(6)  Downgrade fees. No downgrade fees shall be charged unless it requires a technician to be dispatched to the subscriber's home. 
(7)  Delinquent accounts. Grantee shall use its best efforts to collect on delinquent subscriber accounts. In all cases, the grantee shall provide the customer with at least ten working days written notice prior to disconnection. 
(8)  Subscriber policies. The grantee shall comply with all subscriber policies in the cable Chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(9)  Installation. For a standard installation, the grantee shall install cable to a subscriber within ten (10) business days of request by the subscriber. 
(10)  Outages. The grantee, upon subscriber request, shall credit the subscribers account for a prorata share of the monthly bill commensurate with the period of time a subscriber experiences an outage in excess of six (6) hours.  
10.48.03 - Service Calls, Complaint Procedures. 
(1)  Payment stations. The grantee shall establish, operate and maintain at least one payment station within the City limits for the purpose of payment of subscriber's service charges and to receive written inquiries, requests and complaints concerning all aspects of the construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the grantee's system. Additional or alternative payment stations may be included in the franchise. 
(2)  Telephone contact numbers. The grantee shall have a listed local, telephone number or numbers for service calls available twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. Said number shall be made available to subscribers and the general public. The grantee shall provide the local telephone number or numbers of management personnel of the grantee to the City and utility companies to enable the City or utility companies to reach the grantee in case of emergency on a twenty-four (24)-hour, seven (7) day-a-week basis. 
(3)  Filing of rules and regulations. The grantee shall prepare and file with the City copies of all of its rules and regulations in connection with the handling of inquiries, requests and complaints. The grantee shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed, and furnish information concerning the City office responsible for the administration of the franchise, including, but not limited to, the address and telephone number of said office. 
(4)  Complaint records. The grantee shall keep full records in connection with all complaints and requests in connection with the system. Such records shall identify the person responding on behalf of the grantee, the subject matter of the contact, the date and time it was received, the resolution of the matter in question or the action take by the grantee in connection with the contact, and the date and time thereof, and such other information as may be deemed pertinent by the grantee. These records shall be made available for periodic inspection by the City. 
(5)  Defective equipment. The grantee shall service or replace without charge any of its equipment provided to a subscriber, which proves defective. 
(6)  City recommendation of resolution. The City may review and recommend to the grantee a resolution of customer complaints.  
10.48.04 - Operation after Termination, Expiration of Franchise. 
(1)  Service. It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive continuous, uninterrupted service insofar as their financial obligations to the grantee are honored. 
(2)  Failure to provide continuity. In the event the grantee fails to operate the system for seven (7) consecutive days without prior approval of the City or without just cause, the City may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the City or a permanent operator is selected. If the City is required to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the City for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the system received by the City that are the result of the grantee's failure to perform. 
(3)  Operation if franchise terminated/expired. In the event the franchise is terminated, or upon its expiration, the council may require the grantee to continue operation for a period not exceeding six (6) months after the date of the grantee's termination or expiration upon the same terms and conditions as are contained in the expired or terminated franchise. Upon the expiration of such period the grantee shall remove, at its own expense, all portions of its cable television system from all streets and public ways and restore such streets and public ways to a condition reasonably satisfactory to the City as specified in Section 10.47 unless the City has previously approved a transfer of the system in accordance with Section 10.41.16 hereof. The grantee shall maintain bonds and letters of credit pursuant to Section 10.46 until the conclusion of all operations under the franchise and this Chapter, including the removal of all equipment and facilities.  
10.48.05 - Protection of Subscriber Privacy. 
Protection of subscriber privacy mandatory. Grantee shall at all times protect the privacy of subscribers, as provided in this Chapter and other applicable Federal, State, and local laws. 
At the time of entering into an agreement to provide any cable service or other service to a subscriber, and at least once a year thereafter, grantee shall provide notice in the form of a separate written statement to each subscriber which clearly and conspicuously informs the subscriber of: 
(1)  The privacy rights of the subscriber and the limitations placed upon grantee with regard this Chapter and all other applicable Federal, State, and local subscriber privacy provisions; 
(2)  The nature of personally identifiable information collected or to be collected with respect to the subscriber and the nature of the use of such information; 
(3)  The nature, frequency, and purpose of any disclosure which may be made of such information, including an identification of the types of persons to whom the disclosure may be made; 
(4)  The period during which such information might be maintained by the cable operator; 
(5)  The times and place at which the subscriber may have access to such information in accordance with this Chapter and other applicable Federal, State, and local law; 
(6)  The procedure for acquiring the subscriber's authorization, in writing or electronically, for the use of personally identifiable information not specifically allowed under the Cable Act. 
10.48.051  Collection of Information Prohibited: Grantee shall not use or permit the use of the cable system to collect personally identifiable information concerning any subscriber without the subscriber's written or electronic consent, except as necessary to render a cable service or other service provided by the cable operator to the subscriber. Grantee shall not install or permit the installation of any special terminal equipment in any subscriber's premises for the two-way transmission of any aural, visual, or digital signals without the prior written or electronic consent of the subscriber. Grantee shall not tabulate, nor permit others to tabulate, any subscriber use of the cable system which would reveal the opinions or commercial product preferences of individual subscribers, whether residential or business, or of any occupant or user of the subscriber's premises without written or electronic authorization from the subscriber for his or her participation in a shop-at-home or similar service unless such tabulation and use of data is specifically permitted by the Cable Act. When providing such service, the grantee may tabulate only those responses essential to the functioning of that shopping or other service, and may not use any such tabulation of individual preferences for any other purposes. Tabulations of aggregate opinion or preference are permitted, provided the aggregations are sufficiently large to assure individual privacy. 
10.48.052  Disclosure of Subscriber Information Prohibited: Unless affected subscribers are first given an opportunity to prohibit or limit such disclosure, grantee shall not sell or otherwise make available to any party any list of the names and addresses of individual subscribers, any list which identifies the viewing habits of individual subscribers, or any personal data, social security number, income and other data the company may have on file about individual subscribers, except as necessary to render or conduct a legitimate business activity related to a cable service or other service provided by the cable operator to the subscriber, provided, however, that such disclosure shall not reveal directly or indirectly the extent of viewing or other use by the subscriber of a cable service or other service provided by the cable operator, or the nature of any transaction made by the subscriber over the cable system. 
10.48.053  Notices of Monitoring: Grantee shall report to the affected parties, the City and other appropriate authorities, any instances of monitoring or tapping of the system, or any part thereof, of which it has knowledge, which is not authorized under this section whether or not such activity has been authorized by grantee. Grantee shall not record or retain any information transmitted between a subscriber or user and any third party, except as required for lawful business purposes. Grantee shall destroy all subscriber or user information of a personally-identifiable nature after a reasonable period of time, unless retention of such information is authorized by the affected subscriber or user. 
10.48.054  Polling by Cable: No poll or other upstream response from a subscriber shall be conducted or obtained except as part of a program that contains an explicit disclosure of the nature, purpose and prospective use of the results of the poll or upstream response and where the program has an informational, entertainment or educational function which is self-evident. Grantee or its agents shall release the results of upstream responses only in the aggregate and without individual references. 
10.48.055  Monitoring Devices: Grantee shall provide written notice to each subscriber when equipment is to be installed on the system which would permit the recording or monitoring of individual viewing habits of a subscriber or household; such equipment shall be installed only after prior written permission has been granted by the subscriber. Such permission may be valid for one (1) year only and may be renewed by permission of the subscriber. In no event shall such permission be obtained as a condition of service or continuation thereof. Grantee shall give each subscriber annual written notice of any such monitoring and of the subscriber's right to terminate the monitoring in accordance with the terms and conditions of the subscriber's contract with grantee. Nothing herein shall apply to the use of addressable converters or equipment used by a subscriber to select programming. 
10.48.056  Collection of Information: Grantee shall not predicate regular subscriber service on the subscriber's grant or denial of permission to collect, maintain or disclose personally identifiable information. A subscriber may at any time revoke any permission previously given by delivering to the grantee a written statement of that intent. 
10.48.057  Subscriber Access: Each subscriber shall be provided access to all personally identifiable information regarding such subscriber that grantee collects or maintains or allows to be collected or maintained, and such subscriber shall be provided the opportunity to correct any error in such information. 
10.48.058  Signals for Performance: This section is not intended to prohibit the use or transmission of signals useful for the control or measurement of system performance or theft of service.  
10.48.06 - Rights of Individuals. 
Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, or physical or mental handicaps, provided the subscriber shall pay all applicable fees for the service desired. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this Chapter by reference. 
Any portion of a cable system controlled by grantee shall be operated in a manner consistent with the principles of fairness and equal accessibility of its facilities and equipment; and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use; allocation of use of said facilities shall be made according to the rules or decisions of the grantee and any regulatory agencies affecting the same. 
10.48.061  Information Accessibility: Each individual shall have the right to information concerning the provisions of this Chapter and the rules and regulations formulated pursuant to it by the council, the grantee, agent or entity created hereunder or pursuant to this Chapter. 
Each individual subscribing to the services of the cable communications system or leasing channels thereon shall be provided with a simple but thorough written explanation of all rights of the subscriber as set forth in this Chapter and the franchise. 
Such information as may herein be prescribed will be made available to the public and individual subscribers in such form as may be required for their understanding. 
Each document required to be maintained, prepared, filed or submitted under the provisions of this Chapter or pursuant to it, except those required and designated confidential by the Federal Communications Commission or other public law or regulation is a public document, available for public inspection and copying at the requestor's expense, at the office of the grantee or the City during normal business hours. The charge for such copying shall approximate the cost of mechanical reproduction and shall not include a charge for labor. 
Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of Federal, State and local regulations, as may be applicable, and as amended from time to time.  
10.49 - BOOKS, RECORDS, AND REPORTS 
 
10.49.01 - Books, Records, Reports Available to Grantor. 
The grantee shall maintain a local office within Okaloosa County. If any of the materials or records described in this Chapter, Section 10.42 are not kept in the Okaloosa County, or upon reasonable request made available in the City, and if the City shall determine that an examination of such materials is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of its duties, then all travel and other expenses necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by grantee.  
10.49.02 - Required Reports. 
The grantee shall file the following reports with the cable communication office: 
(1)  Regulatory Communications: All reports required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) including, but not limited to any annual proof of performance tests and results, Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) reports, and all petitions, applications and communications of all types submitted by grantee to the FCC, the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC), or any other Federal or State regulatory commission or agency, having jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation of grantee's system shall be made available to the City upon request and submitted to the City by delivery to the City manager who shall advise interested City departments of such filing. 
(2)  Facilities Report: An annual report setting forth the physical miles of plant construction and plant in operation during the fiscal year shall be submitted to the City. Such report shall also contain any revisions to the system "as built" maps filed with the City. The annual report shall be provided in February. 
(3)  Construction Reports: Upon request by the City, reports shall be sent to the City bi-monthly after the franchise is awarded for any construction undertaken during the term of the franchise until construction is complete, including any rebuild that may be specified in the franchise. 
(4)  Proof of performance test results shall be supplied to the City upon request when sections of the system are rebuilt and annually as required in this Chapter. 
(5)  Change of Service notification of any change in programming or service shall be provided to the City, in writing, thirty (30) days prior to implementation. 
(6)  Grantee Rules: The grantee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms of regular subscriber service policy regarding the processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the grantee's policy in connection with its subscribers shall be filed with the City and be available upon request at the grantee's local office. All such terms and conditions, including schedule of charges, must have been filed with the City prior to their becoming effective. Such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable State and Federal laws, rules or regulations. 
(7)  Proof of Bonds and Insurance: Grantee shall submit to the City the required performance bond, or a certified copy thereof, and written evidence of payment of required premium, and all policies of insurance required by this Chapter, or certificates, in a form acceptable to the City, evidencing that such policies are in effect.  
10.49.03 - Financial Reports. 
The following financial reports for the franchise area shall be submitted annually to the City ninety (90) days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year: 
(1)  An ownership report, indicating all persons, who at any time during the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest in the franchise of twenty-five 25 percent or more. Once an initial report is submitted, subsequent reports need only be submitted for years in which the list of such persons has changed from the preceding year. 
(2)  An annual financial statement certified by the Chief Financial Officer of the grantee of revenue received during the previous calendar year prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(3)  An annual list of officers and members of the Board of Directors of grantee and of any parent corporation.  
10.49.04 - Operational Reports. 
The following system and operational reports shall be submitted upon request to the City: 
(1)  An annual summary of complaints received and handled in addition to any reports required in the franchise; 
(2)  An annual projection of system and service plans for the future.  
10.49.05 - Additional Reports. 
The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the City at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonable necessary and appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the City in connection with this Chapter or the franchise.  
10.49.06 - Required Records. 
The grantee shall at all times maintain 
(1)  A record of all complaints received and interruptions or degradation of service experience for the preceding period prior to a performance review; 
(2)  A full and complete set of plans, records and "as built" maps showing the exact location of all cable communication system equipment installed or in use in the City, exclusive of subscriber service drops; 
(3)  Subscriber account records for the two(2) prior calendar years. 
(4)  The City may impose reasonable requests for additional information, records and documents from time to time.  
10.49.07 - Miscellaneous Provisions. 
Minimum public notice of any public meeting relating to this Chapter or the franchise shall be governed by local law. 
10.49.071  Notice of Bids for Franchise Applications: Invitation of applications for a franchise, public notice of "request for proposals". The City may invite applications for a cable communications franchise in accordance with applicable law by means of a public notice advertising the availability of its "request for proposals". The public notice shall contain, but need not be limited to, 
(1)  A description of the franchise area which is sought; 
(2)  A statement that a formal "request for proposals" is available to prospective applicants from a City official whose name, address, and telephone number are specified; 
(3)  A statement that applications for the franchise must be submitted in writing in the form and manner specified in the "request for proposals" no later than a day certain; 
(4)  A statement that all applications will be made available for public inspection during normal business hours at a specified location. 
10.49.072  Request for proposals: Prior to inviting applications for any cable services franchise, the City shall prepare a "request for proposals" that shall contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A description of the cable system and services desired by the City including any system specifications established by the City. 
(2)  A statement specifying the form that all applications shall follow. 
(3)  A statement indicating the amount of the application fee (if any) to be submitted with the application, and the manner in which such fee is to be submitted. 
(4)  A statement that all applications must contain the information required by the "request for proposal". 
(5)  The closing date for the submission of applications. 
(6)  The name, address, and telephone number of the City Official(s) who may be contacted for further information. 
10.49.073  Public Hearing on Notice: The City shall conduct a public hearing prior to awarding any cable television franchise. The hearing shall be preceded by reasonable notice to each of the franchise applicants and to the public, and shall be conducted by the City Council in accordance with the following procedures. 
a.  There shall be an agenda for the hearing which shall specify the proposal(s) to be considered at the hearing. 
b.  Every person who has applied for a cable television franchise shall appear at the hearing either in person or by authorized representative. The application of any applicant not so appearing shall not be further considered, except for good cause shown. 
c.  All persons shall be given opportunity to participate in the hearing, but nothing contained herein shall limit the power of the presiding officer to establish reasonable time limits and otherwise limit repetitive statements or questions. 
d.  The notice of hearing shall conform to all relevant sate and local laws and ordinances, describe the agenda to be considered at the public hearing, and indicate that copies of all franchise applications are available for public inspection during normal business hours at a place to be specified in the notice. 
10.49.074  Right to Reject: The City, at its discretion, may reject any application for a franchise.  
10.49.08 - Failure to Require Performance Not a Waiver. 
The failure of the City at any time to require performance by the franchisee of any provision hereof shall not affect the right of the City thereafter to enforce same; nor shall waiver by the City of any breach of any provision hereof be taken or held to be a waiver of any succeeding breach or as a waiver of any provision itself.  
10.49.09 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter for any reason is held invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction or the FCC, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. The invalidity of any portion of this Chapter shall not abate, reduce or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation by the franchisee of the franchise granted hereunder; provided, however, that the City may amend those provisions invalidated.  
10.49.10 - Compliance with Laws. 
Franchisee shall conduct operations under this Chapter in compliance with all applicable laws and regulatory standards.  
10.50 - MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 
 
10.50.01 - Cooperation with Northwest Florida Water Management District. 
The City will coordinate with the Northwest Florida Water Management District [NWFWD] to establish water conservation strategies and techniques designed to preclude emergency water shortages. 
The City will adopt procedures for emergency water conservation in accordance with the plans of the Northwest Florida Water Management District. 
In cooperation with the NWFWMD, the City shall implement any emergency water conservation plans necessary to protect water sources during periods of insufficient supply within the Floridan Aquifer.  
10.50.02 - Areas of Water Resources Concern. 
Pursuant to F.A.C. 40A-2.801, an area of water resources concern may be established by the Northwest Florida Water Management District to protect the area's water resources from depletion, saltwater intrusion or induced contamination, or from any other activity which may substantially affect the quality or quantity of the area's water resources. 
Within such areas, the NWFWMD may establish lower permit thresholds, establish management and minimum levels, and stipulate any limiting conditions as necessary to monitor, manage, and control the use of water. The City shall cooperate with the NWFWMD in its establishment of any areas of water resources concerns which may impact the corporate limits of the City. 
Should an area be declared an area of water resources concern pursuant to F.A.C. 40.A-2.801, the City should follow the provisions within Florida Administrative Code 40A-2.802 in order to provide for regulatory provisions to protect the quality and quantity of groundwater serving the City.  
10.50.03 - Connections; Permit Required. 
No person, unless properly authorized by written permission from the director of public works, shall tap or make any connection to the mains, distribution system or water pipes of the City water system.  
10.50.04 - Application for Service. 
Application for water and sewer service shall be made in the City Hall upon an application form provided by the City. The applicant shall furnish a description of the property to which service is requested.  
10.50.05 - Authority to Turn On; Testing. 
No person, except duly authorized members of the Water Division, shall turn on water without written permission to do so from the Superintendent of the Water Division, the Director of Utilities, or the City Manager. No licensed plumber shall turn on water for any owner except for the purpose of testing his or her work, service pipe or fixture. After testing these, he shall immediately turn off the water.  
10.50.06 - Connection Required Where Service Available. 
No property owner and/or user of developed property shall fail to connect to the City water system when City water is available to the property, and no occupant of any structure shall occupy such structure without City water running thereto for drinking and sanitation purposes.  
10.50.07 - Connection Fees. 
Connection fees shall be paid for connecting into any and all City water mains, which fees shall cover the cost of bringing City water service to the property line of the private property to which such service is requested or required. Such fees shall be established by the City Council by resolution, in the general fee schedule, with the following additional requirements. 
(1)  An additional connection fee shall be charged when the cost of extending the water line exceeds the established fee per lot. 
(2)  Where more than one unit is constructed on a lot or parcel, the connection fee shall be per unit for service to the property line. 
(3)  Upon application for service, the developer or customer shall place into escrow an amount equal to the total connection fee for the number of services required or provide other financial arrangements acceptable to the City, which amount shall be paid to the City upon completion of construction. When notification has been received by the City that such amounts have been placed in escrow or other financial arrangements have been accepted by the City, the City will prepare a detailed estimate of normal cost from the City's existing system to the property line of the new customer to be served, exclusive of the cost of any over-sizing of lines required by the City to serve other future customers. To the extent that such estimated normal cost to provide and extend service exceeds the amount placed in escrow or the financial arrangements accepted by the City representing connection fees, the developer or customer shall, prior to the start of construction, place an additional amount in escrow or furnish a method of financing acceptable to the City and equal to the estimated excess construction cost, if any, less any credit as established in the fee schedule, for a residential water customer. Upon completion of construction, there will be transferred from the escrow accounts or payment from other sources which have been accepted by the City, to the City, the total amount of the required connection fees plus the total amount of excess construction costs placed on deposit or committed by the developer or customer. The water line extension policy shall be that the customer or developer shall pay all costs of extension less the fee for residential water customers, but shall not pay less than the established connection fees. 
(4)  Fraternal or charitable organizations receiving their principal income from donations shall have a reduced connection fee for a three-quarter inch line.  
10.50.08 - Meters Required. 
Each individually owned or operated business or commercial establishment which is housed in a building that is separated by a partition wall from an adjacent business and is directly accessible to the public from the outside, will be required to have a separate water meter. Business or commercial establishments that fit the description in this section on the effective date of this section will be billed as if they were on a separate meter by taking the total consumption and dividing the consumption by the number of businesses to arrive at the average water consumption. The average water consumption rate or charge will be multiplied by the number of businesses to arrive at the total monthly charge. All new connections, including new construction, shall be placed on a meter basis after final inspection.  
10.50.09 - Utility Deposits. 
Minimum utility deposits shall be established by the City Council by resolution in the general fee schedule. 
If any utility service of a resident should be discontinued due to nonpayment two (2) times within a twelve (12) month period, or if the resident has an unpaid balance, an additional deposit equal to one (1) month's average billing rounded up to the nearest $5.00 will be required prior to resumption of service or beginning new service. 
Deposits collected will be refunded on all accounts that have remained current in their payments for a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive months. The deposit refund will be applied to the utility bill(s). 
Deposits for businesses shall be determined based on the published water, sewer and garbage rates schedules. 
(Ord. No. 1988 , § 2, 2-27-18)  
10.50.10 - Payment Prior to Connection. 
In all cases, the applicable connection fees shall be paid to the City before connection is made, and the City shall make the connection at its cost.  
10.50.11 - Construction Water. 
Construction water is defined as water used by a contractor in the construction of a building or structure. A meter will be installed for the purpose of metering the amount of construction water used during a construction period. A deposit of $35.00 will be collected prior to the installation of the meter.  
10.50.12 - Liability for Meter Damage. 
The person in possession or custody of real property in the City shall be liable for damage to any water meter located thereon where the meter has been negligently or willfully damaged. Upon failure of such person to pay for the damage or replacement of the water meter, he shall be subject to prosecution.  
10.50.13 - Irrigation Purposes. 
Installation of taps for irrigation purposes will require an installation fee based on the size of the water tap, when it is necessary to cut any paved surface, if a larger tap is requested, and when a second meter is installed. No bill will be prepared during the month when water usage is less than 1,000 gallons. Bills will be prepared on a usage basis and will be sent out after at least 1,000 gallons pass through the meter.  
10.50.14 - Discontinuance; Minimum Bill. 
After receipt of a meter deposit and after the water has been turned on for customer use, if the customer requests that the water be discontinued prior to occupancy, a minimum charge will be paid. 
A fee will be charged for requests to turn on and turn off the water prior to extended occupancy for purposes of cleaning, alteration or repair. A bill for consumption or a minimum bill for the meter size shall be prepared. Service shall be provided for a maximum of ten (10) days.  
10.50.15 - Use After Discontinuance Prohibited. 
No person shall use City water after such water has been turned off by the City. In the case of a violation of this section, the person in possession of the premises shall be deemed to be the violator.  
10.50.16 - Maintenance of Laterals. 
The applicant, user or owner of the property serviced by the City water service shall be responsible for maintaining the water pipes between the plumbing fixtures on the property and the property line or water meter in good operating condition and free from all internal obstructions.  
10.50.17 - Water Saving Devices. 
When undertaking new construction or renovation of an existing structure, water conservation devices such as water saving water closets and flow restricting shower heads and faucets shall be installed. 
a.  No tank type water closet shall be installed with water usage in excess of 3 ½ gallons upon each flush. 
b.  No shower head or faucet shall be installed which allows a flow of more than an average of three gallons per minute at sixty (60) pounds of pressure per square inch.  
10.50.18 - Obstructing Meters; Right of Entry. 
No person shall obstruct, cover up or hide any water meter or any water indicating or recording device so that the inspector or meter reader or other employee of the City cannot find or reach such meter or device. 
Employees of the finance or utilities departments have the right to enter upon premises where City water is used for the purpose of inspecting City pipes, settings, reading and repairing meters, turning water service off or on and enforcing the ordinances and rules of the City, or regulating water service in any manner necessary. If any water user, whether owner or tenant, should refuse to allow entrance by any lawful agent of the City upon any premises for the purposes herein stated, the water may be shut off from such premises pending compliance with the requirements of this section. The City is authorized to take action (e.g. tow and impound an obstructing vehicle) to allow City employees access to a water meter, and the costs of any affirmative action required by the City shall be assessed against and included as a cost of service in the user's water bill.  
10.52 - INAPPROPRIATE DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION INTO STORMWATER SYSTEM 
 
10.52.01 - Purpose, Intent. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Fort Walton Beach through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by Federal and State law. This Chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this Chapter are to regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges by any user, prohibit unpermitted connections and discharges to the MS4, to establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter.  
10.52.02 - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the stated meanings for the purpose of this Chapter: 
Best management practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage, as established by the City. 
Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended. 
Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Inappropriate discharge. Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system. 
Unpermitted connections. An unpermitted connection is defined as any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an inappropriate discharge to enter the storm drain system, including but not limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection was previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, prior to the adoption of this Chapter (Ordinance No. 1720), or any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Stormwater Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The system of conveyances, including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains, owned and operated by the City of Fort Walton Beach and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, but not used for collecting or conveying sanitary sewage. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit. A permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b), that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Nonstormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water. 
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Storm drainage system. Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to: any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stormwater management plan. A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
Wastewater. For purposes of this Chapter, any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.  
10.52.03 - Discharge Prohibitions. 
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any unauthorized discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited. Therefore, no person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants. The following discharges are exempt from this Chapter: 
(a)  Water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated ground water infiltration, uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water. 
(b)  Discharges or flow from firefighting and other discharges specified in writing by the City of Fort Walton Beach as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(c)  Discharges associated with dye testing after a verbal notification to the City of Fort Walton Beach prior to the time of the test. 
(d)  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under a NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.  
10.52.04 - Prohibition of Unpermitted Connections. 
The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of unpermitted connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, unpermitted connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
10.52.041:  It is a violation of this Chapter if a person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such a connection to continue. 
10.52.042:  Inappropriate connections in violation of this Chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the City of Fort Walton Beach. 
10.52.043:  Upon receipt of written notice of violation from the City of Fort Walton Beach and within a reasonable time period, the owner of property subject to the violation shall locate and identify any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent, that is connected to the storm sewer system, to include any outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point, and provide such documentation of the location and identification to the City.  
10.52.05 - Watercourse Protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.  
10.52.06 - Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges. 
The operator of any facility required to have an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall submit a copy of the Notice of Intent (NOI) to the City along with the required Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan at the same time the operator submits the original Notice of Intent to the FDEP or EPA, as applicable. Any person subject to such permit shall comply with all provisions of the permit and provide proof of compliance to the City prior to any discharge into the MS4. It shall be considered a violation of this Chapter if a person subject to such permit does not submit a copy of the Notice of Intent or proof of compliance with the permit to the City prior to any discharge. The copy of the Notice of Intent and Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan may be hand-delivered or mailed to the City at: 
Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater 
Attn: Environmental Specialist 
City of Fort Walton Beach 
P.O. Box 4009 
Fort Walton Beach, FL 32549  
10.52.07 - Compliance Monitoring. 
The owner of facilities subject to regulation under this Chapter shall allow the City to enter and inspect as often as may be necessary to determine compliance at the facility with the provisions of this Chapter. Unreasonable delays in allowing or refusal to allow the City to access a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this Chapter. All owners of regulated facilities shall: 
(a)  Make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the City if there are security measures in force at the facility which require proper identification and clearance; 
(b)  Allow the City ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination, and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law; 
(c)  Allow the City to set up on any permitted facility such devices necessary, in the sole discretion of the City, to conduct monitoring and sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(d)  Install monitoring equipment as required by the City; 
(e)  Maintain all sampling and monitoring equipment in a safe and proper operating condition at the operator's expense, to include the calibration of equipment to measure stormwater flow and quality; 
(f)  Remove and keep clear, at the operator's expense, any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility upon the written or oral request of the City.  
10.52.08 - Search Warrant for Compliance Monitoring. 
If an owner or operator of a facility subject to the provisions of this Chapter refuses access to the City of any part of the premises. The City may apply for the issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. The City must demonstrate probable cause that there may be a violation of this Chapter or a need to inspect and sample discharge from the facility to verify compliance with this Chapter or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community.  
10.52.09 - Use of Best Management Practices. 
The City shall adopt and identify best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of such activity, operation, or facility shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise that is, or may be, the source of an unpermitted discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater management plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.  
10.52.10 - Notification of Spills. 
Any person responsible for a facility or operation or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation who becomes aware of or receives information of any known or suspected release of materials that result or may result in unauthorized discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States, shall take all necessary steps, pursuant to the City's BMPs, to discover, contain, and cleanup such discharge. In the event of such a discharge of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify the appropriate emergency response agencies via emergency dispatch services. 
In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the City in person or by phone or facsimile no later than 5:00 p.m. on the next business day. If notification is made in person or by phone, the person responsible for the facility or operation shall confirm that notification by sending a written notice addressed and mailed to the City of Fort Walton Beach within seven business days of the phone or in person notice. 
If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years.  
10.52.11 - Violations, Enforcement, Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter. Violations of the provisions of this Chapter may be enforced pursuant to Chapter 1.8 of the Code, or otherwise as provided by law. 
However, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this Chapter may also be deemed a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and declared a public nuisance. If any condition is deemed and declared a public nuisance, the City shall abate, enjoin, suspend MS4 discharge access, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance pursuant to Chapter 5.05 of the code. 
The remedies listed in this Chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the City of Fort Walton Beach to seek cumulative remedies.  
10.53 - RATES & CHARGES 
 
10.53.01 - Increases for Tax Purposes. 
The rates and charges set forth in this division shall be subject to proportional increases to compensate for any existing tax or any applicable new taxes, which may hereinafter be imposed by any State or Federal taxing body.  
10.53.02 - Bases of Minimum Charges. 
Minimum monthly residential and commercial charges for water service shall be established by the City Council by resolution, in the general fee schedule. To further clarify, any residential or multiple residential meter up to two inches in size has a minimum water charge the same as a three-quarter-inch meter. Any residential or multiple residential unit using a meter above two inches in size will be charged by meter size as listed under the commercial heading.  
10.53.03 - Authority to Establish Fee Schedule. 
The City Council by resolution in the general fee schedule shall establish charges and fees for water and service supplied by the City. Such charges shall be charged to all users of the service unless otherwise excepted.  
10.53.04 - Bases of Monthly Charges for Water Supply. 
The charges shall be based on the minimum fee, plus any consumption over 2,000 gallons. A minimum monthly fee, which includes the first 2,000 gallons of usage per month, shall be charged according to the size of meter and type of use. The consumption fee shall be based on the use of water over 2,000 gallons per month. 
For multiple residential units that are connected to a single meter, a minimum bill shall be established for the first unit, plus an additional amount for each additional unit. The minimum water usage will be the number of units times 2,000 gallons of water. Hotel and motel units shall be billed based on the commercial schedule of the minimum fee, plus consumption.  
10.54 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY 
 
10.54.00 - Intent. 
It is the intent of this Chapter that the City will establish a stormwater management program pursuant to § 403.0891, F.S., and a stormwater management as a City utility enterprise in accordance with § 403.0893, F.S. The City shall establish user fees for stormwater management service to be charged to all developed properties within the City that contributes stormwater runoff to the City's stormwater management systems to accomplish the functions of such utility. These functions include, but are not limited to, maintenance, planning, design, construction, regulation, surveying, and inspection as they relate to stormwater management facilities of the City.  
10.54.01 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth: 
Best management practices (BMPs). The schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control facility site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
Commercial property. Any property designated as a commercial or multi-commercial property in the City's utility billing system. This includes any other property not designated as residential property. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU). A reference from which an equitable distribution of the cost of services and facilities can be made among all properties in the City through a stormwater management service charge rate methodology. The equivalent residential unit in the City for the purpose of service charge ratemaking has been determined through engineering analysis to be a gross area of 3,200 square feet of effective impervious area. 
Impervious areas. Surfaces which have been compacted or covered with a layer of material which is highly resistant to infiltration by water, such as roofed and paved areas, including, but not limited to, areas covered by roofs, roof extensions, slabs, patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks, parking areas and athletic areas. 
Lot. A parcel of land shown on a recorded plat or on the Okaloosa County Property Appraiser's maps, or any piece of land described by deed and recorded in the Public Records of Okaloosa County, Florida. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). A conveyance, storage area or system of conveyances and storage areas (including, but not limited to, stormwater sewers, inlets, manholes, catch basins, drainage facilities, curbs and gutters, roadways, culverts, channels, conduits, drainage ditches, drains, swales, washes, gullies, ravines, canals, streams, creeks, rivers, waterways, waters of the state, floodways, floodplains, wetlands, lakes, ponds (natural or artificial), reservoirs, stormwater management facilities, stormwater detention ponds, stormwater retention ponds, sediment settling ponds, and other structural BMPs, and right-of-way or easements for any of the preceding) owned or operated by local government that discharges to waters of the United States or other MS4s, that is designed solely for collecting, treating or conveying stormwater, and that is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in 40 United States Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 122.2, or amendments thereto. 
NPDES. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System defined in 40 CFR 122.2. 
NPDES permit. The permit numbered FLR 04E061, issued to the City by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, as it may be amended or supplemented from time to time in the future, and successor permits. 
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, 42 USC 2011 et seq.), heat, wrecked or damaged equipment, rock, sand, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into the MS4. 
Property owner. The person who has fee ownership, dominion, or title of real property. This term may also include a tenant and any agent of the owner or tenant, including the developer. 
Residential property. Any property designated or currently used as a residential or multi-residential property in the City's utility billing system. This includes single-family dwellings, apartments, town homes, and condominiums. 
Runoff. The surface flow of water, which results from, and occurs following, a rainfall event.  
10.54.02 - Stormwater Management Program. 
The City hereby directs the City Manager to develop and implement a stormwater management program. The stormwater management program shall be instituted within the incorporated areas of the City to plan, design, construct, maintain, and manage stormwater operations and improvements. The objectives of such program shall be to: 
(a)  Establish a stormwater management program mutually compatible with those developed by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, the Northwest Florida Water Management District, and other local governmental entities; 
(b)  Develop a City-wide stormwater management program responsible for the construction, operation, and maintenance of stormwater devices; for stormwater system planning; for review of development plans for compliance with stormwater management codes; and for surface water quality management; 
(c)  Recommend stormwater utility user fees sufficient to plan, construct, operate, and maintain stormwater management systems; 
(d)  Recommend the establishment and setting aside, as a continuing source of revenue, other funds sufficient to plan, construct, operate, and maintain the City's stormwater management systems; 
(e)  Protect, restore, and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of community waters; 
(f)  Assist in preventing individuals, business organizations, and governments from causing harm to the community, by activities which adversely affect water resources; 
(g)  Encourage the construction of drainage systems which aesthetically and functionally approximate natural systems; 
(h)  Encourage the protection of natural systems, and the use of such natural systems in ways which do not impair their beneficial functioning; 
(i)  Encourage the use of drainage systems which minimize the consumption of electrical energy, or petroleum fuels, in order to move water, remove pollutants, and maintain said systems; 
(j)  Minimize the transport of pollutants to community waters; 
(k)  Maintain or restore groundwater levels; 
(l)  Protect, maintain, or to restore natural salinity levels in estuarine areas; 
(m)  Minimize erosion and sedimentation; 
(n)  Prevent damage to wetlands; 
(o)  Prevent damage from flooding, while recognizing the natural fluctuations in water levels are beneficial; 
(p)  Protect, restore, and maintain the habitat of fish and wildlife; 
(q)  Ensure the attainment of these objectives by requiring the approval and implementation of a Stormwater Management Program for all activities adversely impacting community waters; 
(r)  Ensure cooperative efforts toward joint development of compatible and efficient stormwater management programs in adjacent jurisdictions; 
(s)  Ensure the City's compliance with all requirements of the NPDES permit.  
10.54.03 - Stormwater Management Utility User Fee. 
There is hereby created a stormwater management utility user fee to be charged for the provision of stormwater management services to properties with impervious surfaces and developed properties with improvements or uses that contribute stormwater runoff to the City's stormwater management systems. Such user fees shall be used only to accomplish the functions of the stormwater management program and utility. Such user fees shall be a monthly fee as established by a separate resolution and set forth in the comprehensive fee schedule, in accordance with the following methodology. 
(a)  Residential property. Each residential property or unit, including any single-family dwelling or unit, of any kind, within a multi-family development, shall be considered one (1) ERU for billing purposes. Monthly service charges for each residential property shall be identical and billed according to the water meter assigned to the unit. 
(b)  Commercial properties. Commercial properties shall be charged a user fee equivalent to the following formula: Base ERU = Total impervious surface on property divided by the residential ERU of 3,200 or one (1) ERU, whichever is greater.  
10.54.04 - Exemptions. 
City-owned lots or parcels, except those leased to any entity that is required to pay utilities for the leased premises, public road rights-of-ways, vacant lots or parcels, and undeveloped lots or parcels shall be classified as exempt from stormwater utility user fees.  
10.54.05 - Right of Refusal to Connect to Utility; Procedures. 
Any property owner responsible for paying the stormwater user fee, who chooses not to use stormwater management program services, may elect to develop their property in a manner that retains all run-off on-site and prevents discharge to the City's stormwater infrastructure. The property owner must verify retention of all stormwater on-site by submitting, for review and approval by the City, certified engineering drawings and calculations demonstrating that one hundred (100) percent of the total volume of runoff from the property will be retained within the property. The engineering calculations shall be based on runoff volumes from the one-hundred-year frequency rainfall event, for the following durations: one (1), two (2), four (4), eight (8) and twenty-four (24) hours and one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), seven (7) and ten (10) days.  
10.54.06 - Mitigation Credits. 
Stormwater fee credits of up to fifty percent (50%) may be given to developed properties, demonstrating stormwater control and management facilities which generate less volume of runoff and apply best management practices (BMPs) to improve surface water quality. The amount of each available credit shall be adopted by separate resolution and set forth in the City's comprehensive fee schedule. Credits will be awarded on a four-year basis and each property owner must reestablish the right to a credit every four (4) years. A property owner may apply for a credit by submitting an application for credit, on a form approved by the City Manager, along with certified engineering drawings and calculations sufficient enough to evaluate a claim for credit.  
10.54.07 - Collection of Fees. 
Stormwater utility fees shall be collected and enforced in the same manner that water, wastewater, and solid waste fees are collected and enforced. Failure to timely pay the monthly stormwater utility fees will result in the termination of water service and may also result in the disconnection of stormwater management service(s) to the subject property in accordance with section 10.53.02, of the City's Code, as amended. The City may, at its discretion, submit a separate notice to a property owner of the annual stormwater utility fees imposed on that owner's property if such notice will facilitate the billing and collection of imposed fees.  
10.54.08 - Stormwater Utility Fund. 
There shall be established a stormwater utility fund for the deposit of all fees collected pursuant to this ordinance for the stormwater management program. The stormwater utility fund shall be used exclusively to provide services and facilities related to the stormwater management program and for the following expenditures: operation or maintenance of stormwater management facilities; costs for the planning, evaluation, design, construction, and management of the stormwater management program; administrative costs related to the management of the stormwater management program; management services, such as permit review and planning and development review related to the stormwater management program; debt service financing of capital improvements related to the stormwater management program.  
10.54.09 - Inspection, Compliance, and Enforcement. 
The City's code inspectors and other City staff as required, upon presentation of proper identification, shall be granted access for inspection of facilities, structures, or properties, discharging or suspected of discharging to the City's MS4 or waters of the United States in order to effectuate the provisions of this ordinance, investigate violations or complaints of potential violations of the terms of this ordinance, and to collect samples for review and analysis. All structures and processes which allow discharges to the City's MS4, as well as records concerning them, shall be made accessible to authorized personnel for this purpose.  
10.55 - BILLING PROCEDURES 
 
10.55.01 - Initial Billing. 
After the meter deposit has been made with the City and service has been provided, a prorated minimum consumption bill based on the actual days of service will be sent for the initial bill. The final bill will be prorated based on the number of days of service from the last reading date to the day the services are terminated.  
10.55.02 - Disconnection for Nonpayment. 
Water will be shut off after thirty (30) days from the date of the bill for nonpayment of charges, in accordance with § 180.13, F.S.  
10.55.03 - Delinquency; Discontinuance of Service. 
Each occupant of property in the City using City water shall pay to the City a fee on an account that has not been paid by the due date or upon failure to put up a deposit. Water service will be discontinued to any place having a thirty (30)-day delinquent bill or upon failure of a customer to make the appropriate deposit. The service charge is due after 9:00 a.m., thirty (30) days from the date of the bill. Further, an additional service charge shall apply, payable in advance, for a broken meter lock, a pulled meter, straight lock up, water turned on after hours, and to recheck cutoff (water restored without payment).  
10.55.04 - Final billing. 
A final bill will be computed upon the period of time a customer occupies a building after the last regular monthly meter reading. If fifteen (15) days or less has passed since this reading, a minimum charge, or consumption for water only, whichever is greater, shall be made. If more than fifteen (15) days have passed since this reading, a minimum charge for all utilities (sewer, water and garbage service) or consumption, whichever is greater, shall be made. A final bill will be computed on the basis of a minimum bill or consumption, whichever is higher, regardless of the time period between the last meter reading and termination of service. Any outstanding amount at the time of final billing will be deducted from the meter deposit on file. Should the amount due be less than the amount of the deposit, a refund will be made to the customer. Any amount due over the amount of the deposit will be billed.  
10.55.05 - Payment of Other Charges; Delinquency, Surcharges. 
The charges for the refuse and recyclable materials services provided shall be paid monthly to the City, and the City is hereby authorized to include such charges on the regular monthly statements for water and sewage service. Upon failure to pay such bill within twelve (12) days after the billing date, a surcharge of five (5) percent of the total amount of such bill shall be added to the bill. Upon failure to pay the bill in full, together with any applicable surcharge, within thirty (30) days from the billing date, all public services shall be discontinued until all required payments are made in full, plus applicable service fees, deposits and/or surcharges as may be otherwise provided.  
10.56 - WATER AND WASTEWATER IMPACT FEES 
 
10.56.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to assign growth related costs to those customers responsible for such additional costs and to ensure the costs to provide such services are borne by the new users of the water and wastewater systems.  
10.56.02 - Definitions. 
When used in this Chapter, the following terms shall be defined to mean: 
Applicant means the owner of real property or the person or legal entity which has the legal right to utilize real property by means of any form of ownership which real property the applicant desires to be served by water and/or wastewater service. 
City means the City of Fort Walton Beach, Okaloosa County, Florida, a municipal corporation of the State of Florida. 
Collection facilities means the lines, pipes and appurtenant equipment and all other related equipment or facilities, or whatever type or nature, used to collect sewage from sewer facilities, buildings, structures or facilities and to transmit it to wastewater treatment facilities. 
Contribution in aid of construction means the transfer in ownership of water system and/or wastewater system assets from a customer to the City. Such contribution may make the customer eligible for exemption as discussed in section 10.54.3. 
Council or City Council means the City Council of the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida. 
Customer means any person, firm or corporation who receives water and/or wastewater service from the City and who is liable for payment of such service/services. 
Customer capaCity means the total water and/or wastewater service capaCity allocated to a customer of the water and/or wastewater system. 
Customer installations means all water and/or wastewater facilities which ordinarily and customarily exist on the customer's side of the point of delivery, such as, by way of example and not limitation, curb stops and lateral connections. 
Distribution facilities means the lines, pipes, meters, and appurtenant equipment and any other related equipment or facility, or whatever type or nature, used to distribute water from the utility to the customer for usage. 
Dwelling means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Dwelling Unit means one or more rooms in a residential building, which are used or intended for use as an independent living facility for one family including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Equivalent Residential Connection or ERC means a factor used to convert a given average daily flow (ADF) to the equivalent number of residential connections. For this purpose the ADF of one ERC is deemed to be 350 gallons per day (gpd) for water service and 300 gpd for wastewater service. 
Gallons per day or GPD means gallons per day. 
Meter means a device used to measure water delivered to a "point of delivery" by the City. 
Point of delivery means the designated point at which the applicant's property is connected to the water and/or wastewater facilities. 
Property means the real property owned or controlled by an applicant for which water service capaCity allocation, wastewater service capaCity allocation, or both, is requested. 
Service lines means the pipes of the system, which are connected from City water and wastewater facilities to the "point of delivery." 
Transmission facilities means those lines and appurtenant facilities used to either transmit wastewater from the (i) collection facility to a wastewater treatment plant, (ii) transmit treated wastewater to a final effluent disposal site, (iii) transmit water from a water treatment plant to a distribution system or (iv) transmit raw water from wells to a water treatment plant. 
Utility agreement means a written agreement between the City and a property owner which establishes the terms and conditions pursuant to which the City will provide water and/or wastewater services. 
Utility facilities means by way of illustration and not limitation, all equipment, fixtures, pumps, lines, mains, manholes, lift stations, pumping stations, laterals, service connections, and any all appurtenances thereto together with all real property, easements and right-of-way necessary to provide water and wastewater service. 
Wastewater Impact Fee means a fee or charge paid to the City by an Applicant for the purpose of obtaining Wastewater Service Capacity. Impact fees are utilized for the acquisition, improvements, expansion and construction of facilities deemed necessary by the City to furnish Wastewater Service Capacity and related service to the Property and to adequately fund capital improvements to the System. The term specifically does not include the costs of Collection facilities as previously defined or customer installations the costs for which shall be fully borne by the applicant. 
Wastewater Service Capacity means the rate of wastewater flow on an average daily basis measured in gallons per day, which can be treated and disposed of according to a wastewater facilities design. 
Wastewater system means the facilities associated with the treatment and transmission of wastewater collected by the City. 
Wastewater treatment plant means the facility in which wastewater collected from customers of the City is treated. 
Water impact fee means a fee or charge paid to the City by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining water service capacity. Impact fees are utilized for the acquisition, improvements, expansion and construction of facilities deemed necessary by the City to furnish water service capaCity and related service to the property and to adequately fund capital improvements to the system. The term specifically does not include the costs of distribution or customer installations, the cost of which shall be fully borne by the applicant. 
Water service capacity means the amount of water, which can be pumped, treated, transmitted and distributed, on an average daily basis, where such amount is measured in gallons per day. 
Water system means the facilities associated with the treatment and distribution of potable water to the City's customers. 
Water treatment plant means the facility in which raw water drawn from wells is treated and subsequently distributed to customers of the City's water system or raw water treated on site and pumped directly into the system.  
10.56.03 - Establishment of a Water Impact Fee and Wastewater Impact Fee. 
The City Council has determined that the report entitled "Comprehensive Water and Wastewater Rate Study," dated September 2001, sets forth a reasonable methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact fees. Not withstanding all other charges for water and wastewater connections, facilities or servicing, the City hereby adopts and establishes pursuant to general law, a water impact fee and a wastewater impact fee, the purpose of which will be to finance the cost recovery associated with the water and wastewater service capacities. 
(a)  Effective May 1, 2002: 
(1)  The water impact fee imposed by the City shall be two hundred thirty-five dollars ($235.00) per ERC. 
(2)  The wastewater impact fee imposed by the City shall be two hundred seventy dollars ($270.00) per ERC. 
(b)  Effective January 1, 2003: 
(1)  The water impact fee imposed by the City shall be four hundred seventy dollars ($470.00) per ERC. 
(2)  The wastewater impact fee imposed by the City shall be five hundred forty dollars ($540.00) per ERC. 
(c)  Effective January 1, 2004: 
(1)  The water impact fee imposed by the City shall be seven hundred dollars ($700.00) per ERC. 
(2)  The wastewater impact fee imposed by the City shall be eight hundred seven dollars ($807.00) per ERC. 
(d)  A resolution of council may amend these fees from time to time.  
10.56.04 - Applicability. 
The water and wastewater impact fees set forth herein shall be paid by those applicants who 
(a)  connect to the City's water and/or wastewater system, 
(b)  request water and/or wastewater service from the City, or 
(c)  request an increase in water and/or wastewater customer capacity. 
The City may exempt any customer from the payment of all or a portion of the water and/or wastewater impact fees to the extent that the City accepts a permanent contribution in aid of construction related to water supply, treatment or transmission facilities or the wastewater transmission, treatment, or effluent disposal facilities having a value of not less than the portion of the water and/or wastewater impact fees being exempted.  
10.56.05 - Time of Payment. 
All water and/or wastewater impact fees shall be paid prior to the connection of a structure or structures to be served by the City, or such other time as may be specifically provided for by City resolution, by City ordinance, by agreement, or by permit. Applicants shall make payment of water and/wastewater impact fees to the City and at such time will receive official documentation stating that such payments have been made.  
10.56.06 - Determination of Equivalent Residential Connection Factors for Water and Wastewater Services. 
For the purpose of calculating and imposing the water and wastewater impact fees set forth herein, the equivalent residential connection factor for any particular connection or establishment shall be either 1.0000 ERC or the ERC as calculated and imposed in the manner provided below, whichever is greater. 
Type of Establishment 	ERC Unit (1) 	Factor 
Residential: 		
 Single Family 	Per Dwelling 	1.000 
 Multi-Family* 	Per Dwelling Unit 	0.800 
 Adult Living (Assisted Living) 	Per Bed 	0.500 
 House Boat/Live in Boat 	Per Dock Slip 	1.000 
 Transient Lodging (Hotel and Motel) 	Per Unit/Room 	0.500 
 Bed & Breakfast 	Per Establishment 	1.000 
	Plus Per Bedroom for Rent 	0.250 
Commercial: 		
 Auditorium 	Per Seat 	0.019 
 Barber/Beauty Shop 	Per Chair 	0.357 
 Bowling Alley 	Per Lane 	0.333 
 Laundromats (Self-Service) 	Per Machine 	1.330 
 Dry Cleaning 	Per 100 sq. ft. 	1.900 
 Automotive Repair & Maintenance Stores 	Per Bay 	0.500 
 Gas Sales 	Per Bay 	1.132 
 Add 	Per Wash Bay 	3.663 
 Add 	Per Toilet 	1.132 
 Car Wash Self Service 	Per Bay 	3.200 
 Car Wash Automatic 	See Notes e & f 	
 Shopping Centers 	See Notes e & f 	
 Office Building 	Per 1,000 SF 	0.3500 
Food Service: 		
 Restaurant, Conventional 	Per Seat 	0.100 
 Restaurant (24 hours) 	Per Seat 	0.167 
 Restaurant ("Fast Food") 	Per Seat 	0.050 
 Bars/Lounges 	Per Seat 	0.067 
Other: 		
 Theater 	Per Seat 	0.009 
 Dinner Theater 	Per Seat 	0.075 
 Dental Office 	Per Chair 	2.143 
 Medical Office 	Per Exam Room 	0.571 
 Medical Clinic 	Per Exam Room 	0.571 
 Church 	Per Seat 	0.009 
 Schools (Middle & High) 	Per Student 	0.071 
 Schools (Elementary, Day Care, Pre-K, Kindergarten) 	Per Student 	0.046 
 Schools (Boarding) 	Per Student 	0.286 
 
*Includes condominiums, cooperatives, apartments and town homes. 
ERC Measurement Unit. The number of ERC measurement units, as provided by the applicant, approved and/or adjusted by the public works department, shall be based upon the maximum number of such ERC measurement units associated with the criteria used by the City's building department and/or fire marshall for such establishments. The number of square feet shall be based on the enclosed area. 
(a)  One Equivalent Residential Connection (ERC) shall, for the purposes of this section, have an assigned value of 1.00. For water customer capacity, one ERC is hereby established and determined to be equal to a flow of 350 gallons per day (GPD), average annual basis, or such other value as may be later approved or determined by the City. For wastewater customer capacity, one ERC is hereby established and determined to be equal to a flow of 300 GPD, average annual basis. 
(b)  The "total equivalent residential connection value" for an establishment shall be calculated by multiplying the ERC factor identified above by the number of ERC units. 
(c)  Mixed-use establishments (i.e. establishments which utilizes water and wastewater capacity under several categories) shall have their impact fees calculated based on the sum of the individual categories applicable to the establishment. The minimum customer capacity requirement (i.e. ERC) shall be based on the highest minimum for any applicable category. 
(d)  For existing establishments that are issued additional building or plumbing permits which will subsequently increase the amount of capacity needed, or if a facility formerly classified as residential is reclassified, the impact fee shall be computed based on the difference in ERCs between the old and new classification. Should the new classification result in a customer capacity demand that is less than the previous, no rebate for fees paid shall be applicable. 
(e)  For all establishments either not listed above or listed without specific ERC units and factors, the total ERC value for water customer capacity shall be determined by dividing the numerator that is equal to the average daily demand (as provided in a certificate from the architect or engineer) by 350 gallons per day (gpd). For example: 
Total Water ERCs = Average Daily Demand 
 —————————— 
 350 gpd/ERC 
The Water Impact Fee shall be determined by using the following formula: 
Total Water ERCs × $700.00 = Water Impact Fee 
(f)  For all establishments either not listed above or listed without specific ERC units and factors, the total ERC value for wastewater customer capacity shall be determined by dividing the numerator that is equal to the average daily flow (as provided in a certificate from the architect or engineer) by 300 gallons per day (gpd). For example: 
Total Water ERCs = Average Daily Demand 
 —————————— 
 300 gpd/ERC 
The Wastewater Impact Fee shall be determined by using the following formula: 
Total Wastewater ERCs × $807.00 = Wastewater Impact Fee  
10.56.07 - Establishment of Funds, Expenditure Guidelines and Pledge of Revenues. 
The water impact fees collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be deposited into a fund called the "Fort Walton Beach Water System Impact Fee Fund" and the Wastewater Impact Fees shall likewise be deposited into a fund called the "Fort Walton Beach Wastewater Impact Fee Fund."  
10.56.08 - Use of Funds. 
(a)  The water impact fees deposited shall be used only for the acquisition of the City's water system and all components thereof and additions thereto, and the construction and acquisition of additions and extensions to the City's water system and all components thereof including raw water supply facilities, transmission facilities, mains, ground storage facilities, new pumping facilities, water treatment plants, and distribution facilities in order to provide more efficient water treatment capacity or water service capacity to those customers of the City's water system. 
(b)  The wastewater impact fees so deposited in the above-mentioned fund shall be used only for the acquisition of the City's wastewater system and all components thereof and additions thereto, and the construction and acquisition of additions and extensions to the City's wastewater system and all components thereof, including collection facilities, transmission facilities, treatment facilities, and effluent disposal facilities, in order to provide more efficient sewage treatment capacity, effluent disposal capacity, or wastewater service capacity to those customers of the City's wastewater system.  
10.56.09 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by an order, requirement, decision or determination of the building official and/or engineer by the implementation or enforcement of this Chapter may file a written appeal to the board of adjustment within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the order, requirement, decision or determination by the building official to which the appeal is directed. The procedures for such an appeal are contained in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida, section 20-346, Land Development Regulations.  
10.60 - PRIVATE WATER WELLS AND SUPPLY SYSTEMS 
 
10.60.01 - Prohibition. 
No person shall dig, construct or maintain a water well or any other system of private water supply in any area of the City where water from the municipal service is available.  
10.60.02 - Permit Required. 
No person shall dig or construct a water well in the City without first obtaining a permit from the council. Upon application for the permit, the applicant shall have the right, upon a demand made at the time of the application, to a hearing before the council before the final action by the council on the application. If such permit is issued, then the water well and the water from it, shall, in all respects, conform to all of the requirements of the state department of health and rehabilitative services for the construction and operation of water wells and for the inspection and approval of the water produced thereby.  
10.60.03 - Conditions of Permits. 
All permits for the digging and construction of water wells, and all permits for the maintenance and use of existing water wells, shall be conditional permits, subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  Monthly inspection and approval of the quality of the water from the well, and its fitness for human consumption, shall be made by the state board of health in accordance with its regulations with respect to water supplied by a public utility. Every person maintaining a water well under such conditional permit shall keep, on the property supplied by water from such water well, the report of the state board of health, and shall display the report to any authorized agent of the City, upon demand. 
(2)  Unless the water from the water well which is the subject of the permit is submitted to the monthly inspection and approval of the state board of health, as provided in subsection (1) of this section, and unless the water from the well is approved by the state department of health and rehabilitative services as being fit for human consumption, the water supplied by such well shall not be used, directly or indirectly, for human consumption, for cooking, for making ice or for washing articles of food or cooking utensils, food containers, dishes, plates, cups, knives, forks, spoons or other articles used in connection with the human consumption of food. For the purpose of enforcing this condition, the council shall require that all water connections between the water well, or a tank obtaining water from the water well, or a pumping system used in connection with the water well, and a house, cottage, store, restaurant, building, hotel, rooming house, theater, service station or place of business or abode, shall be discontinued, except for direct connections used only for air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration (but not the making of ice), boiler use and similar uses, provided that there is no connection between such direct connection and any of the other water pipes or water distribution systems in such house, cottage, store, restaurant, building, hotel, rooming house, theater, service station or place of business or abode.  
10.60.04 - Deep Water Wells. 
"Deep water well" means a well of a depth of 75 feet or more. No person shall drill or continue to drill a deep water well without a permit.  
10.60.05 - Enclosure, Protection for Wells. 
No person shall operate or maintain, or permit to be operated or maintained, a well or private water system in the City unless such well or system is covered or protected by an enclosure sufficient to prevent a person from falling into or entering such well or system. A permit shall be required to cover or enclose a deep water well or system that is to be dug, or when abandoned, before it is used.  
10.70 - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
 
10.70.01 - Definitions, Table of Abbreviations. 
Act or the Act . The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
Approval authority . The administrator of the EPA. 
Authorized representative of industrial user . 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in this definition if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter [mg/l]). 
Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
Categorical standards. National categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard. 
Cooling water. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Control authority. Refers to the approval authority or the superintendent of the City's wastewater treatment plant. 
Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge. The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial user. A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
Interference. The inhibition of disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345), or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
National categorical pretreatment standard. or pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard. Any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) or the Act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
New source. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section. 
Passthrough. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Pollution. The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by the City. This definition includes any sewers owned by the City that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this Chapter, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW from persons outside the City who are, by contract or agreement with the City, users of the City's POTW. 
Significant industrial user. Any industrial user of the City's wastewater disposal system who: (i) has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day; (ii) has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the City's wastewater treatment system; (iii) has in his or her wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the Act or state statutes and rules; or (iv) is found by the City, Florida Department of Environmental Regulation or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Superintendent. The person designated by the City to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this Chapter or his or her duly authorized representative. 
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts. 
Unpolluted water. Water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the City's POTW. 
Wastewater. The liquid and water carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
Wastewater contribution permit. Such permits as set forth in this Chapter. 
Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
Table of Abbreviations. 
BOD 	Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations 
COD 	Chemical oxygen demand 
DER 	Department of environmental regulation (Florida) 
EPA 	Environmental Protection Agency 
l 	Liter 
mg 	Milligrams 
mg/l 	Milligrams per liter 
NPDES 	National pollutant discharge elimination system 
POTW 	Publicly owned treatment works 
SIC 	Standard industrial classification 
SWDA 	Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et. seq. 
USC 	United States Code 
TSS 	Total suspended solids 
  
10.70.02 - Purpose. 
This Chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the City and enables the City to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403).  
10.70.03 - Objectives. 
The objectives of this Chapter are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge. 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system. 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system. 
(4)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system. 
(5)  Set rates for disposal. 
(6)  This Chapter shall apply to the City and to persons outside the City who are, by contract or agreement with the City, users of the City POTW. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the superintendent of the City POTW shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Chapter.  
10.70.04 - Enforcement. 
The City's enforcement guide for sampling, monitoring, and reporting violations is outlined in their pretreatment enforcement response plan. These are the steps that will be taken in regards to a particular circumstance. The City may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the City, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of person, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the City to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.  
10.70.05 - Actions upon Notification of Suspension. 
Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The City shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge at the user's expense. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the City within 15 days of the date of occurrence.  
10.70.06 - Falsifying Information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document files required to be maintained pursuant to this Chapter or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Chapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 1.05.  
10.70.07 - Use of Public Sewer Required. 
(1)  Prohibited deposits on public or private property. No person shall place, deposit or permit to be placed or deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property in the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. 
(2)  Prohibited discharge to natural outlets. No person shall discharge to any natural outlet in the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any wastewater or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this Chapter. 
(3)  Buildings to be connected to sewerage system. The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated in the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the City, are hereby required, at their expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, in accordance with this Chapter, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so. 
(4)  Connection required. The City will require all developed properties to be serviced by the City's central sanitary sewer system within one year of notice by the City of availability of service. 
(5)  Connection inspection. By the year 1995, the City will complete a City-wide inspection to ensure that all developed properties are, can be connected or cannot be connected to the central sewer system. 
(6)  Septic tank and package treatment plants prohibited. The City shall continue its prohibition of the installation of package treatment plants and septic tanks.  
10.70.08 - Maintenance of Laterals. 
The applicant, user or owner of the property serviced by the City sewer service shall be responsible for maintaining the sewer pipes between the plumbing fixtures on the property and the property line in good operating condition and free from all internal obstructions.  
10.70.09 - Sewer Line Extension Policy. 
The sewer extension policy of the City shall be that the developer or customer shall pay all costs of extensions but shall not pay less than the total tap fee as outlined in this section. 
When it is determined that a sewer extension is necessary to serve a proposed development, a rough estimate will be provided to the owner and developer upon request. If the developer wishes to have a detailed estimate, a written request must be made and a financial arrangement must be made with the Finance Director in the amount of ten (10) percent of the rough estimate or ten (10) percent of the total proposed tap fee, whichever is higher, to cover the cost of design and preparation of a detailed estimate of the sewer extension. After this detailed estimate is presented to the developer, he may choose to not go any further with the proposed extension, which will cause the developer to forfeit the amount paid for the preparation of the detailed estimate, or he may choose to continue the sewer extension process. At such time, the initial financial arrangement will apply toward the construction costs or tap fees. If the developer chooses to proceed with construction, and such construction is set up as a project, he will be required to provide additional financial arrangements with the Finance Director to cover the amount of the detailed estimate or the amount of the total tap fees, whichever is greater, before construction can begin. This will be considered to be the cost of the extension.  
10.70.10 - Septic Tanks, Portable Toilets, Pleasure Boat, Travel Trailer Waste. 
Septic tank, portable toilet, pleasure boat and travel trailer waste shall not be introduced into the City's wastewater system, except at the facility located near the intersection of Hollywood Boulevard and Robinwood Drive, or at a meter connection provided by the City. 
This sewage shall be metered and appropriate charges paid. Charges are due and payable immediately upon the acceptance of such waste by the City. Residential and commercial customers who have sewer service available to them, but who are not connected to the sewer system, shall be charged accordingly.  
10.70.11 - Industrial Permits. 
The initial permit fee plus the sampling fee will be established and set forth in the general fee schedule plus the sampling as listed in this section. The fees for the industrial permit shall be determined by the number of samples and types of tests required of that industry. A fee shall be charged for each sample collected by the City plus the cost of analysis of the sample plus ten (10) percent of the cost of analysis. This shall be billed after the results of the test have been received.  
10.70.12 - Major Industries. 
Major industries, as defined by 40 CFR 128, and any other regulation established from time to time by the Environmental Protection Agency, or another appropriate regulating agency, shall comply with 40 CFR 128.  
10.71 - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 
 
10.71.01 - Permit Required to Open Sewer. 
No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a permit.  
10.71.02 - Location of Existing Sewer Tap. 
Prior to installation of a building sewer service, information on the location of sewer taps will be provided by the division of engineering after a permit for a sewer line is issued. Verification of the elevation and location shall be the responsibility of the contractor or homeowner.  
10.71.03 - Use of Old Sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test by the City, to meet all the requirements of this Chapter.  
10.71.04 - Compliance with Code. 
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice 9 shall apply.  
10.71.05 - Connection Fees. 
A flat tap fee shall be charged to each development per unit. An additional fee shall be charged when it is necessary to cut any paved surface. In addition to these tap fees, an additional fee may be charged as authorized by resolution of the City council. 
(1)  Single-family residential. A tap fee shall be paid for any new tap or connection made to the City sanitary sewer line. Such fee shall include all costs for providing sewer service to the property line of the property to be served. Where an existing building is serviced by a septic tank and used at the time application for City sewer service is made, the tap fee shall be the same as is required for a new tap or connection. Where the front footage of a lot or parcel exceeds one-hundred (100) feet in width, the tap fee will be calculated based on a front footage cost. The cost per foot will be determined by dividing the flat tap fee by one-hundred (100) feet; thence multiplying the cost per foot by the front footage to determine the final tap fee for the lot or parcel. 
(2)  Multifamily residential. Where more than one residential unit is constructed, a sewer tap fee will be charged. Hotels, motels, guest houses and tourist courts shall be considered to contain residential units. 
(3)  Commercial. Where a commercial development is constructed, a sewer tap fee will be charged for each business unit of four thousand (4,000) square feet or less. Where a business unit exceeds four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area, an additional tap fee shall apply for each four thousand (4,000) square feet and portion thereof. Where a development of multiple units is constructed, the total tap fee will be based on the fee per unit as described in this section. Where a warehouse is constructed, the tap fee shall be based on the square footage of the office space provided.  
10.71.06 - Payment before Connection. 
In all cases, the applicable connection fee shall be paid to the City before the service connection is made by the City.  
10.71.07 - Elevation. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the lowest floor. In all buildings in which a building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.  
10.71.08 - Polluted Surface Drainage Restricted. 
No person shall connect sump pumps, roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer, unless such connection is approved by the City for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.  
10.71.09 - Regulation of Connections to Public Sewer. 
The connection of a building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the City before the connection is made.  
10.71.10 - Inspection, Testing. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the City building official or his or her representative.  
10.71.11 - Excavations Guarding. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.  
10.71.12 - Damage to City Property. 
If any sidewalk, street, curb or asphalt maintained by the City or any City utility is damaged, it will be repaired by the City and billed to the party responsible for the damage on a billing work order.  
10.71.13 - Inflow During Installation. 
In the process of installing a building sewer and connecting it to a sanitary sewer, no sanitary sewer shall remain open to inflow of groundwater, surface water and/or stormwater for more than one hour.  
10.71.14 - Capping of Unused Connection Points. 
Sanitary sewers installed with unused points of connection for building sewers shall have the points of connection capped for watertight integrity prior to connection of the building sewer. The method of capping shall be one approved by the City.  
10.71.15 - City Construction in City Right-of-Way. 
A sanitary sewer line or service installed on a City right-of-way or in an easement granted to the City for the purpose of sanitary sewer lines that are to be maintained by the City shall be constructed by the City. If the City deems that assistance in the installation of such lines is necessary, construction may be performed by a private contractor, approved by the City, according to the specification set forth in this Chapter or accepted by the utilities director.  
10.72 - DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 
 
10.72.01 - Wastewater Dischargers. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge without a City permit into any natural outlet within the City, in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, and/or to the POTW any wastewater, except as authorized by permit.  
10.72.02 - City's Rights. 
If any water or waste is discharged or is proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which water contains the substances or possesses the characteristics of the enumerated prohibitions in this Chapter, and which, in the judgment of the City, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes or equipment; the disposal of residuals produced therein or receiving waters; or which otherwise creates a hazard to life or constitutes a public nuisance, the City may 
(1)  reject the waste, or 
(2)  require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; or 
(3)  require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the waste. 
When considering the alternatives of subsection (a) of this section, the City shall give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger as well as the impact on the wastewater facilities. If the City permits the pretreatment and/or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the City.  
10.72.03 - Discharge Prohibitions. 
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW or allow pass-through of these pollutants or wastewater. In addition, the specific prohibitions for pollutants as stated in section 403 of the Act shall not be introduced to the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
(a)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. Also, prohibition of wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in section 261 of the Act. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances. 
(b)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissue, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, fish scales, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(c)  Any wastewater having a pH less than five, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. 
(d)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act. 
(e)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(f)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(g)  Any substances which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(h)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(i)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) unless the POTW is designed to accommodate such temperature. 
(j)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation. 
(k)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulation. 
(l)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(m)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through. 
(n)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(o)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW.  
10.72.04 - Grease, Oil, Sand Interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid waste containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in this Chapter, or any flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capaCity approved by the City and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintenance of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal, by appropriate means, of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which records are subject to review by the City.  
10.72.05 - Specific Pollutant Limitations. 
No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of: 
Pollutant 	mg/l 
Arsenic 	0.10 
Barium 	2.0 
Boron 	1.0 
Cadmium 	0.02 
Chrome (total) 	1.0 
Chrome (hexavalent) 	0.1 
Copper 	0.50 
Cyanide 	0.20 
Fluoride 	4.0 
Iron 	5.0 
Lead 	0.10 
Mercury 	0.005 
Nickel 	1.0 
Selenium 	0.02 
Silver 	0.10 
Zinc 	1.0 
Endrin 	0.0004 
Lindane 	0.008 
Methoxychlor 	0.2 
Toxaphene 	0.01 
2, 4-D 	0.2 
2, 4, 5-TP Silvex 	0.02 
  
10.72.06 - Pretreatment of Flow Equalizing Facilities. 
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any water or waste, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense. Furthermore, pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities may be inspected by the City and/or its duly authorized representatives without notice to the owner.  
10.72.07 - State Requirements. 
Florida Department of Environmental Regulation requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than Federal requirements and limitations or those in this Chapter.  
10.72.08 - Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this Chapter for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this Chapter. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.  
10.72.09 - Measurement Standards. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and waste to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the City.  
10.72.10 - Excessive Discharge. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the City or State. (Comment: Dilution may be an acceptable means of complying with some of the requirements of this Chapter, e.g. the pH prohibition.)  
10.72.11 - Accidental Discharges. 
The user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or the substances regulated by this Chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or users own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for review, and shall be approved by the City before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this Chapter. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(1)  Written notice. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other applicable law. 
(2)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.  
10.72.12 - Periodic Compliance Reports. 
All significant industrial users subject to a Pretreatment Standard, after the compliance date of such Pretreatment Standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the utilities department during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the Pretreatment Standard or by the Superintendent, a report that contains: 
(1)  The nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such Pretreatment Standards; 
(2)  A record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported; 
(3)  The mass of pollutants regulated by Pretreatment Standards in the effluent of the user when the user is using dilution to meet applicable Pretreatment Standards or requirements, because dilution is not an acceptable alternative to meet Pretreatment Standards, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. 
(4)  These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the Superintendent, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable Pretreatment Standards; 
(5)  The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable Pretreatment Standard; 
(6)  All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the Administrator pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the Administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the Administrator. (Comment: Where 40 CFR 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in questions sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April, 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the Administrator.)  
10.72.13 - Monitoring Facilities. 
The City shall require the user, at his or her expense, to provide and operate a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems, if determined to be necessary by the City. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the City may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the Public Right-of-Way area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and any required sampling and measuring equipment required of the user shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the City's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the City.  
10.72.14 - Authority for Inspections and Sampling. 
The Superintendent, the Sanitation and Licensing Inspector and other duly authorized employees of the City, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing relative to discharges to the community sewerage system in accordance with this Chapter. 
10.72.141  Right to Gather Information; Restrictions: A Superintendent, Sanitarian and Licensing Iinspector and other duly authorized employees of the City are authorized to obtain any necessary information concerning industrial processes and operations which have a direct bearing on the kinds and sorts of discharges being discharged to the wastewater collection system. The City has the right to copy any information and data obtained in reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections on any user. This information and data shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies in accordance with applicable State law and/or Federal law. 
10.72.142  Indemnification of City and Owner: While performing the necessary work referred to in this section on private property the Superintendent, the Sanitation and Licensing Inspector and other duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises and established by the owner, and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees. The City shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property caused by City employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner and growing out of the gauging and sampling operations, except as such may be caused by negligence of failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions as required by section 36-204. For the purposes of this subsection, "owner" means and included the lawful owner of the premises, the tenant, the lessee and any other person lawfully occupying the premises by and with the consent and permission of the owner. 
10.72.143  Right of Entry through Easement: The wastewater treatment plant Superintendent, the Sanitation and Licensing Inspector and other duly authorized employees of the City, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.  
10.72.15 - Pretreatment. 
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this Chapter and shall achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the Federal Pretreatment Regulations. Any facilities required to pre-treat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for review and shall be acceptable to the City before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the City under the provisions of this Chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the City prior to the user's initiation of the changes. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request.  
10.73 - PRIVATE LIFT STATIONS 
 
10.73.01 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Annual station inspection. The required yearly inspection and certification of all mechanical, structural, and electrical components of certain privately owned lift stations located within the City. 
Dwelling, multifamily. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more families. 
Dwelling, one-family. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. 
Dwelling, two-family. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families. 
Florida Department of Environmental Protection. or FDEP. The State of Florida Department of Environmental Protection, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such state agency. The FDEP serves as the primary compliance and enforcement authority within the state for matters relating to the construction of wastewater collection and treatment facilities. Furthermore, the FDEP serves as the main investigation agency for all sewage spills within lands or waters of the state. 
Health hazard. Any condition or action which creates, or may create, a danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. For the purpose of this section, sanitary sewage spills from private lift station facilities onto lands within the City or into waters in or bordering the City will constitute an imminent danger to public health and will be classified as a health hazard. 
Okaloosa County Health Department or OCHD. The state health department unit located within Okaloosa County, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such state agency. The OCHD serves as the primary authority within the county for assessing and determining the appropriate level of public health risk for any accident, outbreak, catastrophe, or natural disaster. 
Privately owned lift station or POLS. A mechanical apparatus owned and/or operated by a person or entity other than the City, and designed for the conveyance of sanitary sewage from its origin on private property to publicly owned infrastructure such as a gravity sewer main, sewage force main, lift station, or pumping station. Apparatus may be a package lift station, grinder pump system, or pump station, etc. located on nonpublic property within the corporate boundaries of the City.  
10.73.02 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to monitor the use of privately owned lift stations within the City. Nothing contained herein is intended to replace or affect the jurisdiction and enforcement of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or Okaloosa County Health Department, or any other governmental agency charged with administering, regulating, or enforcing matters relating to the construction of wastewater collection and treatment facilities.  
10.73.03 - Registration and Permitting. 
For any property containing an existing privately owned lift station, the property owner shall register with the City obtain a permit for such POLS within ninety (90) days of August 26, 2003. Property owners shall register and obtain permits for all new POLS within ninety (90) days of installation. The property owner shall be required to renew the permit each year. An administrative fee for such registration is authorized to be charged by the City, the amount of which shall be set by resolution and may be amended from time to time. Such registration fee shall include a late fee for any property owner who does not obtain or renew a POLS permit within the time limits imposed by this Chapter.  
10.73.04 - Annual Inspection Required. 
For any property containing a privately owned lift station, the property owner shall obtain an annual station inspection on such POLS, certifying that the POLS meets all mechanical, structural, and electrical requirements of the state. Proof of such annual inspection shall be required to obtain a permit. Thereafter, the annual station inspection shall be performed within sixty (60) days of the expiration of such permit. The property owner must submit a report certifying the POLS is in proper operating order meeting all state requirements and all needed maintenance/repairs have been completed. This certification of the results from each annual inspection shall be submitted to the City prior to the expiration of the permit. Such submission of documentation prior to the expiration of the facility's permit shall serve as renewal notification to the City of said permit. Such inspections shall be conducted and certified by a State of Florida licensed Professional Engineer or a State licensed master plumber at the owner's sole expense.  
10.73.05 - Exemption from Inspection. 
A property containing only a one-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling shall be exempt from the annual inspection requirement. Properties containing a townhouse or multifamily dwelling, which is serviced by a common or community privately owned lift station, shall not qualify for the exemption as outlined in this subsection and shall be required to comply with the reporting requirements.  
10.73.06 - Penalty. 
Any property owner who does not obtain and maintain a permit as required by this section shall be deemed to be in violation of the City Code. Any property owner violating this section may be subject to enforcement by the Code Enforcement Board and be subject to the rules and procedures of that board, including being subjected to a fine, in an amount as the Code Enforcement Board may determine. 
In addition to the above, any property owner failing to obtain the required annual station inspection or failing to provide certification of compliance as required by this section, will be reported to the FDEP, OCHD, or any other governmental agency, deemed appropriate by the City Manager or his designee.  
10.74 - WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMITS 
 
10.74.01 - Permit Required. 
All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a Wastewater Discharge Permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a Wastewater Contribution Permit on or before April 9, 1991. All other users (domestic sewage only) of the POTW shall be permitted by the issuance of a plumbing permit.  
10.74.02 - Application Information. 
Users required to obtain a Wastewater Contribution Permit shall complete and file with the City, an application in the form prescribed by the City. 
(1)  New users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. The City will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. 
(2)  After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the City may issue a Wastewater Contribution Permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this section. 
(3)  In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(a)  Name, address, and location (if different from the address). 
(b)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended. 
(c)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in this Chapter as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. 
(d)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(e)  Average daily and thirty (30)-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any. 
(f)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by their size, location and elevation. 
(g)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(h)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any City, State or Federal Pretreatment Standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the Pretreatment Standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable Pretreatment Standards. 
(i)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(j)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(k)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(l)  Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.  
10.74.03 - Schedule for Pretreatment. 
If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the Pretreatment Standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment should be included in permit applications. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (1) shall exceed nine (9) months. 
(3)  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent.  
10.74.04 - Modifications. 
Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Sandard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit, as required, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within one hundred and eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the Superintendent within one hundred and eighty 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Sandard the information required for an application for permit.  
10.74.05 - Conditions. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the City. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer. 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule. 
(6)  Compliance schedules. 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the City, and affording City access thereto. 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the City of any new introduction of wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges. 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure compliance with this Chapter.  
10.74.06 - Duration. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit re-issuance a minimum of one hundred and eighty 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the City during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his or her permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.  
10.74.07 - Transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the City. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.  
10.74.08 - Reporting Requirements. 
Within one hundred and eighty 180 days after the effective date of a Categorical Pretreatment Standard, or one hundred and eighty 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a Category Determination submission under section 403.6(a)(4) of the Act, whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such Categorical Pretreatment Standards and currently discharging to, or scheduled to discharge to, a POTW shall be required to submit to the control authority a report which contains the following information: 
(1)  Identifying information of the facility, including address and name of the operator and owners. 
(2)  Any environmental control permits held by facility. 
(3)  A brief description of operations including the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation carried out by such industrial user. This description should also include a schematic process diagram indicating the points of discharge to the POTW. 
(4)  Flow measurement showing average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from all points of discharge. 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants discharged. 
(6)  Certification of Pretreatment Standards being met on a consistent basis and if categorical determination is or is not applicable to industrial user according to section 403.6 of the Act. 
(7)  A compliance schedule if additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards. The completion date in the schedule provided by the industrial user shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.  
10.74.09 - Compliance Date Report. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable Pretreatment Standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to Pretreatment Standards and requirements shall submit to the Superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by Pretreatment Standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such Pretreatment Standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable Pretreatment Standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O & M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable Pretreatment Standards or requirements. This report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user which is defined in section 403.12 of the Act, and certified to by a qualified professional.  
10.74.10 - Revocation of Permit. 
Any user who violates any of the following conditions of this Chapter, or applicable State and Federal regulations, is subject to having his or her wastewater discharge permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this division: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his or her discharge. 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit.  
10.74.11 - Notice of Violation. 
Whenever the City finds that any user has violated or is violating this Chapter, Wastewater Contribution Permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained in this division, the City may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the City by the user. 
At the end of the calendar year, the City will publish a list of significant violators who have not corrected any violations within fourty-five (45) days after being contacted of the violation. The City will hold a session for public participation with regards to these violations per section 403.8 of the Act.  
10.74.12 - Enforcement Procedures. 
The City may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the Code Enforcement Board why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
(1)  A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Code Enforcement Board regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the Code Enforcement Board why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(2)  The Superintendent or Pretreatment Coordinator shall transmit a report of the evidence with recommendations to the Code Enforcement Board for action on the industry. 
(3)  At any hearing held pursuant to this Chapter, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor. 
(4)  After the Code Enforcement Board has reviewed the report and the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.  
10.74.13 - Legal Action. 
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the City's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, Federal or State Pretreatment Requirements, or any order of the City, the City Manager may authorize and direct the City Attorney to commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate court of jurisdiction.  
10.75 - SEWER RATES AND CHARGES 
 
10.75.01 - Connection Required. 
All property owners and/or property users of developed property that is available for connection to the existing sewage collection system are required to pay the established sewage charges or fees, as set by the City from time to time, whether connected to the sewer system or not.  
10.75.02 - Bases for Rates. 
The rates, fees and other charges for sanitary sewer service shall be based on section 204(b) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, PL 92-500, as amended, which requires that the City develop and maintain a system of user charges to ensure that each recipient of sewer service pay its proportionate share of the costs of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of all waste treatment services provided by the City. Such rates, fees and charges shall also be based on an industrial cost recovery system which requires all present and future industrial users to pay that portion of federal funds granted which are allocable to the treatment of wastes from industrial users.  
10.75.03 - Authority to Establish Charges. 
The City Council shall establish and amend as necessary all charges related to sanitary sewer services by resolution through the General Fee Schedule.  
10.75.04 - Unit Defined. 
Units are defined as follows: 
(a)  single-family residence, one unit; 
(b)  multiple residential units, each residential unit, one unit; 
(c)  Motels, each ten rooms or fraction thereof, one unit. 
(d)  Each commercial business establishment operating under a business name and connected to a water meter: one unit. 
Each individually owned or operated business or commercial establishment which is housed in a building that is separated by a partition wall from an adjacent business and is directly accessible to the public from the outside will be considered a separate unit.  
10.75.05 - Surcharge. 
To the established rates and charges, there shall be added a surcharge based on the following formula. This surcharge shall be applied to all users whose sewage has suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand in excess of the following concentrations: 
(a)  BOD: 220 ppm, and 
(b)  suspended solids: 200 ppm. 
The additional charge for sewage having concentrations in excess of these amounts shall be based on the cost per 1,000 gallons determined according to the following formula: 
Surcharge = [(B-220) + (S-200)] 8.34 × $0.24 = Cost/1,000 gals. 
————————————— 
    1,000 
The surcharge cost will be multiplied by the user's metered water consumption (in 1,000 gallons). The calculated amount will then be added to the charges computed under the City's normal rate schedule to arrive at the user's total monthly bill.  
10.75.06 - Toxic Pollutants. 
Any user discharging any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the City's treatment works shall pay the cost of such additional expense as determined by the City.  
10.75.07 - Discharge. 
If the user is discharging less water than is being purchased and wants to be billed for only the discharged amount, then the user must install a metering device. If the user is discharging more water than is being purchased, the City will require the user to install a metering device. This metering device shall be purchased, installed and maintained by the user but be approved by the City. Monthly readings will be provided to the City to calculate the sewer bill for the month. Annual calibrations will be required with copies provided to the City.  
10.75.08 - Nonresident Surcharge. 
Provided that there are not franchise agreements to the contrary, for all sewer service supplied outside the City limits, there shall be added to the foregoing rate a minimum surcharge of twenty-five (25) percent. A higher surcharge for outside City use may be imposed at the discretion of the Council.  
10.75.09 - Adjustments. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to make administrative adjustments of the rates prescribed in this section in cases where hardship would be placed on an individual account or where application of the rate does not provide an average billing increase. 
The City Council may, by resolution, make any adjustments to the rates as it may deem necessary and proper.  
10.75.10 - Other Water not Put into System. 
If a business uses water for business purposes (such as concrete companies, landscaping, etc.) and the water used does not enter the City sewerage system, monthly billing will be made for consumption of water only, not for sewage and water charges. In order to qualify for this exemption, two meters will be required; one to serve the business purpose and one to serve normal sewage requirements.  
10.80 - SOLID WASTE 
 
10.80.01 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bear-resistant retrofit kit. A city-approved latching mechanism that can be incorporated onto existing solid waste containers. 
Bear-resistant solid waste container. A solid waste container with a reinforced lid and a latching mechanism, or other city-approved method, that prevents access to the contents by bears. 
Bulk container or dumpster. A container that may contain both wet and dry solid waste that is typically used by commercial, industrial, public, or multi-tenant residential facilities. 
Bulk/Household Waste. (Also known as Residential or Commercial Special Pickup). Large item(s) discarded on Residential or Commercial Property, as a result of normal housekeeping activities, which cannot be placed in a Garbage Container because of its size, shape, and weight. 
Construction and demolition debris. Concrete, concrete block, brick, mortar, sand, gravel, dirt, drywall, paper, metal, asphalt, and any other construction or demolition by-product. 
Garbage. All kitchen and table food waste, animal or vegetative waste that is attendant with or results from the storage, preparation, cooking or handling of food materials. 
Hazardous waste. Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance, or article that is designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or other applicable federal agency, or by the State of Florida to be "hazardous," as that term is defined by Federal or State law, and which shall not be disposed in a landfill, transfer station, or recycling facility. 
Infectious waste. Those wastes that may cause disease or that are reasonably suspected of harboring pathogenic organisms, including wastes resulting from the operation of medical clinics, hospitals and other facilities producing infectious wastes, such as diseased human and animal parts, contaminated bandages, pathological specimens, hypodermic needles, contaminated clothing and surgical gloves, etc 
Recycling. The reuse of solid waste in manufacturing, agriculture, power production, or other processes. 
Recyclables. Those solid waste items that are separated from the solid waste stream and can become commodities through recycling. 
Sanitary nuisance. A condition created by any person, or the keeping, maintaining, propagation, existence, or permitting of anything by a person which threatens or impairs the health or lives of individuals, or causes or transmits disease, and further defined in the City's Land Development Code. 
Shredding. A process of reducing the particle size of solid waste through the use of grinding, shredding, milling or rasping machines. 
Solid waste. Garbage, trash, recyclables, construction and demolition debris, and other types of waste material, whether residential or commercial, allowed to be accepted for disposal at landfills, but excluding all hazardous waste, and special waste. 
Solid waste container. A City-supplied or owned solid waste container for use with automated garbage trucks with a 96-gallon maximum capacity. 
Special waste. Any solid waste that requires special processing, handling, or disposal techniques that are different from the techniques normally used for handling and disposal of solid waste. Examples include, but are not limited to, abandoned vehicles, used tires, waste oil, sludge, dead animals, agricultural and industrial wastes, septic tank pumping, asbestos, liquid wastes, infectious wastes and residue, pollution control residue, and debris or contaminated soil or water from the cleanup of a spill. 
Tipping Fees. Those fees charged by a commercial hauler of solid waste from a waste transfer facility, transfer station, or a waste landfill. Such charges shall be based on a volumetric amount (usually per ton) calculated when the Waste Collection Vehicle drops (tips) the solid waste load at the commercial transfer facility, transfer station, or waste landfill. 
Transfer station. A transfer facility for the receipt, short-term processing or holding, and transfer of solid waste, yard waste, or recyclables. 
Trash. Refuse, accumulations of paper, wooden or paper boxes or containers, and sweepings, and all other accumulations that are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of stores, offices and other business places, other than garbage and yard waste, for which no special processing, handling, or disposal techniques are required. 
Waste Collection Vehicle (WCV). A vehicle specifically designed to pick up various quantities of solid waste for transport to a transfer facility, transfer station, or waste landfill. 
Waste oil. All types of waste oils, including waste automotive lubricants, industrial waste oils, and petroleum compounds. 
White goods. Inoperative and discarded refrigerators, ranges, washers, water heaters, and other similar domestic and commercial appliances. 
Yard waste. Vegetative resulting from landscaping maintenance or land clearing operations and includes materials such as tree and shrub trimmings, grass clippings, palm fronds, trees and tree stumps. 
(Ord. No. 1947 , § 3, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 2000 , § 2, 1-8-19)  
10.80.02 - Private Collection, Transportation Prohibited. 
No private person or business may collect, haul or transport solid waste generated from residences or places of business, unless specifically authorized to do so by the City through an exception permit. 
10.80.021  Exception Permit: The City Manager may issue an exception permit to allow private individuals or businesses to service commercial accounts upon a finding that the City's equipment is either inadequate to service the proposed account or it is not economically feasible for the City to service the account. Permits will be issued to approved vendors only in October of each year and prior to container placement 
10.80.022  Revocation of Exception Permit: The City Manager may, at any time, revoke any exception permit issued pursuant to this section upon a finding that the City either has obtained the equipment necessary to service the account or that it has become economically feasible for the City to service such account. Upon such revocation, the account shall thereafter be serviced by the City 
10.80.023  Compensation for Permit: All private individuals and businesses that are issued exception permits shall compensate the City by paying to the City, on a quarterly basis, a ten percent (10%) fee of the gross revenue of the customers being serviced in the City by such private individuals or businesses previously approved to conduct a solid waste hauling operation within the City. Such compensation shall be based not only on standard container customers, but on any other type of collection service approved by the City for the customers and commercial hauler. Failure to pay the fee shall be grounds for revoking the business license of the solid waste service provider and/or revoking the exception permit.  
10.80.03 - Solid Waste Container Service. 
The City will issue solid waste containers to an address and are not to be removed from the premises of that address. If a dwelling is to be unoccupied for any length of time, the property owner should notify the City. Containers are stamped on the top rim with a serial number for identification. In the case of multiple dwelling units, such as duplexes, apartments, etc., the City will furnish an adequate number of containers to satisfy the refuse requirements based on a rate of two (2) collections per week. 
10.80.031  Placement of Containers: Containers shall be placed near the street curb or alley as indicated and directed when the containers are first issued. If the WCV operator finds that a container location needs to be changed, he will relocate the container and notify the user by a tag placed on the container. The containers shall not be placed behind or close to parked cars, utility poles or other obstacles that might prevent safe access by the mechanical arm pickup from the side of the WCV. If approved by the utilities department, containers may be permanently placed near the street only when they are concealed by a structure that is not unsightly to the neighborhood and that is in keeping with the surrounding area, but such containers must be removed away from such structures by users and properly placed for collection. Containers shall not be placed at the curb or alley earlier than 7:00 p.m. of the evening proceeding the collection day and must be removed to a point at the side or rear of the structure not later than 7:00 p.m. on the day of collection. 
10.80.032  Proper Use of Containers: Containers are for garbage and trash. Yard waste, such as grass clippings, leaves, yard rakings, tree and shrub trimmings, etc., paint, solvent, rock, sod, or large pieces of metal or concrete shall not be placed in such containers. City issued solid waste containers shall at all times have their lids on and be closed. 
10.80.033  Maintenance of Containers: Occupants shall maintain their containers in good, clean and serviceable condition and shall return them to the City in good condition if so directed by the utilities department. The City will replace or repair any container that fails because of defects or damage caused by the collection equipment. All other damage or loss shall be the occupant's responsibility; the occupant will be billed by the City for the cost of any repair or replacement resulting from abuse or negligence on the part of the occupant. 
10.80.034  Special and Extra Pickups: 
(1)  If all occupants of a residential unit are physically unable to properly place the solid waste container at the curb, the City will provide a special pick up for that residential unit once each week. Such occupants shall contact the City and request to have the residential address serviced by a special pick up. 
(2)  A resident may request an additional garbage or trash pickup for a time other than the regular scheduled pickup time or in addition to the regular scheduled pickup time. Such pickups are considered "extra collection pickups" for both commercial and residential users and are subject to additional charges. 
10.80.035  Bulk Containers: Any commercial or multifamily complex that generates more solid waste than can be placed in the provided containers or that does not have the facilities to accommodate the containers shall request, or the City may require, the bulk container service provided by the City. A bulk container shall not be used at a commercial or multifamily complex if a proper location is not provided for the bulk container or if it is not accessible to the WCV for handling. 
10.80.036  City Responsibility: The collection, hauling and disposal of solid waste generated within the City shall be made by the officers, agents, or employees of the City under the direction of the City Manager. The charges established by the City shall be set forth in the City's comprehensive fee schedule and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
10.80.037  Bear-Resistant Containers: 
(1)  Users shall have the option of using a city-approved, bear-resistant solid waste container, if available. Users shall also have the option of using a city-approved bear-resistant retrofit kit to upgrade existing non bear-resistant containers. Bear-resistant containers shall be secured until the container is permitted to be placed curbside for collection. Once the container is emptied, users shall secure bear-resistant container until the next scheduled collection day. 
(2)  Non bear-resistant containers containing household garbage shall be secured from bear intrusion until the container is permitted to be placed curbside for collection. 
(3)  For areas of the city that have reoccurring bear related conflicts, users may be required to obtain bear-resistant containers and ensure that they are properly secured at all times until the container is permitted to be placed curbside for collection. Properties with reoccurring bear related conflicts may be subject to code enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 1947 , § 3, 8-9-16)  
10.80.04 - Prohibited Use of Containers. 
No person shall dump solid waste into a City container which is assigned to another person or dump solid waste that was generated outside of the City into any City solid waste container of any kind.  
10.80.05 - Solid Waste Collection Conditions. 
(1)  Commercial users shall dispose of their solid waste in their approved bulk or solid waste containers. Bulk containers shall be accessible to City employees and WCVs and positioned only in City approved locations on the commercial sites. 
(2)  Residential solid waste cans shall be brought to curbside by their users unless a special pickup has been authorized. 
(3)  Boxes shall be broken down and placed in solid waste or bulk containers. 
(4)  Residential users must separate yard waste from all other solid waste. Yard waste will be collected on the normal yard waste collection day. No single item of yard waste shall exceed four (4) feet in length, have a diameter greater than four (4) inches, or exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight. The volume of loose yard waste shall be limited to four (4) cubic yards per week or less. Exceptions may be made for storm damage. 
(5)  Yard waste shall not be placed on top of and shall not cover sprinkler system heads and water meters. The city shall not be responsible for damage to sprinkler systems, sprinkler heads, water meters, utility combination boxes, or the like, and other objects including fences, gates, hedges, plants, and trees damaged due to yard trash or green waste being placed over or piled on or against such items for collection. 
Contractors or Individuals that are hired to cut, trim trees or shrubs, shall be responsible for removal and disposal of yard waste debris. 
(6)  Bulk/Household Waste will be collected on a call-in basis, once per week, per active residential property. The volume of bulk/household waste shall be limited to four (4) cubic yards per month. Amounts exceeding four (4) cubic yards are subject to charge in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
If no request is made for collection of bulk items placed curbside, such items will be collected by the city at its convenience, without notification, and the property owner or occupant shall be billed for nonscheduled bulk waste collection in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. Billing shall be to the existing city utility account or to the individual property owner or occupant where no city account has been established. 
(7)  Garbage and trash shall be placed in the container provided. If the volume is too great to fit into the container, then the customer shall call the Solid Waste Division for an extra pickup and is subject to charge. 
(8)  No person shall sweep or otherwise deposit solid waste into the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the City. 
(9)  The City will not collect hazardous wastes, infectious wastes, and dangerous materials or substances, such as poisons, acids, caustics, infected materials, ashes, explosives and radioactive materials. Such materials must be properly disposed of by the person or business creating the hazardous waste. 
(Ord. No. 2000 , § 2, 1-8-19)  
10.80.06 - Special Conditions. 
No resident, contractor or business shall cut, trim or remove trees once the City of Fort Walton Beach has been placed under a Tropical Storm or Hurricane Watch/Warning. 
It is the responsibility of the resident, contractor or business to receive authorization from the Solid Waste Division prior to cutting or trimming of trees during this time. 
Violations of this ordinance may be deemed detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of the community. Residents, contractors or businesses found in violation of this ordinance are subject to a citation as prescribed in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2000 , § 2, 1-8-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000 , § 2, adopted January 8, 2019, added a new provision as § 10.80.06, and subsequently renumbered the remaining §§ 10.80.06—10.80.11 as 10.80.07—10.80.12.  
10.80.07 - Burning; Incinerators. 
No person shall burn any wastes in the City except in an incinerator authorized by appropriate permits. Operation of incinerators shall be subject to periodic fire department inspections to ensure that adequate fire and safety precautions are maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2000 , § 2, 1-8-19) 
Editor's note— Former § 10.80.06, see note at § 10.80.06.  
10.80.08 - Construction Debris. 
Construction and demolition debris resulting from remodeling, repair, excavation, construction, demolition of structures, etc., such as earth, plaster, mortar, roofing materials, pieces of concrete, lumber, etc.; must be removed and properly disposed of in an approved container by the person or contractor performing such work or disposal. Use of such containers requires the issuance of an exception permit pursuant to section 10.80.020. Construction debris, as described in this section, shall not be disposed of in any City waste container. 
(Ord. No. 2000 , § 2, 1-8-19) 
Editor's note— Former § 10.80.07, see note at § 10.80.06.  
10.80.09 - Waste Oil, Grease. 
Waste oil and grease accumulated at garages, filling stations and similar establishments shall be removed and properly disposed of by those establishments. The City shall not remove such waste except for the City's convenience or public health, safety, or welfare. If the City removes such waste, the establishment or property owner will be charged for the removal. No person shall place waste oil or grease into storm sewers, sanitary sewers or on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2000 , § 2, 1-8-19) 
Editor's note— Former § 10.80.08, see note at § 10.80.06.  
10.80.10 - Accumulations, Deposits Limited. 
No person shall accumulate solid waste upon any premises in the City for a period longer than eight (8) days. Solid waste placed at the curb side or right-of-way shall be treated as an intended solid waste pick-up on the regularly scheduled day. Oversized or excess volume will be subject to additional fees as described in section 10.80.034, for which a billing work order may be issued, with payment due upon issuance. No persons shall deposit solid waste upon any vacant or unoccupied premises, in any waterway, pit or pool, or upon the property or premises of another person. The removal of all solid waste located on an unoccupied or vacant piece of property is the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2000 , § 2, 1-8-19) 
Editor's note— Former § 10.80.09, see note at § 10.80.06.  
10.80.11 - Recycling. 
City issued recycling bins are the property of the City but the responsibility of the resident or user. The bins shall be left at the residence when the resident moves. Recyclable materials shall be collected and disposed of only in the manner designated by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2000 , § 2, 1-8-19) 
Editor's note— Former § 10.80.10, see note at § 10.80.06.  
10.80.12 - Removal of Solid Waste Materials; Violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove, pick up, or transfer any solid waste materials from disposal containers. This prohibition shall include scavenging. Each unauthorized removal, pick up or transfer of solid waste will constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable as provided in section 1.05. 
(Ord. No. 2000 , § 2, 1-8-19) 
Editor's note— Former § 10.80.11, see note at § 10.80.06.  
10.82 - SOLID WASTE RATES AND CHARGES 
 
10.82.01 - Authority to Establish Rates, Charges. 
The City Council shall establish rates and charges to be paid by the owner or occupant of each residential, commercial, or multi-family unit for the collection of solid waste by the City. Activating water service will automatically activate solid waste charges.  
10.82.02 - Units, Bases Defined. 
Multifamily services . Multifamily residential units on individual water meters utilizing a City-supplied bulk container are charged per unit per month, or the fee for bulk containers, whichever is greater. 
Single unit service . Single-family residential service, multifamily residential service, are charged per unit per month. 
Bulk container service . These containers are provided at the request of the user and shall be billed on a monthly basis using the following formula: Monthly rate charge equals (=) the rate per cubic yard per pickup times (×) the cubic yards per container times (×) the number of pickups per week times (×) 52 weeks a year divided (/) by 12 months a year. 
Compactor service . Accounts utilizing a compactor, which is used with a bulk container that is compatible with City equipment, shall be charged the commercial rate times (×) three (3) per bulk container. 
Commercial sharing of containers . Businesses may combine and share the cost of commercial bulk containers, but each business shall pay the "sharing dumpster" fee as outlined in the City's current Comprehensive Fee Schedule. If access to a container is blocked when the solid waste employees arrive for a scheduled pickup, the pickup will not be made. Solid waste employees will not return until the next scheduled date unless arrangements are made otherwise. 
Change of container . If a customer desires to change a bulk container size, the customer shall pay a service charge for the container change-out equivalent to the rate outlined in the City's current Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
Fuel surcharge . A fuel surcharge shall be billed per month and determined per unit as number of pickups per week (×) $0.045 (×) 4 weeks a month.  
10.82.03 - Appeals. 
Should any person feel aggrieved by an administrative ruling of the City Manager in the establishment of a special rate, such person may file a written complaint with the City Clerk at least two (2) weeks prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. Such complaint shall briefly set forth the grievance. Upon receipt of such complaint, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for hearing at the next meeting of the Council. If such complaint is adjudged to be well-founded, then the Council shall make such recommendations and amendments as it deems proper; otherwise, the designation or classification of the City Manager shall be final.  
10.82.04 - Payment of Charges; Suspension of Service. 
The charges for solid waste services shall be paid monthly to the City, and the City is hereby authorized to include such charges on the regular monthly statements for water and sewage service. A surcharge of five percent (5%) of the total amount of such bill shall be added to the bill for any late payment. Upon failure to pay the bill in full, together with any applicable surcharge, within thirty (30) days from the billing date, all services associated with the bill shall be discontinued until all required payments are made in full, plus applicable service fees, deposits and/or surcharges as may be otherwise assessed.  
10.82.05 - Tipping Fee Charges. 
Charges (tipping fees) for disposal of solid waste shall be added to the service charges.  
10.90 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
 
10.90.01 - Acquisition of Rights-of-Way. 
The acquisition of rights-of-way for City streets shall be according to the following terms: 
(1)  The quality of the title of property upon which the City may construct a road shall be a fee simple interest deeded to the City. 
(2)  Transfers of title may be by special warranty deed, with a copy attached, signed by all parties who have an interest in the property, including all mortgagees. 
(3)  A title search shall be made to verify the current owners and lien-holders of the property, prior to receiving the transfer of title.  
10.90.02 - Removal of Material Prohibited. 
No person shall remove grass, earth or sand from, or dig up, any street, or deposit material of any kind on any street or right-of-way, without the permission of the director of public works.  
10.90.03 - Excavations. 
After any paved street or sidewalk has been laid under the provisions of any ordinance, no person shall dig into or disturb any such paved street or sidewalk or any part of such street or sidewalk, for any purpose, without first obtaining a written excavation permit from the Director of Public Works. Any person desiring to dig up or disturb any paved street or sidewalk shall make written application to the Director for permission to do so and shall pay to the City, in cash, at the time such application is made, such sum of money as the Director may deem sufficient to pay all costs incurred in restoring the disturbed portion of any paved street or sidewalk to its original condition. Immediately after the repairs causing such digging or disturbing have been made, the Director shall be notified, whereupon the Director shall cause the excavation in or under the street to be filled, under his or her direction, by workers in his or her employ, and shall cause the disturbed portion of the paved street or sidewalk to be placed in its original condition, as nearly as practical. Should the cost of such work be less than the amount paid to the City as required in this section, the excess shall be returned to the owner. Should it be more, the owner shall pay the difference to the City.  
10.90.04 - Use of Streets for Business Purposes. 
No person shall use any portion of the streets or sidewalks of the City for the location or operation of any private business, unless such person first obtains a permit or franchise for such use of the streets or sidewalks from the Council. In lieu of such monthly permit, the supplier or his or her agent may purchase an annual permit which shall permit the supplier's vehicles to cross City curbs and rights-of-way for the purpose of loading or unloading such vehicles. The permit shall be purchased prior to crossing any curb within the City limits. A curb shall not be considered as a driveway access to a street.  
10.90.05 - Removal of Curb. 
A driveway permit approved by the City will be required for anyone proposing to remove existing curb to provide driveway access. Removal of existing curb or curb back will be performed by the City. Driveway turnout curb will be installed by the individual at his or her expense, according to specifications set forth by the Director of Public Works.  
10.90.06 - Sidewalk Improvement Program. 
The City finds that there is a need for a coordinated program for improving sidewalks in order to correct existing deficiencies and plan for future needs of the City, and that such program will increase pedestrian safety and improve the quality of life of residents and visitors. The City hereby establishes the following prioritization of need for planning sidewalk improvements throughout the City: 
(1)  Priority level I. Arterial roadways, school areas and those streets on which children would normally walk to schools, business districts, industrial districts, historical districts, health care areas and areas where partial or incomplete sidewalks now exist. 
(2)  Priority level II. Collector roadways. 
(3)  Priority level III. Local streets. 
10.90.061  Sidewalk Improvement Implementation: The City establishes the following procedures for implementing the sidewalk prioritization: 
(1)  Identify streets needing sidewalks according to the priority level. 
(2)  Initiate City sponsored projects and/or receive petitions from property owners desiring sidewalks and develop cost estimates. Rank all proposed sidewalk projects by priority level for funding. 
(3)  The City shall seek to secure adjacent property owner participation in funding sidewalk improvements to the extent of the benefit of the improvement to the adjacent property owner.  
10.90.07 - Street Drainage Design. 
Drainage facilities shall be designed so as to facilitate elimination of stormwater from paved streets within twenty-four (24) hours of all but catastrophic rainfall events. Channeling stormwater runoff directly into water bodies, coastal wetlands, living marine resource habitats, or wildlife habitats shall be prohibited. The City shall require the use of swale drainage to the maximum extent possible, except where it is physically unfeasible as determined by the Utilities Department Director. If feasible, perforated pipe shall be used for exfiltration purposes in situations where piping is necessary.  
10.90.08 - Bicycle Transportation. 
All new roads, road widening projects and/or road resurfacing projects within the City shall be designed to accommodate bicycle transportation following the recommendations and criteria for selecting streets for bicycling listed in table 6 of the Fort Walton Beach Metropolitan Planning Organization Comprehensive Bicycle Transportation Plan for the Fort Walton Beach Urbanized Area, adopted November, 1985, and based on adequate funding, available right-of-way and traffic analysis.  
10.91 - RIGHT-OF-WAY PROTECTION 
 
10.91.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to ensure a safe and efficient traffic circulation system in the City by establishing right-of-way widths for future transportation facilities and by prohibiting encroachment of structures into existing rights-of-way.  
10.91.02 - Permit Required. 
Except as provided in this section, no person shall construct or maintain any structure or facility (including utilities) or make any other use of a public road or future road right-of-way unless and until a permit has been issued by the Public Works Director pursuant to the City Council approving and authorizing such construction, maintenance or use. All applications for the use of Public Right-of-Way must describe the space to be used and the length of time of such use. Permits may be granted for a period of time not exceeding six (6) months, but may be renewed from time to time for periods not to exceed six (6) months, if the encroachment does not unreasonably restrict the public use of the right-of-way and the encroachment is necessary to accomplish the objective for which it is requested in a reasonable manner.  
10.91.03 - Minimum Right-of-Way Requirements. 
No person shall willfully obstruct any portion of the right-of-way for a new roadway identified in the future traffic circulation map series established in the traffic circulation element of the comprehensive plan. No person shall construct any structure or facility (including utilities) or make any other use of the right-of-way for a new roadway identified in the future traffic circulation map series unless and until a permit has been issued by the Public Works Director pursuant to the City Council authorizing and approving such construction, maintenance or use as described in this section. The following minimum right-of-way widths for new roadways identified in the traffic circulation element of the comprehensive plan are established as follows: 
	Urban (ft.) 	Transitional (ft.) 
Local 	60 	60 
2-Lane Collector/One-Way 	60 	60 
4-Lane Undivided Arterial 	96 	96 
4-Lane Divided Arterial 	112 	112 
6-Lane Divided Arterial 	112 	112 
4-Lane Freeway 	N/A 	300 
6-Lane Freeway 	N/A 	350 
  
10.91.04 - Presumptions. 
Any person who obstructs a public road or future road right-of-way shall be presumed to have done so willfully if the obstruction is allowed to remain on the right-of-way for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after the person has been notified to remove the obstruction by the City council or its authorized representative.  
10.91.05 - Roadside Stands Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate or cause to be operated any roadside stand within or on any portion of the right-of-way of any public road.  
10.91.06 - Exceptions. 
The following shall be exceptions from the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Improvement of a public road by a property owner of such public road adjacent to his or her property with landscaping, shrubbery or grass which is not inconsistent with the use of the public road for road purposes; 
(2)  The parking of motor vehicles on that portion of the public road not used as traffic lanes if not otherwise prohibited; 
(3)  Use of the public road for road and traffic purposes other than such purposes involving vehicles of such weight or of such characteristics (for example, metal tires or treads) as may, in the opinion of the City engineer, damage the road surface; 
(4)  The replacement or maintenance of existing utility facilities, such as telephone poles.  
10.91.07 - Non-permitted Structures or Facilities. 
Any structure or facility, including utilities constructed or maintained on public roads in violation of this section shall be removed from such right-of-way, and such right-of-way shall be restored to the condition which existed immediately prior to the construction or maintenance of such structure or facility at the expense of the person constructing, maintaining or owning such structure or facility. If such structure or facility has not been removed and the right-of-way restored as required by this section, then such structure or facility may be removed by the City Manager or a designee at the expense of the person constructing, maintaining or owning such structure or facility. If such person does not pay to the City the cost of removing such structures and facilities and restoring the right-of-way, as required by this section, the cost shall be and constitute a lien against all property owned by such person in the county, to be foreclosed in the manner provided by law.  
10.92 - ACCESS MANAGEMENT 
 
10.92.01 - General Standards. 
All proposed development shall meet these standards for vehicular access and circulation: 
(1)  Access points must be able to accommodate all vehicles entrances having occasion to enter the site, including delivery vehicles. 
(2)  Access point design must be such that an entering standard passenger vehicle will not encroach upon the exit lane of a two-way driveway. Also, a right-turning exiting vehicle will be able to use only the first through traffic lane available without encroaching into the adjacent through lane. 
(3)  There must be sufficient onsite storage to accommodate queued vehicles waiting to park or exit without using any portion of the street right-of-way or in any other way interfering with street traffic.  
10.92.02 - Number of Access Points. 
A maximum of one access point shall be permitted to a particular site from each of one or two abutting streets. When it is in the interest of good traffic circulation, the City engineer, in concurrence with the City manager or a designee may permit one additional access point along a continuous site with frontage in excess of 500 feet, or two additional access points along a continuous site with frontage in excess of 1,000 feet. For the purpose of this section, dual one-way access drives will be considered to be one access point.  
10.92.03 - Separation of Access Points. 
The separation between access points on state-maintained roads shall be in accordance with Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) rules, F.A.C. chs. 14-96 and 14-97. On roads that are not maintained by the state, the separation between access points onto arterial and collector roadways, or between on access and an intersection of an arterial or collector with another road, shall be as shown in the following table. The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway or roadway to the centerline of the nearest adjacent roadway or driveway. The City Engineer may permit a single access point for a property that cannot be permitted access consistent with the standards of subsection 10.92.02 of this section and which has no reasonable alternative access, as determined by the City engineer in concurrence with the City. 
Functional Class of Roadway 	Distance Between Access Points (feet) 
Major arterial 	175 
Minor arterial 	100 
Major collector 	50 
Minor collector 	40 
  
10.92.04 - Vacating Public Street, Alley, Easement, Plat. 
Requests to vacate a right-of-way, easement, or subdivision plat shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 9 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 1967 , § 4, 1-24-17)  
10.92.05 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1967 , § 4, adopted January 24, 2017, repealed § 10.92.05, which pertained to method of approval. For historical derivation, see the "Table of Historical Notes and References" at the end of this Chapter.  
10.93 - STREET DESIGNATION 
 
10.93.01 - Adoption of Plan. 
A plan shall be adopted which will provide for the orderly and systematic naming of thoroughfares and the identification of platted lots by assigning numbers in a logical sequence within the City.  
10.93.02 - Naming of Streets. 
The names of all future arterial streets shall be chosen from lists to be prepared by the Development Administrator commemorating local distinguished citizens, national heroes, typical trees, shrubs and flowers, etc. The names of all other new streets may be designated by the developer of the street with the approval of the City Council. There shall be no duplication of names with any existing name of a street in the Fort Walton Beach Postal Services area. 
(Ord. No. 1967 , § 5, 1-24-17)  
10.93.03 - Conflicting Names; Renaming Streets. 
Presently dedicated and platted thoroughfares that have names that are conflicting, ambiguous or duplicative shall be renamed by the City Council so as to eliminate all conflict, ambiguity and duplication. 
(Ord. No. 1967 , § 4, 1-24-17)5  
10.93.04 - Thoroughfare Suffixes. 
Thoroughfare suffixes shall be assigned to existing and future thoroughfares in compliance with the following definitive system: 
(1)  Circle. Nondirectional, originating and ending on the same thoroughfare. 
(2)  Place. Nondirectional, open on both ends and extending one block. 
(3)  Road. Nondirectional feeder. 
(4)  Street. East-west feeder. 
(5)  Boulevard. East-west major artery. 
(6)  Parkway. North-south major artery. 
(7)  Avenue. North-south feeder. 
(8)  Drive. Nondirectional feeder. 
(9)  Court. Nondirectional dead-end. 
(10)  Lane. Nondirectional feeder. 
(11)  Terrace. Nondirectional feeder. 
10.93.041  Continuation of Thoroughfare Names: Thoroughfare names and suffixes shall be continuous with the direction of the thoroughfare and shall not change except at intersections or grid lines.  
10.93.05 - Grid or Control System. 
Major thoroughfares shall be designated and dispersed throughout the City in both north-south and east-west directions at convenient and appropriate intervals so as to constitute a grid or control system which will preserve established continuity. 
(1)  North-south control lines shall be established as follows: 
Hughes Street and Holmes Boulevard, 100 North 
Yacht Club Drive, Beal Parkway, Lovejoy Road, 200 North 
South Street, 300 North 
Racetrack Road, 500 North 
Cinderella Lane, Oakdale Road, Mooney Road, 600 North 
Rodney Street, 700 North 
Elliott Road, Third Street, Coral Drive (west of Memorial), 100 South 
First Street, Brooks Street (east of Highway 98), 200 South 
Main Street (Highway 98), 300 South 
(2)  East-west control lines shall be established as follows: 
Harbeson Avenue, 100 East 
Chestnut Avenue, Vine Avenue, Iowa Drive, Eglin Parkway (north of Cinco Bridge), 200 East 
Elm Avenue, Ferry Road, 300 East 
St. Mary Avenue, Robinwood Drive, Meadowlark Road, 100 West 
Cedar Avenue, London Avenue and Fliva Avenue, 200 West 
Memorial Parkway, 300 West 
Wright Parkway, 400 West 
Jonquil Avenue, 500 West 
Mary Esther Cut-Off, 600 West 
Blake Avenue, 700 West 
10.93.051  East-West, North-South Grid Lines: Beal Parkway in the main body of the City and Country Club Avenue in the golf course area shall be designated as the principal longitudinal grid lines to establish east-west designations. Hollywood Boulevard shall be designated as the principal latitudinal grid line to establish north-south designations. These control lines, as established, shall be "O" grid lines. 
10.93.052  Identification of Quadrants: For further clarity in designation, the quadrants of the City resulting from the grid lines so established shall be identified as northeast, southeast, northwest and southwest.  
10.93.06 - Numbering Sequence. 
Each residential and commercial building and/or lot in the City shall be assigned a number in numerical sequence beginning at the "O" grid designations: Beal Street for east-west and Hollywood Boulevard for north-south orientations. 
(1)  Where duplex or multiple residential units occupy one lot, the assigned number shall be appended by an alphabetical addendum in sequence, i.e. A, B, C, etc. 
(2)  Where an apartment or office building occupies one or more lots, a number in logical sequence shall be assigned which shall be appended by individual apartment or suite numbers in arithmetic sequence, i.e. apartment or suite number 1, 2, 3, etc. 
10.93.061  Odd, Even Number Locations: In the numbering sequence, odd numbers shall be on the north on all east-west thoroughfares, and on the east on all north-south thoroughfares. 
10.93.062  Arithmetic Progression, Grid Lines: The grid or control lines established in section 10.93.05 shall indicate the progression to the next consecutive group of numbers in arithmetic progression of 100, beginning at the "O" grid lines as established in section 10.93.051. 
10.93.063  Numbering Unplatted Lots: All unplatted lands in the City shall be assigned numbers in proper and logical sequence, as provided in this Chapter, based on a minimum lot size of 75 linear feet fronting on a thoroughfare.  
10.93.07 - Administration and Number Assignment. 
The City Manager will be responsible for managing, coordinating and maintaining the building numbering plan: 
(1)  The owner or occupant of any building to which a number has been assigned will be notified in writing of the number assigned upon request. 
(2)  Should an existing building have, exhibit or be addressed by a number in conflict with the uniform "numbering system," notice shall be given to the owner or occupant, to correct said conflict.  
10.93.08 - Standards For Street Address Numbers. 
All principal buildings in the City shall be assigned address numbers and shall display such assigned numbers, whether or not mail is delivered to such locations. Numbers need not be displayed on accessory buildings. Docks and piers shall be assigned the same number as the principal building, or, for vacant lots the same number as would be assigned a principal building, if existing. Physical numbering shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Assigned numbers for principal buildings shall be displayed and clearly visible and legible, from the street or private way on which the building fronts. Numbers shall be Arabic numerals not less than three (3) inches in height and one-half inch in width, and preferably of reflective material. 
(2)  Numbers must be in a color contrasting to the building or other background. 
(3)  In the case of a principal building which has a separate entrance for each dwelling or occupancy space, the assigned number shall be displayed on each separate front entrance. 
(4)  Any different numbers on a building which might be mistaken for or confused with the address number assigned in accordance with the "numbering system" shall be removed. 
(5)  Assigned numbers for principal buildings which are not visible from the street or private way shall additionally be displayed at the intersection of the driveway and servicing street attached to a post, wall, fence or mailbox at a level to ensure visibility. 
(6)  Assigned numbers for all docks and piers shall be displayed in such a fashion so as not to be confused with channel or other marine markers, and shall be placed at the seaward end of the dock or pier facing the water. Such numbers shall be displayed in Arabic numerals not less than four (4) inches in height and one-half-inch in width, consisting of a reflective material and in a contrasting color to the background to which they are attached. Further, such numbers shall be positioned so as to be constantly between five (5) and eight (8) feet above the mean high waterline.  
10.93.09 - Building Permit And Certificate Of Occupancy Restrictions. 
The City shall assign an address when a building permit is issued for a principal building, dock or pier. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the required number or numbers are displayed in accordance with this Chapter.  
10.100 - TREES 
 
10.100.01 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City Tree Ordinance."  
10.100.02 - Definitions. 
Park trees . Trees located in public parks within the City of Fort Walton Beach and all areas controlled by the City to which the public has free access as a park. 
Street trees . Trees located on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, and rights-of-way within the City of Fort Walton Beach.  
10.100.03 - Administrator. 
The public works director is authorized and responsible for administering this Chapter, including, but not limited to, developing arboricultural standards relative to tree care, protection, construction impacts, and administrative guidelines for compliance with this Chapter.  
10.100.04 - Street and Park Trees. 
By May 2005, and from time to time thereafter as necessary, the tree board shall recommend and the City council shall establish by resolution lists of acceptable street and park tree types and any related standards.  
10.100.05 - Public Tree Care. 
The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines of all rights-of-way and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
CHAPTER 10 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
2005 Code Section 	1992 Code Section 	State Law References/Other Historical Notes 
10.00.01 		
10.00.02 		
10.10.01 	9-27 	Code 1985, § 1082.01; Ord. 1420, § 2 (9-26-00) 
10.10.02 	9.28 	Code 1985, § 1082.02(a); Ord. 1420, § 3 (9-26-00) 
10.10.03 	9-29 	(Code 1985, § 1082.02(d); Ord. 1420, § 4 (9-26-00) 
10.10.04 	9-30 	(Code 1985, § 1082.02(e) 
10.10.05 	9-31 	(Code 1985, § 1082.02(f); Ord. 1420, § 5 (9-26-00) 
10.10.06 	9-32 	(Code 1985, § 1082.02(g); Ord. 1420, § 6 (9-26-00) 
10.10.07 	9-33 	(Code 1985, § 1082.02(h) 
10.10.08 	9-34 	(Code 1985, § 1082.02(i) 
10.10.09 	9-35 	(Code 1985, § 1082.03; Ord. 1420, § 7 (9-26-00) 
10.10.091 		
10.10.092 		
10.10.093 		
10.10.10 	9-36 	(Code 1985, § 1082.04 
10.10.11 	9-37 	(Code 1985, § 1082.05 
10.10.12 	9-38 	(Code 1985, § 1082.06; Ord. 1420, § 8 (9-26-00) 
10.10.13 	9-39 	(Code 1985, § 1082.07 
10.10.14 	9-40 	(Code 1985, § 1082.08 
10.10.15 	9-41 	(Code 1985, § 1282.09; Ord. 1165, § 1 (10-8-91); Ord. 1216, § 1 (3-23-93); Ord. No.1340, § 2 (2-10-98); Ord. 1420, § 9 (9-26-00); 
	9-41(e) 	repeal 
10.10.151 		Ord. 1824 (3-23-10) 
10.10.16 	9-42 	Code 1985, § 1082.10; Ord. 1165 (10-8-91) 
10.10.17 	9-43(a) 	(Code 1985, § 1082.11; Ord. 1165, § 3 (10-8-91); Ord. 1216, § 2 (3-23-93) 
10.10.18 	9-43(b) 	(Code 1985, § 1082.11; Ord. 1165, § 3 (10-8-91; Ord. 1216, § 2 (3-23-93) 
10.10.19 	9-43(c) 	Amend, (Code 1985, § 1082.11; Ord. 1165, § 3 (10-8-91); Ord. 1216, § 2 (3-23-93) 
10.10.20 	9-44 	(Code 1985, § 1082.12; Ord. 866 (3-11-86); Ord. 1420, § 10 (9-26-00) 
10.10.21 	9-45 	(Code 1985, § 1082.13; Ord. 934 (9-8-87) 
10.10.211 		
10.10.212 		
10.10.213 		
	9-46 	repeal 
10.10.22 	9-47 	Ord. 1420, § 12 (9-26-00) 
10.11.01 	9-76 	Ord. 1421, § 2 (9-26-00) 
10.11.02 	9-77 	Ord. 1421, § 3 (9-26-00) 
10.11.03 	9-78 	Ord. 1421, § 4 (9-26-00) 
10.11.04 	9-79 	Ord. 1421, § 4 (9-26-00) 
	9-80 	Repeal 
10.20.01 	10-21 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.02 	10-22 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.03 	10-23 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.04 	10-24(a) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.05 	10-24(b) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.06 	10-24(c) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.07 	10-24(d) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.08 	10-24(e) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.09 	10-24(f) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.10 	10.24(g) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.11 	10.24(h) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.12 	10-25 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.13 	10.26(a) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.14 	10-26(b) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.15 	10-26(c) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.16 	10-26(d) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.17 	10-26(e) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.18 	10-26(f) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.19 	10-26(g) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.20 	10-26(h) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.21 	10-26(i) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.22 	10-26(j) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.23 	10-26(k) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.24 	10-26(l) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.25 	10-26(m) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.26 	10-26(n) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.27 	10-26(o) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.28 	10-26(p) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.29 	10-26(q) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.30 	10-26(r) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.31 	10-26(s) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.32 	10-26(t) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.33 	10-26(u) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.34 	10-27 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.35 	10-27 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.36 	10-28 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.37 	10-29(a) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.38 	10-29(b) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.39 	10-29(c, d) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.40 	10-29(e) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.41 	10-30 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
		Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.42 	10-31 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.43 	10-32 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.44 	10-33 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.45 	10-33 (b, c) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.46 	10-34 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.47 	10-35 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.48 	10-36 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.481 	10-36(a, b) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.482 	10-36(c, d) 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.49 	10-37 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.20.50 	10-38 	Ord. 1459 (11-27-01) 
10.30.01 	36-26 	Code 1985, § 1041.03; Ord. 915 (11-11-86) 
	36-27 	Repeal 
10.30.02 	36-28 	Code 1985, § 1041.01; Ord. 915 (11-11-86) 
10.30.03 	36-29 	Code 1985, § 1041.01; Ord. 915 (11-11-86) 
10.30.04 	36-30(a, c) 	Code 1985, § 1041.01; Ord. 915 (11-11-86) 
10.30.05 	36-30(b, d) 	Code 1985, § 1041.01; Ord. 915 (11-11-86) 
10.30.06 	36-31 	Code 1985, § 1041.01; Ord. 915 (11-11-86) 
10.30.07 	36-31(h) 	Code 1985, § 1041.01; Ord. 915 (11-11-86) 
10.30.08 	36-32 	Code 1985, § 1041.01; Ord. 915 (11-11-86) 
10.30.081 		
10.30.082 		
10.30.083 		
10.30.09 	36-33 	Code 1985, § 1041.01; Ord. 915 (11-11-86) 
10.30.10 	36-34 	Code 1985, § 1041.01; Ord. 915 (11-11-86) 
10.40.01 	10-1 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.40.02 	10-10 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.40.03 	10-2 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.01 	10-3(a)(1) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.02 	10-3(a)(2) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.03 	10-3(a)(3) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.04 	10-3(a)(4) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.05 	10-3(b) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.06 	10-3(c) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.07 	10-3(d) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.08 	10-3(e) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.09 	10-3(f) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.10 	10-3(g) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.11 	10-3(h) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.12 	10-3(i) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.13 	10-3(j) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.14 	10-3(k) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.15 	10-3(l) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.16 	10-3(m) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.17 	10-3(n) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.171 		
10.41.172 		
10.41.18 	10-3(o) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.19 	10-3(p) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.191 		
10.41.192 		
10.41.193 		
10.41.194 		
10.41.195 		
10.41.20 	10-3(q) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.41.201 		
10.41.202 		
10.41.203 		
10.41.204 		
10.41.21 	10-3(r) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.42 		
10.42.01 	10-4(a)(1) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.42.02 	10-4(a)(2) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.42.03 	10-4(a)(3) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.42.04 	10-4(a)(4) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.42.05 	10-4(a)(5) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.42.06 	10-4(a)(6) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.42.07 	10-4(a)(7) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.42.08 	10-4(a)(8) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.43 	10-4(b) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.43.02 	10-4(b)(1) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.43.02 	10-4(b)(2) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.44.01 	10-4(c)(1) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.44.02 	10-4(c)(2) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.44.03 	10-4(c)(3) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.44.04 	10-4(c)(4) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.44.05 	10-4(c)(5) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.45 	10-4(d) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.45.01 	10-4(d)(1) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.45.02 	10-4(d)(2) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.45.03 	10-4(d)(3) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.45.04 	10-4(d)(4) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.45.05 	10-4(d)(5) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46 	10-5 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.01 	10-5(a)(1-4) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.011 		
10.46.012 		
10.46.013 		
10.46.02 	10-5(a)(5) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.021 		
10.46.03 	10-5(a)(6-8) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.04 	10-5(a)(9) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.05 	10-5(a)(10) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.06 	10-5(b)(1) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.07 	10-5(b)(2) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.08 	10-5(b)(3) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.09 	10-5(b)(4) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.10 	10-5(b)(5) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.11 	10-5(b)(6) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.12 	10-5(b)(7) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.13 	10-5(b)(8) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.14 	10-5(b)(9-11) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.141 		
10.46.142 		
10.46.143 		
10.46.15 	10-5(c)(1) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.46.16 	10-5(c)(2) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47 	10-6 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.01 	10-6(a) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.02 	10-6(b)(1) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.03 	10-6(b)(2) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.04 	10-6(b)(3) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.05 	10-6(b)(4) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.06 	10-6(b)(5) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.07 	10-6(b)(6) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.08 	10-6(b)(7) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.09 	10-6(b)(8) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.10 	10-6(b)(9) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.11 	10-6(b)(10) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.12 	10-6(b)(11) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.13 	10-6(b)(12) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.14 	10-6(b)(13) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.15 	10-6(c) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.16 	10-6(d) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.17 	10-6(e) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.18 	10-6(f) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.19 	10-6(g) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.20 	10-6(h) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.47.21 	10-6(i) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.48 	10-7 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.48.01 	10-7(a) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.48.02 	10-7(b) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.48.03 	10-7(c) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.48.04 	10-7(d) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.48.05 	10-7(e) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.48.06 	10-7(f) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.49 	10-8 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.49.01 	10-8(a) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.49.02 	10-8(b)(1-8) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.49.03 	10-8(b)(9) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.49.04 	10-8(b)(10) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.49.05 	10-8(b)(11) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.49.06 	10-8(c) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.49.07 	10-9(a-c) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.49.08 	10-9(d) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.49.09 	10-9(e) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
10.49.10 	10-9(f) 	Ord. 1382 (5-25-99) 
	36-51 	Repeal 
10.50.01 	36-51.1(a, b, e) 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.50.02 	36-51.1(c, d) 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.50.03 	36-52 	Code 1985, § 1040.01 
10.50.04 	36.53 	Code 1985, § 1040.02 
10.50.05 	36-54 	Code 1985, § 1040.03 
10.50.06 	36-55 	Code 1985, § 1040.04 
10.50.07 	36-56 	Code 1985, § 1040.05 
10.50.08 	36-57 	Code 1985, § 1040.12(c), (k) 
10.50.09 	36-58 	Code 1985, § 1040.06; Ord. 887 (6-24-86); Ord. 1337 (9-23-97); Ord. 1372 (2-9-99) 
10.50.10 	36-59 	Code 1985, § 1040.07 
10.50.11 	36-60 	Code 1985, § 1040.12(m) 
10.50.12 	36-61 	Code 1985, § 1040.09 
10.50.13 	36-62 	Code 1985, § 1040.12(p) 
10.50.14 	36-63 	Code 1985, § 1040.12(e), (l) 
10.50.15 	36-64 	Code 1985, § 1040.10 
10.50.16 	36-65 	Code 1985, § 1040.08 
10.50.17 	36-66 	Ord. 1125 (10-8-91) § XXXIV 
10.50.18 	36-67 	Ord. 1328 (5-13-97) 
10.52 		Ord. 1720, 6-12-07 
10.52.01 		Ord. 1720, 6-12-07 
10.52.02 		Ord. 1720, 6-12-07 
10.52.03 		Ord. 1720, 6-12-07 
10.52.04 		Ord. 1720, 6-12-07 
10.52.05 		Ord. 1720, 6-12-07 
10.52.06 		Ord. 1720, 6-12-07 
10.52.07 		Ord. 1720, 6-12-07 
10.52.08 		Ord. 1720, 6-12-07 
10.52.09 		Ord. 1720, 6-12-07 
10.52.10 		Ord. 1720, 6-12-07 
10.52.11 		Ord. 1720, 6-12-07 
10.53.01 	36-81 	Code 1985, § 1040.12(j) 
10.53.02 	36-82 	Code 1985 § 1040.12(o); Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
10.53.03 	36-83 (in part) 	Code 1985, § 1040.12(a); Ord. 1206 (10-27-92) 
10.53.04 	36-83(in part),36-83.1 	Ord. 1290 (9-26-95); Ord. 1820 (3-23-10) 
10.54 		Ord. 1720, (6-12-07). 
10.54.01 		Ord. 1768, § 3 (8-26-08); Ord. 1821 (3-9-10) 
10.54.02 		Ord. 1768, § 3 (8-26-08) 
10.54.03 		Ord. 1768, § 3 (8-26-08); Ord. 1821 (3-9-10) 
10.54.04 		Ord. 1768, § 3 (8-26-08); Ord. 1821 (3-9-10) 
10.54.05 		Ord. 1768, § 3 (8-26-08) 
10.54.06 		Ord. 1768, § 3 (8-26-08) 
10.54.07 		Ord. 1768, § 3 (8-26-08); Ord. 1821 (3-9-10) 
10.54.08 		Ord. 1768, § 3 (8-26-08) 
10.54.09 		Ord. 1768, § 3 (8-26-08) 
10.55 		Code 1985, § 1040.12; Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
10.55.01 	36-84 	Code 1985, § 1040.12(g), (i); Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
10.55.02 	36-85 	Code 1985, § 1040.12(b), Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
10.55.03 	36-86 	Code 1985, § 1040.11; Ord. 829 (5-28-85); Ord. 1096 (6-26-90); Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
10.55.04 	36-87 	Code 1985, § 1040.12(f), (h) 
10.55.05 	36-88 	Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
10.56 		Ord. 1461, §§ 1—9 (1-8-02) 
10.56.01 		Ord. 1461, §§ 1—9 (1-8-02) 
10.56.02 		Ord. 1461, §§ 1—9 (1-8-02) 
10.56.03 		Ord. 1461, §§ 1—9 (1-8-02) 
10.56.04 		Ord. 1461, §§ 1—9 (1-8-02) 
10.56.05 		Ord. 1461, §§ 1—9 (1-8-02) 
10.56.06 		Ord. 1461, §§ 1—9 (1-8-02) 
10.56.07 		Ord. 1461, §§ 1—9 (1-8-02) 
10.56.08 		Ord. 1461, §§ 1—9 (1-8-02) 
10.56.09 		Ord. 1461, §§ 1—9 (1-8-02) 
10.60 		§ 373.203, et seq., F.S. 
10.60.01 	36-107 	Code 1985, § 1860.01 
10.60.02 	36-108 	Code 1985, § 1860.02 
10.60.03 	36-109 	Code 1985, § 1860.03 
10.60.04 	36-110 	Code 1985, § 1860.04 
10.60.05 	36-111 	Code 1985, § 1860.05 
10.70.01 	36-131, 36-132 	Code 1985, § 1042.02; Code 1985, § 1042.03; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
	36-133 	Repeal 
10.70.02 	36-134(a) 	Code 1985, § 1042.01; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.70.03 	36-134(b) 	Code 1985, § 1042.01; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.70.004 	36-135(a) 	Code 1985, § 1042.34; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1147 (6-11-91) 
10.70.05 	36-135(b) 	Code 1985, § 1042.34; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1147 (6-11-91) 
10.70.06 	36-136 	Code 1985, § 1042.40; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.70.07 	36-137 	Code 1985, § 1042.04; Ord. 1113(10-9-90); Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.70.08 	36-138 	Code 1985, § 1042.06; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.70.09 	36-139 	Code 1985, § 1042.30(e); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.70.10 	36-140 	Code 1985, § 1042.33(i); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.70.11 	36-141 	Code 1985, § 1042.33(j); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.70.12 	36-142 	Code 1985, § 1444.03; Ord. 505.5 (2-22-77) 
10.71.01 	36-161 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(a); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.02 	36-162 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(b); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.03 	36-163 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(c); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.04 	36-164 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(c); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.05 	36-165 	Code 1985, § 1042.30(a)—(d); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.06 	36-166 	Code 1985, § 1042.31; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.07 	36-167 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(e); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.08 	36-168 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(f); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.09 	36-169 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(g); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.10 	36-170 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(h); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.11 	36-171 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(i); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.12 	36-172 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(j); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.13 	36-173 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(k); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.14 	36-174 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(l); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.71.15 	36-175 	Code 1985, § 1042.05(m); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.72.01 	36-191 	Code 1985, § 1042.18; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.72.02 	36-192 	Code 1985, § 1042.07; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.72.03 	36-193 	Code 1985, § 1042.08; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1147 ( 6-11-91) 
10.72.04 	36-194 	Code 1985, § 1042.09; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.72.05 	36-195 	Code 1985, § 1042.10; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.72.06 	36-196 	Code 1985, § 1042.11; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.72.07 	36-197 	Code 1985, § 1042.12; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.72.08 	36-198 	Code 1985, § 1042.13; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.72.09 	36-199 	Code 1985, § 1042.14; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
	36-200 	Repeal 
10.72.10 	36-201 	Code 1985, § 1042.16; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.72.11 	36-202 	Code 1985, § 1042.16; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.72.12 	36-203 	Code 1985, § 1042.25; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90; Ord. 1147 (6-11-91) 
10.72.13 	36-204 	Code 1985, § 1042.26; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.72.14 	36-205 	Code 1985, § 1042.27; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90; Ord. 1147 (6-11-91) 
10.72.15 	36-206 	Code 1985, § 1042.28; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.73.01 	36-207(a) 	Ord. 1567 (8-26-03) 
10.73.02 	36-207(b) 	Ord. 1567 (8-26-03) 
10.73.03 	36-207(c) 	Ord. 1567 (8-26-03) 
10.73.04 	36-207(d) 	Ord. 1567 (8-26-03); Ord. 1709, § 3, (8-22-06) 
10.73.05 	36-207(e) 	Ord. 1567 (8-26-03) 
10.73.06 	36-207(f) 	Ord. 1567 (8-26-03) 
10.74.01 	36-226(a) 	Code 1985, § 1042.19; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.74.02 	36-226(b) 	Code 1985, § 1042.19; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.74.03 	36-226(b)(9) 	Code 1985, § 1042.19; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.74.04 	36-227 	Code 1985, § 1042.20; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.74.05 	36-228 	Code 1985, § 1042.21; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.74.06 	36-229 	Code 1985, § 1042.22; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.74.07 	36-230 	Code 1985, § 1042.23; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90)10.74.08 
	36-231(a) 	Code 1985, § 1042.24; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1147 ( 6-11-91) 
10.74.09 	36-231(b) 	Code 1985, § 1042.24; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1147 (6-11-91) 
10.74.10 	36-232 	Code 1985, § 1042.35; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
		
10.74.11 	36-233 	Code 1985, § 1042.36; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1147 ( 6-11-91) 
10.74.12 	36-234 	Code 1985, § 1042.37; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.74.13 	36-235 	Code 1985, § 1042.37; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.75.01 	36-251 	Code 1985, § 1042.32; Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.75.02 	36-252(in part) 	Code 1985, § 1042.33(a)—(h); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1206 (10-27-92); Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
10.75.03 	36-252(a) 	Code 1985, § 1042.33(a)—(h); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1206 (10-27-92); Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
10.75.04 	36-252(b)(1) 	Code 1985, § 1042.33(a)—(h); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1206 (10-27-92); Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
	36-252(b)(2),(3) 	Repeal 
10.75.05 	36-252(b)(3, in part) 	Code 1985, § 1042.33(a)—(h); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1206 (10-27-92); Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
10.75.06 	36-252(b)(5) 	Code 1985, § 1042.33(a)—(h); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1206 (10-27-92); Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
10.75.07 	36-252(b)(6) 	Code 1985, § 1042.33(a)—(h); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1206 (10-27-92); Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
10.75.08 	36-252(b)(7) 	Code 1985, § 1042.33(a)—(h); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90); Ord. 1206 (10-27-92); Ord. 1290 (9-26-95) 
10.75.09 	36-252(b)(8) 	Code 1985, § 1042.33(a)—(h); Ord. 1113 ( 10-9-90; Ord. 1206 ( 10-27-92; Ord. 1290 ( § 7 ( 9-26-95) 
10.75.10 	36-253 	Code 1985, § 1040.12(n); Ord. 1113 (10-9-90) 
10.80.01 	36-271 	Code 1985, § 1080.01; Ord. 1025 (2-28-89); Ord. 1170 (10-8-91); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
	36-272 	Repeal 
10.80.02, et seq 	36-273 	Code 1985, § 1080.12; Ord. 1025 ( 2-28-89; Ord. 1336 ( § 2 ( 10-14-97); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.80.03, et seq 		Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.80.04 		Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.80.05 		Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.80.06 		Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.80.07 		Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.80.08 		Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.80.09 		Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.80.10 		Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.80.11 		Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.81.01, et seq 	36-274, et seq 	Code 1985, § 1080.02; Ord. 922 ( 2-10-87; Ord. 1025 (2-28-89; Ord. 1170, § II (10-8-91); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.81.02 	36-275 	Code 1985, § 1080.09(h); Ord. 883 (5-27-86); Ord. 984 (3-3-88); Ord. 1025 (2-28-89); Ord. 1170 (10-8-91); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.81.03 	36-276 	Code 1985, § 1080.03; Ord. 1025 (2-28-89); Ord. 1170 (10-8-91); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.81.04 	36-277 	Code 1985, § 1080.05; Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.81.05 	36-278 	Code 1985, § 1080.06; Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.81.06 	36-279 	Code 1985, § 1080.07; Ord. 1170 (10-8-91); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.81.07 	36-280 	Code 1985, § 1080.08; Ord. 1170 (10-8-91); Ord. 1336 (10-14-97); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.81.08 	36-281(a, b) 	Code 1985, § 1080.04; Ord. 1170 (10-8-91); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.81.09 	36-281(c, d) 	Code 1985, § 1080.04; Ord. 1170 (10-8-91); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.82.01 	36-296, in part 	Code 1985, § 1080.09(a)—(g), (i), (j); Ord. 883 (5-27-86); Ord. 984 (3-3-88); Ord. 1025 (2-28-89); Ord. 1170 (10-8-91; Ord. 1290 (9-26-95); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.82.02 	36-296, in part 	Code 1985, § 1080.09(a)—(g), (i), (j); Ord. 883 (5-27-86); Ord. 984 (3-3-88); Ord. 1025 (2-28-89); Ord. 1170 (10-8-91); Ord. 1290 (9-26-95); Ord. 1771, § II (9-23-08); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.82.03 	36-296, in part 	Code 1985, § 1080.09(a)—(g), (i), (j); Ord. 883 (5-27-86); Ord. 984 (3-3-88); Ord. 1025 (2-28-89); Ord. 1170 (10-8-91); Ord. 1290 (9-26-95); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.82.04 	36-297 	Code 1985, § 1080.10; Ord. 1085 (2-28-89); Ord. 1170 (10-8-91); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.82.05 	36-298 	Code 1985, § 1080.11; Ord. 1025 (2-28-89); Ord. 1170 (10-8-91); Ord. 1792 (1-26-10) 
10.90.01 	30-2 	Code 1985, § 1020.01 
10.90.02 	30-3 	Code 1985, § 1020.03; Ord. 843 (8-13-85) 
10.90.03 	30-4 	Code 1985, § 1020.04; Ord. 451(1-11-86 
10.90.04 	30-5 	Code 1985, § 1020.06 
10.90.50 	30-7 	Code 1985, § 1020.08; Ord. 843 (8-13-85) 
10.90.60 	30-8(a, b) 	Code 1985, § 1020.09; Res. 89-50 (11-28-89) 
10.90.061 	30-8(c) 	Code 1985, § 1020.09; Res. 89-50 (11-28-89) 
10.90.07 	30-9 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.90.08 	30-10 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.91.01 	30-11(a) 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.91.02 	30-11(b) 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.91.03 	30-11(c) 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.91.04 	30-11(d) 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.91.05 	30-11(e) 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.91.06 	30-11(f) 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.91.07 	30-11(g) 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.92.01 	30-12(a) 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.92.02 	30-12(b) 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.92.03 	30-12(c) 	Ord. 1128 (10-8-91) 
10.92.04 	30-13(a) 	Ord. 1348 (6-9-98) 
10.92.05 	30.13(b) 	Ord. 1348 (6-9-98) 
10.93.01 	30-26 	Code 1985, § 1022.01 
10.93.02 	30-27 	Code 1985, § 1022.02; Ord. 844 (8-13-85) 
10.93.03 	30-28 	Code 1985, § 1022.03 
10.93.04 	30-29 	Code 1985, § 1022.04 
10.93.041 	30-30 	Code 1985, § 1022.05 
10.93.05 	30-31 	Code 1985, § 1022.06; Ord. 844 (8-13-85) 
10.93.051 	30-32 	Code 1985, § 1022.07; Ord. 844 (8-13-85) 
10.93.052 	30-33 	Code 1985, § 1022.08 
10.93.06 	30-34 	Code 1985, § 1022.09 
10.93.061 	30-35 	Code 1985, § 1022.10 
10.93.062 	30-36 	Code 1985, § 1022.11 
10.93.063 	30-37 	Code 1985, § 1022.12 
10.93.064 	30-38 	Code 1985, § 1022.13; Ord. 1236 (11-23-93) 
10.93.065 	30-39 	Ord. 1236 (11-23-93) 
10.93.066 	30-40 	Ord. 1236 (11-23-93) 
	30-41 	Repealed, Ord. 1676 (22-11-05) 
10.100.01 	30-61 	Ord. 1613 (11-9-04) 
10.100.02 	30-62 	Ord. 1613 (11-9-04) 
10.100.03 	30-63 	Ord. 1613 (11-9-04) 
10.100.04 	30-65 	Ord. 1613 (11-9-04) 
  
CHAPTER 11 - TRAFFIC & VEHICLES  
11.00 - VIOLATIONS 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in section 1.05.  
11.01 - HITCHHIKING PROHIBITED 
No person shall solicit, by word or sign or by any other means, for himself or for another, a ride from the occupant of any private vehicle. This section shall not be construed to prevent a person on a public highway from soliciting, or to prevent a driver of a vehicle from giving a ride, where an emergency actually exists or in order to prevent a person from signaling or requesting transportation from a passenger carrier for the purpose of becoming a passenger thereon for hire.  
11.02 - TRUCK ROUTES ESTABLISHED 
The major thoroughfares of Eglin Parkway, Miracle Strip Parkway, Hollywood Boulevard, Beal Parkway, Mary Esther Cutoff, Lewis Turner Boulevard and Racetrack Road are hereby established and designated as truck routes. Trucks with dual axles and/or with a gross vehicle weight over 50,000 pounds shall be required to use the truck routes. All restricted trucks traveling in the city shall travel on a designated truck route and shall deviate from the truck route only when their destination is off of a truck route, and then only by the shortest travel distance to their destination from a truck route. When a truck is found off a truck route, it shall be stopped to determine its destination or followed to its destination. If the destination could be reached by the designated truck route or by a shorter route from the truck route, the driver of the truck shall be deemed to be in violation of this section.  
11.03 - COMBAT AUTOMOBILE THEFT (CAT) PROGRAM 
A "combat automobile theft" (CAT) program, as authorized under the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law is hereby established in Fort Walton Beach, Florida. Vehicle owners may enroll their vehicles giving advance written consent to law enforcement officers to stop their enrolled vehicles if they are being operated between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided the CAT decal is properly displayed in the lower left corner of the vehicle's rear window. The police chief shall administer the program. The city council shall establish in the general fee schedule the fee to be charged for participation in the program  
11.04 - STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING 
 
11.04.01 - Penalties. 
Whoever causes, allows, permits or suffers any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and Florida Statutes shall be fined for each offense. The fine to be imposed for all parking violations, to include the unauthorized use of specially designated and marked motor vehicle public parking spaces reserved for the exclusive use of disabled individuals, and for the unauthorized use of specially designated fire lanes reserved for the use of emergency vehicles, shall be established by resolution of the city council in the general fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1989 , § 2, 5-22-18)  
11.04.02 - Evidence of Liability. 
If a vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this traffic code regulating the standing, stopping, parking or operating of vehicles, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation was standing, stopped, parked or operated in violation of any provision of this traffic code, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle (or the lessee of the vehicle, if such vehicle is a leased vehicle) shall constitute prima-facie evidence that the defendant was the person who stood, stopped, parked or operated the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred.  
11.4.03 - Hearings. 
A hearing may be requested before the Code Enforcement Board within three (3) days of the issuance of a parking violation ticket. If a hearing is requested, the hearing shall be held at the next scheduled meeting of the Code Enforcement Board after the date of the request. The Code Enforcement Board may upon good cause shown, modify the fine to be paid or dismiss the violation ticket. 
A citizen receiving a parking ticket shall contact the Fort Walton Beach Police Department Records Unit, in writing, within three (3) days of the issuance of a parking ticket, using the city parking appeal request. 
Once the records unit receives the request, they will coordinate with the Code Enforcement Division who shall place the request on the next scheduled Code Enforcement Board agenda. The records unit shall then notify the citizen in writing of the scheduled time and date. 
(Ord. No. 1989 , § 2, 5-22-18)  
11.04.04 - Authority to Impound Vehicles. 
Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to have a vehicle removed from a roadway/right-of-way to a local garage, lot, or other place of safety, under the following circumstances. 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  When a vehicle upon a roadway/right-of-way is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic, or the person in charge of the vehicle is physically or mentally incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody and removal. 
(3)  When a vehicle is found being operated on roadways and constitutes a safety hazard. 
(4)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a roadway/right-of-way and is so parked illegally as to constitute a hazard obstruction to normal movement of traffic or is blocking a driveway. 
(5)  Any unattended vehicle parked in violation of this chapter, may, in addition to fines, be removed and the expense of said removal charged to the owner of the vehicle. 
(6)  The expense of towing, removing, and storing the vehicle will be paid by the owner, or owner's designee, before the vehicle will be released. 
(Ord. No. 1989 , § 2, 5-22-18)  
11.04.05 - Notice of Impound to Owner. 
When any vehicle has been found to be in violation of any of the parking ordinances of the city, and the owner or operator thereof has failed to pay the fines, the police department shall notify the registered or titled owner thereof, by registered mail, of the issuance of the violation notice(s), and, further, that such owner may request a hearing within ten (10) days of the date the notice was mailed. If the owner does not pay the fines or request a hearing within such ten (10) days, the vehicle may be impounded by officers of the police department. The cost of towing, removing, and storing the vehicle and the amount of fines shall constitute a lien on the vehicle. The owner must pay all of the charges and fines before the vehicle will be released. If a hearing is requested, the hearing shall be held at the next scheduled meeting of the Code Enforcement Board after the date of the request . The Code Enforcement Board may, upon good cause shown, modify the fines or extend the time within which they may be paid prior to impoundment of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1989 , § 2, 5-22-18)  
11.04.06 - Misuse of Parking Violation Tickets. 
No person shall use any lawfully issued parking violation ticket for the purpose of misleading, deceiving or impeding a police officer in the pursuit of his or her official duties.  
11.05 - VIOLATIONS OF STATE LAW 
No person shall commit, within the city, any parking violation recognized by the laws of the state.  
11.06 - TWO-HOUR PARKING DISTRICT; ENFORCEMENT 
 
11.06.01 - District Established. 
There is hereby created the two-hour parking district in the downtown district of the city which shall consist of the public on-street parking spaces on the following streets and segments of streets which are hereafter designated thereon by the city: 
Street 	From 	To 
South side of U.S. 98 	Brooks Street 	Perry Avenue 
West side of Perry Ave. 	US 98 	Brooks Street 
Brooks Street 	US 98 	Perry Avenue 
  
11.06.02 - Two-hour Limitation; Hours. 
Excluding Sundays but including Saturdays and legal holidays it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in any public on-street parking space in the two-hour parking district for longer than two continuous hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. without completely removing the vehicle from all public parking spaces within the two-hour parking district for a period of not less than one hour.  
11.07 - PARKING IN EXCESS OF 72 HOURS 
No person shall park a vehicle on any city street in excess of 72 hours without an intervening period of movement.  
11.08 - USE OF MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS 
The municipal parking lot located at 107 Miracle Strip Parkway, S.W., shall, on dates and times posted, be used solely for the purpose of city related activities. Upon such designated and posted dates, such parking lot shall be used only by persons who have tickets to a current activity at the Civic Center, or who are attending a meeting at city hall, or who have other authority for the use of the parking lot for scheduled events. The use of such parking lot on designated and posted dates by any other person is prohibited. 
In addition to other applicable penalties, the offending vehicle of any person violating this subchapter may be towed away by the police department or its authorized representative at the expense of the owner of such vehicle.  
11.09 - DESIGNATED FIRE LANES 
No person shall park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of, and while actively engaged in, loading or unloading merchandise or passengers at any place or area designated as a fire lane. A designated fire lane shall mean any place or area posted with a sign that reads "No Parking Fire Lane." The sign shall be a minimum size of 12 inches by 18 inches with a white background and red lettering. Such lettering shall be a minimum of three inches high. The sign shall be posted between 36 inches and 48 inches high.  
11.10 - PARKING PROHIBITIONS IN PARKS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
The following parking, stopping, and standing are prohibited. 
(1)  To park, stop, or stand in any location, the public right-of-way, or City property in violation of any official sign that prohibits such parking, stopping or standing. 
(2)  Any vehicle stopped, standing or parked in any City park shall do so only in designated parking spaces. 
(3)  To stop, stand or park, drive or cause to be driven any vehicle off the designated parking lots and roadways of any city park. 
(4)  To park a vehicle on City property overnight for the purpose of camping, sleeping in vehicle, or storage of a vehicle. It is permitted to park a vehicle and/or a boat trailer in a designated parking space overnight for the purpose of boating or fishing on property that provides fishing docks, boat ramps, or boating facilities. 
(5)  The parking spaces of any City park are for the sole use and purpose of those individuals who are at that time utilizing the park for leisure or recreational activities. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicles in a City park to supplement commercial, business, or other parking purposes except those designated by ordinance.  
11.11 - SPEED LIMIT FOR BOATS ON GOOD THING LAKE 
No person shall operate a boat in excess of idle speed, no wake on Good Thing Lake, located within the city.  
11.12 - WRECKER OPERATIONS AND SERVICES 
 
11.12.01 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle: Any vehicle which has not been moved in 72 hours and is located on public property, including, but not limited to a city street or right-of-way. 
Class A vehicles: Cars, motorcycles, light duty trucks, boats, campers, and other vehicles weighing 10,000 pounds (gross vehicle weight) or less. 
Class B vehicles: Medium duty trucks, motor homes, camper trailers, and other vehicles weighing between 10,001 and 20,000 pounds (gross vehicle weight). 
Class C vehicles: Heavy duty trucks, house trailers, buses, and other vehicles weighing more than 20,001 pounds (gross vehicle weight). 
Contracted wrecker: The city pull-in wrecker service which is negotiated by the city to provide certain towing services for the city. 
Private property towing: Towing or removal of a vehicle that is parked on private real property, at the property owner's direction. 
Rotation wrecker: A wrecker meeting the requirements of this chapter, properly permitted, licensed, and registered with the police department as a rotation wrecker. 
Rotation wrecker towing system: A system whereby a group of wrecker companies have agreed to take turns answering calls for towing and storage services when requested by a police officer at the scene of an accident or disabled vehicle. The wrecker companies are placed on a list, called consecutively as the need arises, and then rotated to the bottom of the list. 
Wrecker: Any truck or other vehicle which is used to tow, carry, or otherwise transport motor vehicles or vessels upon the streets and highways of this state and which is equipped for that purpose with a boom, winch, car carrier, or other similar equipment. 
Wrecker operator: Any person engaged in any manner in owning, operating, having a license for or driving a wrecker for the purposes of providing wrecker services. 
Wrecker service: Any service provided by a person that is related to wrecker operations, including but not limited to maintaining an office, place of business, or storage lot in the city, contracting for towing from or immobilizing vehicles on private property within the city, removing and storing wrecked or disabled vehicles from an accident scene or private property, or removing and storing vehicles in the event the owner or operator is incapacitated, unavailable, leaves the procurement of wrecker service to the law enforcement officer at the scene, or otherwise does not consent to the removal of the vehicle.  
11.12.02 - Owner, Operator and Vehicle Registration Provisions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to provide any wrecker service without having first registered the company, owner, wrecker operators and towing service vehicles with the police department, using a format approved by the police department. The information for registration shall contain the make, model and manufacturer's serial number of the vehicle; date the vehicle was put into service; the driver's license number of the owner and of all towing service vehicles; the name of the insurance company or companies with which the owner and operators have liability insurance coverage for the operation of the vehicle as required by law; the name and driver's license number of all employees involved in the towing of vehicles from public and private property, and such other information as may be required.  
11.12.03 - Wrecker Operator's Permit Violations. 
11.12.031  Operator's Permits: No wrecker operator shall provide any wrecker service without first having obtained a written permit from the owner of the company such operator is employed by or such owner's designee. Each permit will meet the following specifications. 
(1)  Each card shall be not less than 2 1/8 inches by 3 3/8 inches. 
(2)  Each card shall contain a photograph of the wrecker operator that is not less than one inch by 1 1/2 inches. 
(3)  Each card shall contain the name of the wrecker service and wrecker operator's first name in letters that are not less than one-fourth inch by one-fourth inch. 
(4)  Each card shall contain a control number that can be linked back to the driver's personal information. 
(5)  Each card shall contain a place for the wrecker administrator to validate the card. After the card is validated it shall be laminated to protect the information contained on the card. If the permit is lost, damaged, stolen or becomes illegible the card will be immediately replaced. 
11.12.032  Wrecker Service Owner Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any wrecker service to permit any person to be employed as a wrecker operator within the city unless such person has been granted a written permit to engage in private property or rotation towing by the police chief. Each permit shall be valid for two years from date of issuance. 
11.12.033  Permit: To secure a wrecker operator permit, an applicant must provide the following information on a form provided by the city manager. 
(1)  Provide the wrecker administrator a certified copy from the Florida Department of Law Enforcement of his criminal history and a certified copy of his driving record from the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles; 
(2)  Be at least 18 years of age; 
(3)  Possess an appropriate valid Florida driver's license for the wrecker and provide a photocopy to the wrecker administrator; 
(4)  Not have been convicted of the following: 
a.  Any felony if the applicant's civil rights have not been restored; 
b.  Any felony or first degree misdemeanor directly related to the business of towing motor vehicles; or 
c.  Within the previous five years, of driving under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a chemical substance, to the extent that normal faculties are impaired; driving with an unlawful blood alcohol level; or any other criminal traffic offense. 
11.12.034  Revocation of Permit: The police chief may revoke the privilege of any person to do private property towing on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  If the towing service owner or operator fails to register as required by this chapter 
(2)  If the registration contains false statement of a material fact 
(3)  If the towing service owner or wrecker operator provides monetary or other compensation to the private property owner for the privilege of towing vehicles from the property under contract 
(4)  The towing service owner or operator provides monetary compensation to the private property owner for each individual vehicle towed from the property 
(5)  If the towing service owner or wrecker operator charges fees in excess of those set by council resolution 
(6)  If the towing service owner or wrecker operator violates any of the provisions of § 715.07, F.S., as amended, or this chapter; or 
(7)  If a wrecker operator fails to display on or about his person or on the dashboard of the wrecker, easily visible to the public, the wrecker operator permit while performing a private property or rotation tow. 
11.12.035  Violations; Penalty: Complaints regarding any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be referred to the police chief. Three violations of the provisions of this chapter by any owner or operator of a wrecker service or wrecker service vehicle shall result in the automatic suspension of the owner's or operator's privilege to engage in the business of providing wrecker services on private property. An owner shall not be suspended for acts of an employee/operator in violation of this section unless the owner actively participated in or had knowledge of the violation and took no corrective action against the employee/operator. 
(1)  The owner or operator shall be informed in person or by certified or registered mail within seven days prior to the effective date of the suspension. 
(2)  The owner or operator may make a written request for a due process hearing within 15 calendar days of the date of the suspension. Failure to request a hearing within the 15 calendar-day period shall constitute a waiver by the owner or operator of any right to a hearing. 
(3)  The city council shall establish by resolution rules governing the conduct of the hearing to ensure the due process of law. 
(4)  Upon a review of the evidence presented at the hearing, the police chief may revoke the owner's or operator's privilege to engage in the business of private property towing for up to one year. 
11.12.036  Length of Revocation: Any wrecker service owner or operator whose privilege to engage in the provision of wrecker services has been revoked shall not be eligible to again register with the police department for private property towing for a period of one year from the date of revocation. 
11.12.037  Appeal: Any wrecker service owner or operator whose privilege to engage in the business of wrecker services has been revoked may file an appeal within ten days of the date of revocation pursuant to the hearing officer appeals process as specified in rules established by the city manager and city attorney, subject to approval of city council. 
11.12.038  Rotation Wrecker Towing System: The police chief is authorized to establish a rotation wrecker towing system utilizing qualified, reputable wrecker operators for the removal and storage of wrecked or disabled vehicles when the owner or operator of the vehicle leaves the procurement of a wrecker service to an investigating police officer. The city manager and police chief shall be authorized to promulgate rules and regulations for the administration of the rotation wrecker towing system.  
11.12.04 - Storage Area Requirements. 
In addition to the requirements of § 715.07, F.S., as amended, storage sites utilized by wrecker owners for the storage of motor vehicles towed pursuant to private property or rotation towing must be within the city limits; manned during regular business hours; capable of being securely locked; be surrounded by a chain link or solid wall type fence at least six feet in height; and be illuminated with lighting of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 150 feet during nighttime.  
11.12.05 - Conditions of Private Property Wrecker Services. 
11.12.051  Approval of Private Property Wrecker Services Signs: It shall be unlawful for a person hired by the owner of private property within the city to do any private property wrecker services without having first obtained approval from the police department of the signs posted on the property. In addition to the requirements of section 715.07, F. S., as amended, the wording on the sign shall indicate if towing or immobilizing is conducted other than normal business hours by the posting of a sign indicating "24 hours per day." 
11.12.052  Requirements for Private Property Wrecker Services: It shall be unlawful for any person to immobilize, tow or cause to be towed any vehicle parked on private real property unless the provisions of section 715.07, F.S., as amended, and the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The owners of the real property and the wrecker service shall have executed, at least 24 hours prior to the towing or removal of any vehicle, a written agreement for private property towing. The form for such agreement shall be provided by the police department, and may not be amended or modified in any manner, to provide for terms or activities that violate the provisions of this chapter or section 715.07, F.S., as amended. The agreement shall contain: the duration of the agreement; the time of day that such immobilization, towing or removal is authorized; the days of the week that such immobilization, towing or removal is authorized, the fees to be paid for the wrecker service, and the signatures of both the property owner, or the authorized representative, and the owner, or authorized representative, of the wrecker service, certifying that each has read and is in compliance with all of the provisions of section 715.07, F.S., as amended. 
(2)  A copy of the completed agreement is on file with the police department. 
(3)  Where the private real property is provided for residential parking other than for a single-family residence, the agreement shall not authorize the wrecker service to immobilize, tow away or remove any vehicle without a verified request to remove the specific vehicle by the property owner or an authorized representative as permitted in subsection (4) below. A property owner's representative may include a resident manager, a property manager or other agent who has the legal authority to bind the owner, but may not be an officer, employee or agent of a towing service. 
(4)  Owners of properties used for residential purposes may elect to authorize the wrecker service to immobilize, tow away or remove vehicles without a verified request a specific vehicle between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. provided that the owner first comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Signage shall be added to each of the existing tow away signs with letters of the same size as the "tow away" language, which provides the following words: "Roam Towing, 12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m." 
b.  The wrecker services contract on file with the police department shall be amended to provide for roam towing between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. 
c.  A photograph of the "offending" vehicle shall be taken prior to its removal and should be maintained by the wrecker company for a minimum period of two years. The photograph shall demonstrate the violation of law, rule or regulation for which the vehicle is being towed. 
d.  Lease, rental or property owners' association documents shall contain a notice provision indicating that the residential property utilizes roam towing or immobilization. In the case of properties with existing leases, rental agreements or property owners' association documents, it shall be sufficient to notify by regular mail, at the last known address, each of the tenants/owners of the property prior to the initiation of roam towing or immobilization. All amendments to or new leases, rental agreements or property owners' association documents shall contain the provision giving notice that the property owner intends to utilize roam towing or immobilization, and a complete and specifically detailed list of all instructions and rules violations that will result in towing or immobilization. A copy of these provisions must be posted in the rental office and the common area. A copy must also be maintained on file in each tow vehicle removing or immobilizing vehicles from the property. The police chief shall review and approve the parking rules. At the entrance or entrances a sign shall be posted stating where the parking rules can be read by residents and guests. The parking rules shall be posted in a public area at the complex. The management, to ensure that they have not been altered, should regularly inspect them; any sign that is removed or defaced shall be replaced within 30 days. 
(5)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
a.  The towing of vehicles pursuant to other provisions in this chapter. 
b.  The towing of vehicles from property appurtenant to and obviously a part of a single-family residence. 
c.  When notice is personally given to the owner or other legally authorized person in control of the vehicle that the area in which that vehicle is parked is reserved or otherwise unavailable and that the unauthorized vehicle will be removed at the owner's or operator's expense. 
11.12.053  Notice not Required for Emergency Removal: The 24-hour notice requirement of this section shall not apply where the tow is of an emergency nature and the owner has notified the police department prior to removing the vehicle. The term "emergency" in this section shall only include circumstances where the usual operation of a business is impeded by the blocking of entrances, exits or access to operational equipment, but specifically shall not include tows for the purpose of clearing parking areas. 
11.12.054  Delivery to Storage Site Required: All vehicles towed shall be towed directly to the storage site owned or leased by the towing service; a vehicle shall not be kept in any temporary holding area. 
11.12.055  Wrecker Service Response Requirements: Each wrecker service shall staff and monitor its telephones at all times (pager only does not satisfy this requirement) and immediately advise any vehicle owner or authorized representative who calls by telephone of the following: 
(1)  Each and every document or other item which must be produced to retrieve or release the vehicle. 
(2)  The exact charges as of the time of the telephone call, and the rate at which charges will accumulate thereafter. 
(3)  The acceptable methods of payment. 
(4)  That the vehicle can be picked up within 30 minutes of request during regular business hours, and within one-hour of request at all other times.  
11.12.06 - Maximum Wrecker Service and Storage Fees; Violation. 
Maximum wrecker service and storage fees, for private property and rotation system towing and storage shall be established annually prior to December 31 of each year by resolution of the city council, or otherwise as needed. Such maximum fees shall be effective during the following calendar year and until changed by subsequent resolution. 
Violation of any maximum wrecker service and storage fees shall constitute a non-criminal offense and shall be grounds for suspension from the rotation system as outlined in the administrative rules and regulations promulgated by the police chief and automatic suspension of the owner's or operator's privilege to engage in the business of private property towing.  
11.12.07 - Form of Payment for Charges. 
A person, firm or corporation which provides private property wrecker services in the city shall accept payment for charges from the vehicle owner or authorized representative by cash or valid major credit card or debit card.  
11.12.08 - Release Upon Operator Return. 
(1)  The owner or operator of any towing service vehicle which is summoned to tow away any vehicle, whether on a public street, public property, or private property, shall not remove or tow the vehicle away and shall not charge any fee if the vehicle operator returns to the vehicle prior to the towing service operator having physically connected the vehicle to the towing apparatus. "Physically connected" means one-half of the wheel lift apparatus surrounding a tire or the winch hook being properly hooked to the vehicle in an appropriate place on the vehicle where it can safely be towed or winched. If the vehicle is physically connected but not towed away, the towing company may charge up to one-half of the allowable fees as set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  If the registered owner or other legally authorized person arrives at the scene prior to the removal or towing of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be disconnected from the towing or removal apparatus, and that person shall be allowed to remove the vehicle without interference upon payment of a reasonable service fee of not more than one-half of the posted rate, for which a receipt shall be given, unless that person refuses to remove the vehicle which is otherwise unlawfully parked. Removal or towing of the vehicle shall be defined as removing the vehicle off of the physical premises that the towing contract encompasses.  
11.12.09 - Receipt for Wrecker Services. 
When a towed or immobilized vehicle is claimed, the wrecker service shall furnish the owner or other legally authorized person with a receipt that shall include the name of the person who authorized the towing, or immobilization, the specific, itemized charges for the service and all related fees, and shall include the following language: "Notice: Wrecker services on private property is regulated by the provisions of Section 715.07, Florida Statutes, as amended, and City of Fort Walton Beach Ordinance."  
11.12.10 - Prohibitions; Penalties. 
The following activities are prohibited: 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to charge any fee that is based on police response to a call by the owner of a vehicle. 
(2)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to charge a release fee for towed vehicles that are released from storage facilities during normal business hours. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person other than the real property owner or an authorized representative of the owner to move, remove or deface any tow away sign. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner or wrecker employee of a towing or wrecker service to compensate, by cash or in-kind services, a property owner or their agents in exchange for any agreement to tow vehicles from the property owner's property. 
(5)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to exceed the fees set by council. 
(6)  Except for towing in the normal course of its business, it shall be a violation of this chapter for a towing or wrecker service to tow vehicles from its property or the property of its agents, unless the property is the towing service owner's primary place of business. 
(7)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to operate a wrecker without maintaining insurance coverage in the following minimum amounts: 
a.  Garage liability insurance in an amount of not less than $300,000.00 combined single limit liability. 
b.  Garage keeper's legal liability in an amount of not less than $50,000.00, covering perils of fire and explosion; theft of a vehicle, its parts, or contents; riot and civil commotion; vandalism, and malicious mischief. 
c.  On-hook coverage in an amount of not less than $50,000.00 covering damage to a vehicle or vehicles in tow. 
d.  Bodily injury liability insurance and property damage liability insurance in amounts of: not less than $50,000.00 per occurrence for a wrecker with a gross vehicle weight of less than 35,000 pounds; not less than $100,000.00 per occurrence for a wrecker with a gross vehicle weight of 35,000 pounds or more but less than 44,000 pounds; and not less than $300,000.00 per occurrence for a wrecker with a gross vehicle weight of more than 44,000 pounds. 
(8)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner or wrecker employee of a towing or wrecker service to attach a towed vehicle in such a manner that it is not traveling in a straight line behind the wrecker (otherwise known as "crabbing"), so that both vehicles fail to remain in a single lane of travel, in violation of F.S. § 316.089(1). 
(9)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner or wrecker employee of a towing or wrecker service to demand a "no tow" fee if the vehicle they are physically connected to exceeds the gross vehicle weight of the wrecker. For example, a Class A wrecker is not capable of towing a Class C vehicle because the combined weight of the two vehicles exceeds the gross vehicle weight capability of the wrecker.  
11.12.11 - Owner Requests for Service; Wreck-chasing Prohibited. 
The rotation system rules and fees do not apply to a vehicle owner's request for utilization of a specific wrecker operator or company when such request can be reasonably honored. It is unlawful pursuant to F.S. § 323.002(2)(b), for any person to solicit any wrecker business, directly or indirectly, at the scene of a wrecked or disabled vehicle, regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of towing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading, or purchasing the vehicle. It is unlawful pursuant to F.S. § 323.002(2)(b) for any person operating a wrecker to bring the wrecker to the scene of an accident unless such wrecker has been called to the scene by the police department or by the owner, operator, or other person responsible for a vehicle involved in the accident.  
11.12.12 - Liens for Recovering, Towing, Storing; Publication of Notice. 
(1)  Any person regularly engaged in the business of recovering, towing or storing vehicles who comes into possession of a vehicle pursuant to § 713.78(2), F.S., and who claims a lien for recovery, towing, or storage services, shall give notice to the registered owner and to all persons claiming a lien thereon, as disclosed by the records in the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles or of a corresponding agency in any other state. The notice shall be as provided in § 713.78(4), F.S., and shall provide a date, time and place for the sale authorized pursuant to § 713.78, F.S. 
(2)  If publication of notice is required, such notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county which is published at least one day a week and of general interest and readership in the county pursuant to chapter 50, F.S.  
11.12.13 - Violations, Penalties. 
In addition to those penalties imposed by § 715.07, F.S., as amended, violation of any provision of this chapter, including any of the requirements of § 715.07, F.S., as amended, shall be subject to the following civil and criminal penalties: 
(1)  Any person who violates this chapter shall be liable to the owner or lessee of the vehicle for all costs of recovery (including all towing and storage fees) plus attorney's fees and court costs, and shall in addition be liable to the owner or lessee of any immobilized, towed or removed vehicle for damages resulting directly or indirectly from the immobilization, removal, transportation or storage of the vehicle. 
(2)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may upon conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(3)  Violation of any provision of the maximum charges shall constitute a non-criminal offense and shall be grounds for suspension from the rotation system as outlined in the administrative rules and regulations and automatic suspension of the owner's or operator's privilege to engage in the provision of wrecker services on private property.  
11.13 - GOLF CART USE ON CITY ROADWAYS 
 
11.13.01 - Definition. 
Golf Cart. Pursuant to F.S. § 320.01(22), and for the purposes of this section, a "golf cart" is defined as a motor vehicle that is designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of exceeding speeds of 20 miles per hour. 
Low-speed vehicle. Pursuant to F.S. § 320.01(41), and for the purpose of this section, a low-speed vehicle (LSV) means any four-wheeled vehicle whose top speed is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour, including, but not limited to, neighborhood electric vehicles. Low-speed vehicles must comply with the safety standards in 49 C.F.R. s. 571.500 and s. 316.2122. 
(Ord. No. 1948 , § 2, 9-20-16)  
11.13.02 - Authorization to Operate on City Streets. 
(a)  Authorization to operate golf carts within the city and on specified roadways. Golf carts meeting the definition set forth in section 11.13.01 may be operated on city roadways within the defined boundaries shown on the attached Golf Cart Map. The city is hereby designated as a "golf cart community." City council may revoke a portion of the designated golf cart community if council determines that the operation of golf carts within any area or roadway would constitute or has become a danger or detriment to the health, safety, welfare, or character of the community or the surrounding area or city council otherwise determines that it cannot or will not be able to determine that such community or roadway continues to meet statutory requirements. 
(b)  Designated roadways for operation of golf carts/LSVs. Operation of golf carts is authorized only within the Downtown Business and Entertainment District, the Elliott Point Neighborhood, the Ferry Park Neighborhood, and the Kenwood Neighborhood on city roadways with a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less as shown on the Golf Cart Map. 
LSV operation within the city shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Statutes, latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 1948 , § 2, 9-20-16)  
11.13.03 - Hours of Operation. 
Golf carts meeting the minimum equipment standards established in F.S. § 316.212(5) and (6) for operation between sunset and sunrise, may be operated at any time. Golf carts that do not meet the minimum equipment standards for operation between sunset and sunrise shall only be permitted to operate during the hours between sunrise and sunset. 
(Ord. No. 1948 , § 2, 9-20-16)  
11.13.04 - Equipment Minimal Standards. 
All golf carts/LSVs operated within the city or on approved roadways shall meet the minimum equipment standards established by Florida Statutes. In accordance with Florida Statutes, golf carts/LSVs that are operated between the hours of sunset and sunrise shall have additional equipment requirements as stated in F.S. § 316.212(5) and (6) for golf carts and F.S. § 316.2122(2) for LSVs. At a minimum, golf carts and LSVs must have headlights, brake lights, turn signals, a windshield, rearview mirrors, and reflective devices on the front and back of the vehicle. Golf carts and LSVs are also required to have seat belts. 
(Ord. No. 1948 , § 2, 9-20-16)  
11.13.05 - Unlicensed Drivers. 
It shall be unlawful for an unlicensed driver, defined as a driver who does not hold and possess a valid state-issued driver license, to operate a golf cart/LSV upon city streets. 
(Ord. No. 1948 , § 2, 9-20-16)  
11.13.06 - Compliance with Traffic Laws. 
Golf carts/LSVs shall comply with all applicable local and state traffic laws, and may be ticketed for traffic violations in the same manner as motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1948 , § 2, 9-20-16)  
11.13.07 - Regulations. 
Golf carts/LSVs shall be subject to the following restrictions at all times: 
(1)  Unless otherwise expressly authorized pursuant to general law or the enabling ordinance, no golf cart shall be operated upon a road with a posted speed limit in excess of 25 miles per hour. LSVs may be operated upon roads with a posted speed limit of up to 35 miles per hour. 
(2)  A golf cart may not cross any state highway. Golf carts may only cross city or county roadways with speed limits greater than 25 miles per hour at an intersection with stop signs or traffic signals. 
(3)  No golf carts shall be operated upon those roads that the city has identified as arterial roads unless otherwise authorized by the enabling ordinance. 
(4)  A golf cart/LSV shall not be operated upon a state highway. 
(5)  The number of occupants in any golf cart operated on the city roads and streets shall be restricted to the number of seats on the golf cart/LSV. Seat belts shall be provided for each seat on the golf cart/LSV. No occupants of a golf cart/LSV shall stand at any time while the vehicle is in motion. 
(6)  Before golf carts may be operated under this section, the owners thereof must purchase and maintain liability insurance insuring against personal injury and damage to property of any nature relative to the operation of golf carts on the designated public roads and streets. Proof of such insurance must be possessed at all times while operating a golf cart on the designated roads. LSVs shall be registered and insured in accordance with F.S. § 320.02, and titled pursuant to F.S. Ch. 319. 
(7)  No person shall drive any golf cart upon a bicycle path, sidewalk, sidewalk area, or other area not designated for motor vehicle use or not specifically designated for golf cart use. 
(Ord. No. 1948 , § 2, 9-20-16)  
11.13.08 - Golf Cart/LSV Registration. 
All golf carts/LSVs operated on the roadways of the City of Fort Walton Beach must be registered through the city. Registration must be made by the owner who is at least 21 years of age with each owner signing a sworn affidavit verifying the required equipment and insurance coverage. The registration fee will be included in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. There are no prorated registration fees. Funds generated from registration fees will support costs of golf cart inspections, registration decals, and other associated costs. All registrations must be renewed annually during the month of September. The registration decal will be placed on the driver side rear fender. All golf carts/LSVs should include the placement of an orange LSV triangle on back of the golf cart/LSV. 
Fines for unregistered golf carts/LSVs shall be included in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(1)  Driving a golf cart/LSV without a current registration during a calendar year will result in fines for the first, second, and third offenses with a one year revocation of the registration for the fourth and subsequent offenses. 
(2)  Driving a golf cart/LSV when the registration is revoked shall result in a fine and the permanent revocation of the owner's registration. 
(3)  If fines are paid within seven working days (Monday—Friday) of citation issuance, the owner may register the golf cart at no additional cost. 
(4)  If fines are paid after seven working days of the citation issuance, the owner must pay an additional registration fee. 
(5)  If fines are not paid within 30 days of citation issuance, the city may seek an order to show cause through the code enforcement board. 
(Ord. No. 1948 , § 2, 9-20-16)  
11.13.09 - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city shall have the authority to enforce the provisions set forth herein and applicable traffic laws. 
(b)  The city code enforcement board shall be the point of appeal on all city ordinance violations cited under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1948 , § 2, 9-20-16)  
11.14 - MOTORIZED SCOOTERS AND MICROMOBILITY DEVICES 
 
11.14.01 - Definition. 
Dockless small vehicle system or system . System which provides bicycles, scooters, electric bicycles, electric scooters, or other micromobility devices for short-term rentals for point-to-point trips and which may be locked and unlocked without the requirement of a bicycle rack or other docking station. 
Micromobility device . Any motorized transportation device made available for private use by reservation through an online application, website, or software for point-to-point trips and which is not capable of traveling at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour on level ground. Bicycles, scooters, electric bicycles, electric scooters, and other small, wheeled vehicles designed specifically for shared use utilizing GPS technology and deployed as part of a dockless small vehicle system. 
Operator . Means the business operating micromobility device rentals within the City. 
Pilot period. Means the one-year period beginning on the effective date of this ordinance. 
User. Means a person who rents and uses a micromobility device from an operator. 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.02. - Operation of vehicles in parks. 
It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park, drive or cause to be driven any micromobility device or small vehicle off the designated parking lots, roadways, and sidewalks of any city park. 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.03 - Reckless Speed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any micromobility device at a careless, indifferent or reckless speed through any park or playground or upon any right-of-way in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.04 - Overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction. 
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of micromobility devices proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated: 
(1)  The driver of a micromobility device overtaking another micromobility device proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken micromobility device. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken micromobility device shall give to the right in favor of the overtaking micromobility device on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his micromobility device until completely passed by the overtaking micromobility device. 
(3)  The operator of a motor vehicle, when overtaking and passing a micromobility device proceeding in the same direction on the roadway, shall leave a safe distance between the motor vehicle and the micromobility device of not less than three (3') feet and shall maintain the clearance until safely past the overtaken micromobility device. 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.05 - Application for Permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate a micromobility device, or dockless small vehicle system business without first having obtained City business tax receipt. 
(b)  The operator must submit the following items for review with their business tax receipt application submittal: 
(1)  Images and description of micromobility device and mobile application; 
(2)  Business partner program that demonstrates the operator, prior to deployment, has established agreements with businesses or entities who want the micromobility devices to be available for accessing their business, either by employees who park remotely, customers, or others that need to access these properties; 
(3)  Size of fleet at launch, quantified by number of vehicles deployed; 
(4)  Service area at launch; 
(5)  Plan for educating users on proper micromobility device parking; 
(6)  Plan for complying with this ordinance and its requirements; 
(7)  A certificate of insurance pursuant to Section 11.14.06; and 
(c)  All business tax receipts issued shall expire at the end of the pilot period unless the program is extended beyond the term of the pilot period through approval by City Council. 
(d)  The City shall consider issuance of business tax receipts based upon the City population. 
(1)  The maximum number of business tax receipts approved for a micromobility device, or dockless small vehicle system operator in the City shall not exceed one (1) for every ten thousand (10,000) residents, as certified in the most recent census or periodic demographic studies recognized by the City, including the Bureau of Economic and Business Research (BEBR) Florida Estimates of Population. For example: 
Residents Indicated 	Business Tax Receipts 
0—10,000 	1 
10,001—20,000 	2 
20,001—30,000 	3 
30,001—40,000 	4 
40,001—50,000 	5 
50,001—60,000 	6 
60,001—70,000 	7 
70,001—80,000 	8 
 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.06 - Safety Regulations. 
(a)  To be eligible for a business tax receipt, the following standards must be met: 
(1)  All electric scooters used by operators issued a business tax receipt under this chapter shall meet the standards set forth, including a front light that emits white light and a rear red reflector, except an electric scooter need not have fully operable pedals nor wheels of twenty (20") inches or more in diameter. An electric scooter shall have a foot board for the user to stand upon and no seat. Each scooter shall have a top motor-powered speed of less than fifteen (15) miles per hour when operated by a rider weighing one hundred seventy (170) pounds. If it is determined that any battery or motor on a scooter is unsafe for public use, the City reserves the right to terminate the permit issued for the small vehicle. 
(2)  Other safety standards as they become enacted or adopted. 
(3)  Micromobility devices must have always-on front and back lights that are visible from a distance of at least three hundred (300') feet under normal atmospheric conditions at night. Front and rear lights must stay illuminated for at least ninety (90) seconds after the vehicle has stopped. 
(4)  All micromobility devices must have, and clearly display, a unique, permanent identification number that is provided to the city. 
(5)  All micromobility devices must be inspected, maintained, and/or replaced on a mutually agreed-upon schedule with the City. 
(6)  Operators must have the ability to remotely lock-down individual micromobility devices (e.g. when they are deemed/reported unsafe). 
(b)  All operators permitted pursuant to this program shall provide a mechanism for users to notify the operator of any safety or maintenance issues with the micromobility devices. 
(c)  All operators shall provide visible language that notifies the user: 
(1)  That a micromobility device shall not be operated in a way that violates federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  That a micromobility device may not be operating on sidewalks that are solely intended for pedestrians. 
(3)  That whenever operating a micromobility device upon a sidewalk that is not solely intended for pedestrians, the user shall yield to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(4)  That helmet use is encouraged while riding. 
(5)  Of the 24-hour customer service phone number, providing that number prominently on the micromobility device, for users and the general public to report safety concerns, complaints or ask questions. 
(6)  Of the micromobility device unique identifier. 
All permitted operators shall have a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in automobile insurance and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in commercial general liability insurance issued by an insurance company qualified to do business in the state and naming the City of Fort Walton Beach as an additional insured. The operator's insurance shall be primary for any liability arising out of its operator or user's use of operator's small vehicle/micromobility device. Such policy shall expressly provide that it may not be canceled, except after thirty (30) days written notice to the City of Fort Walton Beach Growth Management Department. An operator shall notify the City of Fort Walton Beach Growth Management Department of any modification, amendment, cancellation or substitution of any insurance policy required under this section within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice to the operator of such modification, amendment, cancellation or substitution. If the policy of insurance required by this subsection lapses for any reason the operator's permit shall become void. 
(d)  Operators shall include in their agreements with users a term that users must agree to as a prerequisite to the use of the operator's micromobility devices that the user fully releases and waives all liability of the City for any injury or harm the user experiences arising from the user's use of the operator's micromobility device and that the user assumes all risks associated with operating the micromobility device in the City 
(e)  Operators shall agree that the City is not responsible for educating users on how to ride or operate a micromobility device. 
(f)  Operators shall inform and regularly educate all users regarding all laws and regulations applicable to riding, operating and parking a micromobility device and instruct users to comply with these laws and regulations. 
(g)  All micromobility devices shall include on-board GPS to ensure an operator's ability to locate and retrieve them as needed. 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.07 - Use and Parking of Micromobility Devices. 
(a)  Micromobility devices may be operated on any part of a street or highway where bicycles are authorized to travel, including a bicycle lane or other portion of a roadway designated for exclusive use by bicyclists, the shoulder or berm, and any path or trail intended for use by bicyclists, except those areas listed below: 
(1)  Micromobility devices are prohibited from operating at all times along the following roadways: US 98 (Miracle Strip Parkway), SR 85 (Eglin Parkway). SR 145 (Perry Avenue), SR 189 (Beal Parkway), and SR 393 (Mary Esther Cutoff). 
(b)  Hours of operation for micromobility mobility devices: Micromobility devices may only operate between the hours of 7:00 a.m.— 10:00 p.m. daily. 
(c)  Operators shall inform users on how and where to properly use and park a micromobility devices and on the area of the City in which micromobility devices may be operated. Operators shall provide a mechanism for the user to acknowledge these requirements each time a micromobility device is rented. 
(d)  Any micromobility device parked in any one (1) location for more than two (2) consecutive days without moving may be removed as provided by this section. 
(e)  Any micromobility device parked on private property without the permission of the owner or occupier of the property shall be subject to immediate removal. The owner or occupier of private property desiring the removal of a micromobility device from their property may call the operator of the micromobility device to have the small vehicle removed from the property. If the micromobility device is not removed from the property within two (2) hours, the owner or occupier of the private property may call the Fort Walton Beach Growth Management Department to initiate the removal of the micromobility device. 
(f)  Any micromobility device shall be upright when parked. 
(g)  Micromobility devices shall not be parked in such a manner as to impede the right-of-way or impede access to the right-of-way as defined at a minimum by current Public Rights-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines (PROWAG) standards, and consistent with the following: 
(1)  Operators shall inform users on how to park micromobility devices properly, following the requirements for parking outlined in this section. 
(2)  Restrictions to eligible micromobility devices parking zones on sidewalks: 
a.  Micromobility devices shall not be parked on blocks in such a way as to reduce clear passage below forty-eight (48) inches. 
b.  Micromobility devices shall not be parked in locations where micromobility devices parking is determined to be prohibited by the City. 
c.  Micromobility devices may not be parked within or obstruct: 
1.  Parklets. 
2.  Parks except next to bike racks. 
3.  Transit Stops. 
4.  Public Bike Share stations. 
5.  Loading Zones. 
6.  Disabled Parking Zone. 
7.  Street furniture that requires pedestrian access (e.g. - benches, parking pay stations, bus shelters, etc.). 
8.  Curb ramps, crosswalks, or driveways. 
9.  Building entryways, including those entryways to pedestrian paths that lead to building entryways. 
(h)  All operators shall provide contact information for relocation requests on each micromobility devices. 
(i)  Whenever operating a micromobility devices upon any path or trail intended for use by bicyclists, the user shall yield to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(j)  All operators shall comply with any restrictions developed by the City regarding where micromobility devices can be deployed, placed, parked, and operated. 
(k)  Only one (1) person shall be on a micromobility device, unless the vehicle is equipped with seating for additional users. 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.08 - Removal of improperly parked Micromobility Devices. 
Any micromobility device improperly parked or otherwise in violation of this section, may be removed by the City, its designee, or its contractors. The operator will be responsible for all fees. 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.09 - Operations of Dockless Small Vehicle Share Systems. 
(a)  All operators shall have a staffed operations center within the boundaries of the city of Fort Walton Beach. 
(b)  All operators shall have a 24-hour customer service phone number for users and others to report safety concerns, complaints or ask questions. The phone number shall be visible on all of the operator's micromobility devices, signage and other equipment. 
(c)  All operators shall provide the City with contact information, such as name, phone number, and email, of a Fort Walton Beach-based manager or operations staff available twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. The Fort Walton Beach-based manager or operations staff shall be capable of rebalancing or relocating micromobility devices and be able to respond to City requests, emergencies, and other issues at any time. 
(d)  Operators shall respond to requests for rebalancing, relocation, reports of incorrectly parked small vehicles, or reports of unsafe/inoperable vehicles by relocating, re-parking, or removing the micromobility devices, as appropriate. Any unsafe, in-need-of-repair micromobility devices shall be removed within two (2) hours, and it must be repaired before placed back onto the right-of-way or into revenue service. 
(e)  Every micromobility device shall have a unique identifier, such as a unit number, that is visible to the user on the micromobility devices. 
(f)  If the City or any City department or office incurs any costs as a result of addressing or abating any operator's violation of these requirements, or incurs any costs of repair or maintenance of public property, upon receiving written notice of the costs, the permitted operator shall reimburse the City for such costs within thirty (30) days. 
(g)  The City reserves the right to terminate micromobility devices, dockless small vehicle system permits. If an operator's permit is terminated, operator shall decommission micromobility devices fleet within thirty (30) days unless a different time period is determined by the City of Fort Walton Beach. 
(h)  The City may take any appropriate steps or assess any penalties or sanctions to compel operators to comply with this ordinance, any other City ordinance, or any other law. This shall include termination of an operator's permit. 
(i)  The City shall establish, and all operators shall comply with, procedures and protocol in the event of extreme weather, emergencies, and special events. 
(j)  The City has the power and is authorized to do all acts and things necessary or convenient to implement this ordinance, to promote and protect public safety, and to ensure the right-of-way is not impeded. 
(k)  Operators found in violations of this section shall be fined for an initial offense, and for any repeat offenses within thirty (30) days of the last same offense by the same operator. Fine rates shall be included in the City's Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.10 - Data Sharing. 
Operators must be able to provide accurate monthly summaries to the City describing customer and staff incidents, injuries, system operation, system use, reported complaints, customer service responses, and system maintenance. Reports will be provided to the City in the format defined by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.11 - Number of Small Vehicles allowed. 
(a)  An operator's fleet is limited to seventy-five (75) micromobility devices for the first month of the approved business tax receipt during the pilot period. 
(b)  After the first month, an operator may submit a request to increase its fleet size based on demonstration of utilization rate. Fees based on new fleet size apply. During a permitted month, an operator will be permitted to operate with less than but not more than the fleet size permitted for any given month. 
(c)  Operators must demonstrate successfully meeting a minimum average utilization threshold of two (2) rides per day per vehicle for each type of dockless vehicle and these utilization rates must be demonstrated after the first and each consecutive month thereafter during the pilot period. 
(d)  City may require permitted operators to reduce their fleet size on a monthly basis if operator's provided data demonstrates its fleet is being used below the average utilization threshold. 
(e)  Operators shall notify the City if they plan to change their fleet size two (2) weeks before deployment. This notice shall include the additional program administrative fee for the expanded fleet and documentation of their updated performance bond. 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.12 - Adoption of state laws relating to bicycles and electric bicycles. 
Except as otherwise specified by this article or state law, the Florida requirements and laws applicable to bicycles and electric bicycles shall apply to micromobility devices. 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.13 - Child Small Vehicle safety rules and regulations. 
The following is prohibited: 
(1)  For any person under sixteen (16) years of age to operate a micromobility device unless at all times when so engaged the person wears a protective bicycle helmet of good fit fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet; 
(2)  For any person under fourteen (14) years of age to operate a micromobility devices; and 
(3)  For any parent or legal guardian of a person under fourteen (14) years of age to knowingly permit the person to operate a micromobility device in violation of subdivision (2). 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19)  
11.14.14 - Health and Safety. 
For any reason, such as, but not necessarily including, safety concerns or multiple violations of this article, the City Council may at any time suspend or terminate the operations of any or all micromobility devices, dockless small vehicle systems in order to maintain health and safety in the City. Should micromobility devices, dockless small vehicle systems be suspended or terminated, operators will not be entitled to the refund of any fee or expense. 
(Ord. No. 2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-10-19) 
CHAPTER 11 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
2005 Code Section 	1992 Code Section 	State Law References/Other Historical Notes 
11.00 	32-1 	Code 1985, § 440.99 
11.01 	32-2 	Code 1985, § 440.02 
11.02 	32-3 	Code 1985, § 440.03; Ord. 865 (2-11-86) 
11.03 	32-4 	Ord. 1249, § 1 (6-28-94) 
11.04.01 	32-21 	§ 316.1945 et seq., F.S.; Code 1985, § 460.99; Ord. 955 (7-28-87); Ord. 1079 (4-10-90); Ord. 1264, § 1 (10-25-94); Ord. 1585, § II (8-10-04) 
11.04.02 	32-22 	§ 316.1967. F.S.; Code 1985, § 460.05 
11.04.03 	32-23 	Code 1985, § 460.06 
11.04.04 	32-24 	Code 1985, § 460.07; Ord. 1373, § 3 (12-11-01) 
11.04.05 	32-25 	Code 1985, § 460.04, Ord 1373 (12-11-01) 
11.04.06 	32-25 (in part) 	Code 1985, § 460.04 
11.05 	32-26 	§ 316.1945, F.S.; Code 1985, § 460.01 
11.06.01 	32-27(a) 	Code 1985, § 460.02 
11.06.01 	32-27(a) 	Code 1985, § 460.02; Ord. 1585 (8-10-04) 
11.06.02 	32-27(b) 	Code 1985, § 460.02; Ord. 1585 (8-10-04 
11.07 	32-28 	Code 1985, § 460.03 
11.08 	32-29 	Code 1985, § 460.08 
11.09 	32-30 	Code 1985, § 460.09; Ord. 1079 (4-10-90) 
11.10 	32-31 	Ord. 1373, § 4 (12-11-01) 
11.11 	7-2 	§ 327.33, F.S.; Code 1985, § 480.01; Ord. 1190 (4-28-92) 
11-12 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06) 
11-12.01 		Ord. 1671, (6-13-06) 
11.12.02 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06); Ord. 1712, § 3, 12-12-06) 
11.12.03 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06; Ord. 1712, §§ 4—7, (12-12-06) 
11.12.031 		Ord. 1671, (6-13-06), Ord. 1712, § 4, (12-12-06) 
11.12.032 		Ord. 1671, (6-13-06), 
11.12.033 		Ord. 1671, (6-13-06) 
11.12.034 		Ord. 1671, (6-13-06) 
11.12.035 		Ord. 1671, (6-13-06), Ord. 1712, § 5, (12-12-06) 
11.12.036 		Ord. 1671, (6-13-06), Ord. 1712, § 6, (12-12-06) 
11.12.037 		Ord. 1671, (6-13-06), Ord. 1712, § 7, (12-12-06) 
11.12.038 		Ord. 1671, (6-13-06) 
11.12.04 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06) 
11.12.05 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06); Ord. 1712, § 8, (12-12-06) 
11.12.051 		Ord. 1712, § 8, (12-12-06) 
11.12.052 		Ord. 1712, § 8, (12-12-06) 
11.12.053 		Ord. 1712, § 8, (12-12-06) 
11.12.054 		Ord. 1712, § 8, (12-12-06) 
11.12.055 		Ord. 1712, § 8, (12-12-06) 
11.12.06 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06); Ord. No. 1712, § 9, (12-12-06) 
11.12.07 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06); Ord. No. 1712, § 10, (12-12-06) 
11.12.08 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06) 
11.12.09 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06; Ord. 1712, § 11, 12-12-06) 
11.12.10 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06) 
11.12.11 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06) 
11.12.12 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06) 
11.12.13 		Ord. 1671, § 4, (6-13-06; Ord. No. 1712, § 12, (12-12-06) 
 


LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE CITY OF FORT WALTON BEACH, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FORT WALTON BEACH, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Mike Anderson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Scott Smith 
Diane Keller 
John Mead 
Mike Holmes 
Amy Jamieson 
MG Moran 
Dick Rynearson 
City Council 
____________ 
Michael Beedie 
City Manager 
____________ 
Hayward Dykes 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kim Barnes 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FORT WALTON BEACH, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Dick Rynearson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Nic Allegretto 
Mike Holmes 
Amy Jamieson 
Nathan Kelley 
Kirby Locklear 
MG Moran 
David Schmidt 
City Council 
____________ 
Michael Beedie 
City Manager 
____________ 
Hayward Dykes 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kim Barnes 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a publication of the Land Development Code of the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Land Development Code were furnished electronically by the City of Fort Walton Beach. The source of each section is included in the Table of Historical Notes and References following each chapter. The absence of a section in the table indicates that the section remains unchanged from the original codification. The text and tables of this Land Development Code were furnished electronically by the City of Fort Walton Beach. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The Land Development Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the chapter, section, and subsection. Thus, section 6.04.050 is subsection .050, located in section 6.04 of chapter 6. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and sections are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Kayla Jewell, Editor, and Aline True, Quality Control Supervisor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Kim Barnes, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Land Development Code which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Land Development Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and indexes. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Land Development Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 1917  5-19-15 Included 1 1941  4- 7-16 Included 1 1942  4-26-16 Included 1 1956 11-15-16 Included 2 1968  2-14-17 Included 3 1969  2-14-17 Included 3 1970  2-14-17 Included 3 1971  3-28-17 Included 3 1972  3-28-17 Included 3 1974  6-27-17 Included 4 1976  8-22-17 Included 4 1990  4-24-18 Included 5 2005  2-26-19 Included 6  
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
1.00.00 - GENERALLY 

1.00.01 - Purpose and Intent. 
A.  The primary purpose of this Land Development Code is implementation of the City of Fort Walton Beach Comprehensive Plan (Comprehensive Plan). 
B.  This LDC is further intended to accomplish the following purposes: 
1.  Protecting, promoting, and improving the public health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare; 
2.  Guiding and accomplishing coordinated and harmonious development in accordance with the existing and future needs of the City; 
3.  Conserving the value of land, buildings, and resources, and protecting landowners from potential adverse impacts of proposed developments; 
4.  Protecting the character and maintaining the stability of residential, business, industrial, recreation, and public areas; 
5.  Controlling and regulating the growth of the City, concentrating the more intense development in areas of high capability and limiting development in areas of low capability; 
6.  Directing and controlling the type, distribution, and intensity of development; and 
7.  Being equitable, in terms of consistency, with established regulation and procedures, respecting the rights of property owners while taking into consideration the interests of all the citizens of the City. 
1.01.00 - TITLE 
    This code shall be known as and entitled the "Fort Walton Beach Land Development Code" and may be referred to as the "LDC." 
1.02.00 - AUTHORITY 
    This LDC is enacted pursuant to the requirements and authority of Chapter 163, Part II, F.S., and Chapter 166, F.S. 
1.03.00 - APPLICABILITY 

1.03.01 - Generally. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this LDC: 
A.  The use of any parcel of land, or any structure, or any combination thereof, within the corporate limits of the City shall be in conformance with the requirements of this LDC. 
B.  All development shall conform to the standards, criteria, requirements, and procedures of this LDC. 
1.03.02 - Exceptions. 
    Previously approved projects that are identified as exempt from the provisions of this LDC are exempt only to the extent of the previous approval and are exempt from the provisions of this LDC only to the extent that such provisions are inconsistent with the prior, unexpired approval. Specific requirements regarding existing, valid development orders and permits are set forth in Chapter 9. 
1.04.00 - ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPLEMENTATION 

1.04.01 - City Manager. 
    The City Manager is the chief administrative official of the City (see the Fort Walton Beach Code of Ordinances). For the purposes of this LDC, the City Manager is assigned to administer, interpret, and implement the standards, criteria, and procedures of this LDC where the Development Administrator or other specific staff position within the City has not been designated for such action. 
1.04.02 - Development Administrator. 
    The Development Administrator is the City staff person designated to issue development orders for expedited development, approve compliance reports, authorize administrative waivers, and other actions required for implementation of this LDC as specifically designated by the Development Administrator. The Development Administrator shall be responsible for agendas for boards identified in Section 1.06.00. 
1.04.03 - Floodplain Administrator. 
    The Development Administrator shall serve as the floodplain administrator required to administer and implement the floodplain management regulations set forth in Chapter 3. As required by FEMA, the floodplain administrator shall have the following duties: 
A.  Review local development permits to assure sites are reasonably safe from flooding; 
B.  Review all local development permits to assure that the permit requirements of Section 3.05.00 have been satisfied; 
C.  Require copies of additional Federal, State, or local development permits, especially as they relate to Sections 161.053; 320.8249; 320.8359; 373.036; 380.05; 381.0065; and Chapter 553, Part IV, Florida Statutes, be submitted along with the local development permit application and maintain such permits on file with the development permit; 
D.  Notify adjacent communities, the Florida Division of Emergency Management - State Floodplain Management Office, the Northwest Florida Water Management District, FEMA, and other Federal and/or State agencies with statutory or regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse; 
E.  Notify FEMA within six (6) months when new technical or scientific data becomes available to the community concerning physical changes affecting flooding conditions so that risk premium rates and flood plain management requirements will be based on current data; 
F.  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained; 
G.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (A-Zones) of all new and substantially improved buildings, in accordance with Section 3.05.00; 
H.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new and substantially improved buildings have been flood-proofed, in accordance with Section 3.05.00; 
I.  Review certified plans and specifications for compliance. When flood proofing is utilized for a particular building, certification shall be obtained from a registered engineer or architect certifying that all areas of the building, together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, below the required elevation are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy in compliance with Section 3.05.00; 
J.  Interpret the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. When there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation; 
K.  When base flood elevation data and floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 3.05.00, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or any other source, in order to administer the provisions of Section 3.05.00; 
L.  Coordinate all change requests to the FIS, FIRM, and FBFM with the requester, State, and FEMA; and 
M.  Where base flood elevation is utilized, obtain and maintain records of lowest floor and flood proofing elevations for new construction and substantial improvements in accordance with Section 3.05.00. 
1.05.00 - INTERPRETATIONS 

1.05.01 - Generally. 
A.  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this LDC, the provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community. 
B.  In the interpretation and application of this LDC, all standards, provisions, and requirements shall be liberally construed in favor of the objectives and purposes of the City and shall not be construed to limit or repeal any other powers granted to the City under State law. 
C.  It is not intended by this LDC to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. 
D.  Specific provisions of this LDC shall be followed in lieu of general provisions that may be in conflict with the specific provision. 
E.  Where provisions of this LDC conflict with other regulations, the more stringent restrictions shall be applied. 
F.  Where written text and illustrations are in conflict, the written text shall govern. 
1.05.02 - Responsibility for Interpretation. 
A.  In the event that any question arises concerning the application of regulations, standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of this LDC, the Development Administrator shall be responsible for interpretation. In the interpretation of this LDC, the Development Administrator shall be guided by the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Responsibility for interpretation by the Development Administrator shall be limited to standards, regulations, and requirements of this LDC, and shall not be construed to include interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in this LDC. Interpretation shall not be construed to override the responsibilities given to any commission, board, or official named in other sections or chapters of this LDC. 
1.05.03 - Rules for Interpretation of Boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the official zoning map, the rules set forth in this section shall apply. 
A.  Where such district boundaries are indicated as approximately following section or quarter section lines, street lines, alley lines, or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
B.  In unsubdivided property or where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the boundary is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the official zoning map. 
C.  Where a district boundary divides the area of a lot unequally, the district classification and regulations of the larger portion shall apply to the remaining smaller portion of the lot. 
D.  Where any public street or alley is hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to each parcel of abutting property shall apply to that portion of such street or alley added thereto by virtue of such vacation or abandonment. 
E.  In case any further uncertainty exists, the City Council shall interpret the intent of the official zoning map as to the location of such boundaries. 
1.05.04 - Rules of Construction. 
    The rules of construction set forth in the Fort Walton Beach Code of Ordinances shall apply to the provisions set forth in this LDC. 
1.05.05 - Days; Computation of Time. 
    Throughout this LDC, "day" or "days" means business days, except where calendar days are specifically identified. The method required for the computation of time shall be as set forth in the Fort Walton Beach Code of Ordinances. 
1.06.00 - BOARDS 

1.06.01 - Generally. 
A.  The City Council has established the boards identified in this chapter for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this LDC. 
B.  All procedures pertaining to matters before the boards are set forth in Chapters 8 and 9 of this LDC. 
1.06.02 - Requirements for All Boards. 
A.  The City Council shall make appointments to boards identified in this chapter, based on the eligibility and board composition requirements, if any, set forth for each board. 
1.  Each board shall consist of seven (7) members and two (2) alternates. Alternates shall participate in the meetings, but shall not be seated to vote except upon the absence of a regular member. 
2.  All board members shall be residents of the City for a minimum of one (1) year. 
3.  All board members shall be registered voters. 
4.  Terms shall begin on October 1 of each year and shall be for four (4) years. 
5.  A regular board member may be appointed for two (2) consecutive full terms. 
6.  Appointments of persons to replace a departed member shall begin immediately upon appointment and continue for the remainder of the unexpired term of the departed member. 
B.  The City Council shall have authority to revoke any appointment for reasonable cause, including but not limited to, failure to be a resident or qualified elector of the City, conviction of a felony, or conviction of an offense involving moral turpitude while in office. 
C.  Absences. The City Council shall revoke the appointment of any board member who fails, without good cause, to attend three (3) consecutive regular board meetings, or a total of four (4) regular meetings or special meetings within any twelve (12) month period. The City Clerk shall determine whether an absence is excused. 
D.  Officers. 
1.  At the last regular meeting of each fiscal year, each board shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson, both of whom shall serve for the subsequent calendar year. 
2.  Officers may serve up to two (2) consecutive one (1) year terms. 
3.  When the chairperson departs, an election shall be held at the next meeting of the board to elect a new chairperson who shall serve for the remainder of the calendar year. 
4.  The chairman shall be responsible for procedures of meetings and hearings and shall take such action as may be necessary to preserve order and the integrity of all proceedings. 
5.  The vice Chairperson shall act as Chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson. 
E.  Meetings, hearings, and workshops. 
1.  Each board shall establish a regular meeting day, time, and place. 
2.  Special meetings and workshops may be called by the Chairperson or upon the majority vote of members at a regular meeting. 
3.  When required, a public hearing may be held during a regular or special meeting, provided that notice has been given in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 9.04.00. 
4.  When a public hearing is a quasi-judicial hearing, the hearing shall comply with the requirements set forth in Section 9.06.00. 
5.  If there is no business scheduled for a regular meeting prior to the deadline for applications, the Chairperson may cancel the regularly scheduled meeting. 
F.  Quorum and voting. 
1.  Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. 
2.  A quorum shall be required for a board to take action and transact business. 
3.  All actions shall require a simple majority of the members present and voting at a meeting or hearing. 
4.  A member who is present shall vote unless disqualified. 
G.  Rules of procedure. A board shall take actions and transact business in conformity with the provisions of applicable State law. A board may adopt additional rules of procedure as needed. 
H.  Records. 
1.  Any decision made by a board shall be recorded and entered into the minutes of the meeting or hearing. 
2.  All records shall be public records as set forth by applicable State law. 
3.  A board shall keep a record of minutes of meetings and decisions, including recommendations, resolutions, findings, and determinations. 
I.  The City Clerk shall be responsible for support to boards, including making a record of meetings, providing required notices, providing notices of vacancies to the City Council, providing notices of absences per Section 1.06.02.C, and other such support as may be required for the appropriate conduct of board business. 
J.  Compensation. All board members serve without compensation. However, where travel is required by the City Council, travel expenses shall be paid in accordance with City policy for travel reimbursement. 
1.06.03 - Local Planning Agency (LPA). 
A.  Membership qualifications. In addition to the general membership requirements for all boards set forth in Section 1.06.02, preference shall be given for potential members with experience and expertise in the following professions: urban and regional planning, architecture, landscape architecture, law, natural resource management, and real estate. 
B.  Ex officio members. In addition to the regular voting members, representatives of the following agencies shall be included as non-voting members on the LPA when such agency appoints a representative: 
1.  Okaloosa County School Board; 
2.  Eglin Air Force Base; and 
3.  Hurlburt Field. 
C.  Powers and duties. The powers, duties, and responsibilities of the LPA shall be to: 
1.  Serve as the Local Planning Agency (LPA) required by Section 163.3174, F.S. 
2.  Prepare, or cause to be prepared, the Comprehensive Plan, or any element or portion thereof; 
3.  Prepare, or cause to be prepared, this LDC; 
4.  Initiate, review, hear, consider, and make recommendations to the City Council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny applications to amend the text, Future Land Use Map, or other portions of the Comprehensive Plan; 
5.  Initiate, review, hear, consider, and make recommendations to the City Council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny applications to amend the text of this LDC; 
6.  Initiate, review, hear, consider, and make recommendations to the City Council on applications to rezone land and applications for approval of a PUD; and 
7.  Prepare studies, recommendations, plans, or other documents as may be requested by the City Council. 
8.  Review, consider, and render decisions regarding applications to expand or modify benign nonconformities 
9.  Review, consider, and render decisions regarding applications for variances 
10.  Review, consider, and render decisions regarding appeals of administrative decisions; and 
11.  Consider such other matters as may be assigned by the City Council 
1.06.04 - Reserved. 
1.06.05 - Code Enforcement Board (CEB). 
A.  Appointments, membership, and qualifications. 
1.  Appointments to the CEB shall be for a term of three (3) years. 
2.  Preference shall be given to potential members with experience and expertise in the following professions: zoning, architecture, building (contractors or subcontractors), and real estate. 
B.  The powers, duties, responsibilities, and procedures of the CEB shall comply with the requirements set forth in Chapter 162, Part I, F.S. 
1.07.00 - DOCUMENTS REFERENCED 
    The City shall annually publish a list of documents, codes, and manuals which are adopted for regulation of development within the City in addition to this LDC. 
1.08.00 - ACRONYMS AND DEFINITIONS 

1.08.01 - List of Acronyms. 
ADA Americans with Disabilities Act CCCL Coastal construction control line CRA Community Redevelopment Agency DBH (dbh) Diameter at breast height DO Development order DRI Development of regional impact EPA Environmental Protection Agency ERP Environmental Resource Permit FAA Federal Aviation Administration FAC Florida Administrative Code FCC Federal Communications Commission FDEP Florida Department of Environmental Protection FDOT Florida Department of Transportation FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency FIRM Flood Insurance Rate Map FLUM Future Land Use Map FS Florida Statutes ITE Institute of Transportation Engineers LDC Land development code LOS Level of service NGVD National Geodetic Vertical Datum PUD Planned Unit Development ROW Right-of-way TCEA Transportation concurrency exception area USACOE United States Army Corps of Engineers  
1.08.02 - List of Defined Terms. 
    Words used in this LDC shall be construed according to the common meaning as defined in a standard dictionary, such as the Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary, or other source, such as The Florida Building Code, or the Florida Statutes. Words defined in this Section have the meaning provided when used in this LDC. 
    Access: A way or means of vehicular or pedestrian approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
    Accessory dwelling: A secondary dwelling unit established in conjunction with and clearly subordinate to a principle dwelling, whether part of the same structure as the principle dwelling or a detached dwelling. Accessory dwellings may be called helpers quarters, guest quarters, mother-in-law suites, granny flats, or other similar terms, all having the same meaning as "accessory dwelling." 
    Accessory use or building: A subordinate use or building customarily incident to the principle building or use and which is on the same lot or parcel of ground as the principle building or use. 
    Adverse effects: Any modifications, alterations, or effects or waters, associated wetlands, or shore lands, including their quality, quantity, hydrology, surface area, species composition, or usefulness for human or natural uses which are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, to biological productivity, diversity, or stability or which unreasonably interfere with the reasonable use of property, including outdoor recreation. The term includes secondary and cumulative as well as direct impacts. 
    Aquifer: An underground formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that is permeable enough to transmit, store or yield usable quantities of water. 
    Archaeological site: A property or location which has yielded or may yield information on the city's and local area's history or prehistory. Archaeological sites are evidenced by the presence of artifacts and features indicating the past use of a location by people. 
    Arena, auditorium, or stadium: An open, partially enclosed or fully enclosed facility primarily used or intended for commercial spectator sports or entertainment. Typical uses include convention and exhibition halls, sports arenas, and amphitheaters. 
    Artisan studio: A workplace for a person skilled in an applied art. 
    As-built plans: The amended site development plans specifying the locations, dimensions, elevations, capacities and capabilities of structures or facilities as they have been constructed. 
    Breakaway wall: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
    Building: Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Clearing: The removal of trees and brush from a substantial part of the land but shall not include mowing of grass. 
    Commercial vehicle: Any vehicle whether motor-driven or towed, and used constructed or equipped for the transportation of goods, wares, merchandise, tools, or equipment in the trade, commerce or industry. The following vehicles shall be excluded from the effect of this LDC: Passenger vehicles including station wagons, SUVs, and vehicles constructed for recreational purposes or other non commercial purposes, vehicles used by governmental agencies for official business, and vehicles which are or may be required to be similarly identified by State or Federal law 
    Cottage industry: The creation or assembly of products in a home-based setting rather than a factory. 
    Cross-access: A vehicular and/or pedestrian connection between abutting properties which permits the exchange of trips between the two adjacent sites without the need to use the public street system. 
    Cultural or historic resource: Any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, object, or other real or personal property of historical, architectural, or archaeological value. The properties may include, but are not limited to, monuments, memorials, Native American habitations, ceremonial sites, abandoned settlements, artifacts or other objects with intrinsic historical or archaeological value, or any part thereof relating to the history, government, and culture of the city, the state, or the nation. 
    Dedication: The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any general and public use, reserving to such owner no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public use to which the property has been devoted. 
    De minimis: A matter so minor as to be disregarded. 
    Density: Number of residential dwelling units per acre. 
    Detention: The collection and storage of surface water for subsequent controlled discharge at a rate which is less than the rate of inflow. 
    Development agreement: A document complying with the requirements of Section 163.3220-.3243, F.S. 
    Development order: Any order granting, denying, or granting with conditions, any official action of the City having the effect of allowing or denying the development or use of land. 
    Direct hydrologic connection: A surface water connection which, under normal hydrological conditions, occurs on an average of thirty (30) or more consecutive days per year. In the absence of reliable hydrologic records, a continuum of wetlands may be used to establish a direct hydrologic connection. 
    Discharge or discharge point: The point of outflow of water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin, or facility. 
    Drainage: Surface water runoff; the removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means which include runoff controls. 
    Drip line: The outer perimeter of the crown of a plant or tree. 
    Dwelling: A single building; or portion thereof, forming an independent habitable unit including facilities for living, sleeping, sanitation, and cooking. 
    Dwelling, duplex: A single building containing two (2) contiguous and independent dwelling units separated by a common wall and sharing a common roof and foundation. 
    Dwelling/multiple family: A structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units attached to each other by walls, garages, carports, utility rooms, breezeways, etc. or conventional dwelling units, whether attached or detached from each other, which share a single deeded lot. Each dwelling unit of the multiple family structures may be located on one (1) deeded lot or may be on separately deeded lots. Multifamily dwellings include structures commonly called garden apartments, apartments, and condominiums. 
    Dwelling/single-family: A structure containing a single dwelling unit, detached from other dwelling units by horizontal or vertical space with no connection provided by walls, garages, carports, utility rooms, breezeways, etc. 
    Easement: An interest in land owned by another which entitles its holder to a specific use or enjoyment. 
    Elevated building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
    Elevation (geography): Vertical distance to a point or object from sea level or some other datum, as specified within the LDC. 
    Elevation (structures): A drawing showing the vertical elements of a building, either exterior or interior, as a direct projection to a vertical plane. 
    Ex parte: An oral and/or written communication with a decision-maker regarding an application for development approval which occurred prior to the quasi-judicial hearing at which the decision-maker is to consider such application. An ex parte communication includes a private site visit to the property that is the subject of the application for development approval. 
    Facade: That portion of a building encompassing the area extending in a generally vertical plane from the ground to the highest point of the building, marquee, or canopy and extending in a horizontal plane between the vertical ends of the structure. 
    Farmers market: A group of vendors principally involved in the sale of locally produced and grown fruits, vegetables, meats, prepared foods, and art and crafts. 
    Finished floor elevation: The top of a floor surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement) i.e. top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction measured from the mean sea level. 
    Flag: A sign made of fabric or other similar non-rigid material supported or anchored along only one edge or supported or anchored at only two (2) corners. 
    Flood or flooding: The following terms are defined for the purposes of implementing the floodplain management requirements set forth in Section 3.05.00. The use and application of the following terms are applicable solely to Section 3.05.00 and shall not be construed to apply to any other regulations set forth in this LDC. 
    Alteration of a watercourse: A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Appeal: A request for a review of the Flood Plain Administrator interpretation of any provision of this LDC or a request for a variance. 
    ASCE 24: A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Base flood: A flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation: The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Basement: The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Building Official: The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the Florida Building Code, or a duly authorized representative. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Building permit: An official document or certificate issued by the community which authorizes performance of specific activities that are determined to be compliant with the Florida Building Code. 
    Coastal construction control line: The line established by the State of Florida pursuant to section 161.053, F.S., and recorded in the official records of the City, which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a 100-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions. 
    Coastal high hazard area: A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V Zones" and are designated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V. [Note: The FBC, B defines and uses the term "flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" and the FBC, R uses the term "coastal high hazard areas."] 
    Design flood: The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
1.  Area with a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
2.  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation: The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the City's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to 2 feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
    Encroachment: The advancement or infringement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Existing building and existing structure: Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 27, 1976. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 27, 1976. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): The Federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials: Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Flood hazard area: The greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
1.  The area within a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
2.  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official map of the City on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the City. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Flood Insurance Study (FIS): The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Floodplain Administrator: The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of Section 3.01.00 of this LDC (may be referred to as the Development Administrator). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval: An official document or certificate issued by the City, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with Section 3.01.00 of this LDC. 
    Floodway: The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Floodway encroachment analysis: An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Florida Building Code: The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Functionally dependent use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic structure: Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings. 
    Letter of Map Change (LOMC): An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include: 
1.  Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
2.  Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
3.  Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the City's floodplain management regulations. 
4.  Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Light-duty truck: As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
1.  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
2.  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
3.  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Lowest floor: The floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value: The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used herein, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, Actual Cash Value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the Property Appraiser. 
    New construction: For the purposes of administration of Section 3.01.00 and the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after July 27, 1976, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 27, 1976. 
    Nonresidential: Any building or structure or portion thereof that is not classified residential in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Building (Residential Group R or Institutional Group I) and ASCE 24. [Also see definition in ASCE 24.] 
    Park trailer: A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding fourteen (14) feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
    Recreational vehicle: A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [Defined in section 320.01(b), F.S.) 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Sand dunes: Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    Special flood hazard area: An area in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. The term also includes areas shown on other flood hazard maps, if such maps are adopted by the City of Fort Walton Beach or otherwise legally designated. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Start of construction: The date of issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Substantial improvement: Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
1.  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to variance requirements set forth in Chapter 8. 
    Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of Section 3.01.00, or the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that, would not otherwise be permitted by this LDC or the Florida Building Code. 
    Watercourse: A river, creek, stream, channel, or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
    Floor: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e. top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR): A measurement of the intensity of development on a site. The floor area ratio is the relationship between the total floor area of all buildings on a site and the gross site area. The FAR is calculated by adding together the floor areas of all floors except mechanical areas and parking areas and dividing this total by the gross site area. 
FAR = Total building floor area divided by total lot area. 
    Frontage: The length of the property line of any one (1) premises parallel to and along a public right-of-way, excluding alleyways. 
    Grade: The established average level of ground exclusive of mounds and berms. 
    Groundwater: Water beneath the surface of the ground whether or not flowing through known and definite channels. 
    Historic resource: Any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, object, or other real or personal property of historical, architectural, or archaeological value. These properties or resources may include, but are not limited to, monuments, memorials, Indian habitations, ceremonial sites, abandoned settlements, engineering works, architectural interiors, artifacts, or other objects with intrinsic historical or archaeological value, or any part thereof, relating to the history, government, and culture of the City. 
    Historical site: Any place, building, or district of historical, architectural or archaeological significance or value which has been officially identified in the National Register of Historic Places, or by the State Division of Archives, History and Records Management or by the City. 
    Impervious surface: A surface which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. The term includes most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and similar structures. 
    Land: The earth, water, air, above, below, or on the surface. 
    Landmark: A building, structure, or location of architectural, archaeological, or historic significance to Fort Walton Beach and which meets one (1) or more of the criteria for designation. A landmark may include an historical site which was the location of a significant historical event. References to landmarks shall include any or all designated landmarks, landmark sites, and archaeological sites. 
    Local Development permit: A document issued by the City authorizing the applicant to undertake construction, earth moving, tree removal, paving, or installation of landscaping materials. 
    Lot: The latest fractional part of subdivided lands having limited fixed boundaries, and an assigned number, letter, or other name through which it may be identified. The word "lot" shall include the words "plot," "parcel," or "tract." 
    Corner lot: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at a street intersection, or abutting upon two (2) adjoining and deflected lines of the same street and thereby forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot depth: The distance measured in a mean direction of the side lines of the lot from the midpoint of the front line to the midpoint of the opposite rear line of the lot. 
    Double frontage lot: A lot having two (2) non-adjoining property lines abutting upon a street. 
    Lot/interior: A lot other than a corner lot, and abutting one (1) street. Alleys shall not be considered as streets. 
    Lot line: A line that marks the boundary of a lot. 
    Lot width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the median point between the foremost point and the rearmost point of the side lot lines. 
    Manufactured/modular building: A structure fabricated in an offsite manufacturing facility for installation or assembly as a finished building or as part of a finished building on the building site. This shall include, but not be limited to, residential, commercial, institutional, storage and industrial structures. The building must bear an insignia of approval certifying that it is built in compliance with the requirements of the Florida Manufactured Building Act of 1979. 
    Mobile home: A structure fabricated prior to June 15, 1976, and transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and which is built on an integral chassis and designed to be used as a one-family dwelling when connected to the required utilities. 
    Mean high water: The average height of the high waters over a nineteen (19)-year period. For shorter periods of observation, mean high water means the average height of the high waters after corrections are applied to eliminate known variations and to reduce the result to the equivalent of a mean nineteen (19)-year value. 
    Mean high-water line: The intersection of the tidal plane of mean high water with the shore. 
    Mean sea level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this LDC, the term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD). 
    Micro irrigation (low volume): The frequent application of small quantities of water directly on or below the soil surface, usually as discrete drops, tiny streams, or miniature sprays through emitters placed along the water delivery pipes (laterals). Micro irrigation encompasses a number of methods or concepts including drip, subsurfaces, bubbler, and spray irrigation, previously referred to as trickle, low volume, or low flow irrigation. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) (as corrected in 1929): A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevation within the floodplain. 
    Owner: The person in who is vested the fee ownership, dominion, or title of property. 
    Parcel: A unit of land within legally established property lines. 
    Planned Unit Development (PUD): A parcel or combination of contiguous parcels designed and developed as a single, integrated unit rather than as an aggregate of individual lots or buildings, with design flexibility from the development standards applicable to the zoning district. 
    Plat: A map or drawing depicting the division of lands and lots, blocks, parcels, tracts, or sites, and streets. 
    Pollutant: Any substance, contaminant, noise, or manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of air or water in quantities or at levels which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life, or property, or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation. 
    Premises: A parcel of land consisting of a lot, tract, parcel, other unit, or combinations thereof, recorded in the public records of Okaloosa County. 
    Principal use or building: The main or primary purpose for which a structure or lot is designed, arranged, or intended or for which it may be occupied or maintained. 
    Retention: The collection and storage of water runoff without subsequent surface discharge to surface waters. 
    Right-of-way (ROW): Land dedicated, deeded, used or to be used, for a street, alley, walkway, boulevard, drainage facility, access for ingress, egress, or other purpose. 
    Runoff: Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area. 
    Sign: Any writing, pictorial presentation, number, illustration, or decoration, banner or pennant, or other device which is used to announce direct attention to, identify, advertise, or otherwise make anything known. The term "sign" shall not be deemed to include the terms "building" or "landscaping," or any architectural embellishment of a building not intended to communicate information. 
    Animated sign: A sign that flashes or moves or otherwise changes at intervals more frequently than once each six (6) seconds. 
    Awning sign: Any sign attached to, in any manner, or otherwise made a part of any awning or awning-like structure which projects beyond a building or extends along and projects beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
    Banner sign: A sign constructed of cloth, paper, or other non-rigid material, with or without frames, and secured at both ends. Flags are not banners. 
    Bench sign: Any sign painted on or attached to a bench. 
    Changeable copy sign: A sign that is designed so that characters, letters, or illustrations can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. 
    Copy: The linguistic or graphic content of a sign. 
    Directional sign: A sign located on premises to identify exits, entrances, driveways, or off-street parking. 
    Ground sign: A sign that is supported by one (1) or more columns, upright poles, or braces extended from the ground or from an object on the ground, or that is erected on the ground, where no part of the sign is attached to any part of a building. 
    Illuminated sign: A sign which contains a source of light or which is designed or arranged to reflect light from an artificial source including indirect lighting, neon, incandescent lights, backlighting, and shall also include signs with reflectors that depend upon automobile headlights for an image. 
    Monument sign: A sign, which is attached to a self supporting structure and is not attached or affixed in any way to a building or other structure. 
    Pole sign: A freestanding sign that is not attached or affixed in any way to a building or other structure. The sign must have a concealed means of support equal to a minimum of thirty (30) percent of the overall sign width. 
    Portable sign: Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported by trailer or on its own wheels, including such signs even though the wheels may be removed and the remaining chassis or support structure converted to an A- or T-frame sign and attached temporarily or permanently to the ground. 
    Projecting sign: A sign attached to and supported by a building or other structure and which extends at any angle there from. 
    Real estate sign: A sign on premises that are offered for sale or lease. 
    Roof sign: A sign erected over or on the roof, or extending above the roof line, which is dependent upon the roof, parapet or upper walls of any building, or portion thereof, for support. 
    Sandwich or sidewalk sign: A moveable sign not secured or attached to the ground constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" or a tent-like shape, hinged or not hinged at the top. 
    Sign face: The part of a sign that is or may be used for copy. 
    Sign face area: The area of any regular geometric shape which contains the entire surface area of a sign upon which copy may be placed. 
    Snipe sign: Any sign of any material whatsoever that is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, or any object located or situated on any public road rights-of-way, easements, or alleys. 
    Temporary sign: An attached on-premises sign made of non-rigid materials and intended to be displayed for a limited time period. 
    Vehicle sign: A sign affixed to or painted on the surface of a transportation vehicle, including automobiles, trucks, boats, and trailers. 
    Wall sign: A sign, painted on an exterior wall, or a separate structure which is approximately parallel to and supported by a wall or other enclosure, and protrudes no more than six (6) inches from the wall surface. 
    Window sign: A sign affixed or applied to the exterior of a window, or located on the inside of a window or within ten (10) feet of a window or enclosed structure, and which is visible from the street or building exterior through a window or other opening. 
    Site: Any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots, or parcels of land which are in one (1) ownership, or are contiguous and in diverse ownership where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision, or project. 
    Sketch plan: An informal plan indicating the salient existing features of a site and its surroundings, and the general layout of a proposed development. 
    Structure: Anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. It includes a movable structure while it is located on land which can be used for housing, business, commercial, agricultural, or office purposes either temporarily or permanently. "Structure" also includes fences, billboards, swimming pools, poles, pipelines, transmission lines, tracks, and advertising signs. Specifically excluded from the definition of "structure" are canvas or vinyl covers up to 120 square feet in area. 
    Use: The specific purpose, activity, or function for which land, a building, a lot, a sign, or a structure is intended, designated, arranged, occupied, or maintained. 
    Waterbody or surface waterbody: Any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir, or other area which ordinarily or intermittently contains water and which has a discernible shoreline. 
    Waters of the State: Includes, but is not limited to, rivers, lakes, streams, springs, impoundments, wetlands, and all other waters or bodies of water, including fresh, brackish, saline, tidal, surface, or underground waters. 
    Water's edge or wetland's edge: The water's or wetland's edge shall be determined by whichever of the following indices yields the most landward extent of waters or wetlands: 
1.  The boundary established by the average annual high water mark; 
2.  The landward boundary of hydric soils; or 
3.  The landward boundary of wetland vegetation, based on the wetland vegetation index. 
    Water use zone: A grouping of sprays, sprinklers, or micro irrigation emitters so that they can be operated simultaneously by the control of one (1) valve according to the water requirements of the plants used. 
    Wetlands: Areas saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a dominance of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands covered under this chapter shall include the following: 
1.  Areas within the dredge and fill jurisdiction of the State Department of Environmental Protection. 
2.  Areas within the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as authorized by Section 404, Clean Water Act of section 10, River and Harbor Act. 
3.  Areas within the jurisdiction of the Northwest Florida Water Management District. 
4.  Areas identified by the state natural areas inventory. 
    Yard: An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except by trees or shrubbery or as otherwise provided in this LDC. 
    Yard, front: The yard across the full width of the lot, extending from the front line of the building to the front line of the lot, excluding steps. 
    Yard, rear: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building. 
    Yard, side: An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building, situated between the side line of the building and the adjacent side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
    Yard, side facing a street: An open unoccupied space on the same lot measured between the side line of the building and the adjacent side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard along the side street. 
CHAPTER 1 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
LDC Effective 
1 May 2012 LDC Effective 
9/2008-4/2012 State Law References/Other Historical Notes Authority Chpt. 166.021 F.S., Chpt. 163.3161 F.S., Chpt 163.3202 F.S., City Charter § 2, Ord. 1861 27 Mar 2012 1.00.00 1.00.01 1.01.00 1.02.00 1.03.00 1.03.01 1.03.02 1.04.00 1.04.01 1.04.02 1.04.03 1.05.00 1.05.01 1.05.02 1.05.03 1.05.04 1.05.05 1.06.00 1.06.01 1.06.02 1.06.03 1.06.04 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 2013, 1.06.05 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 2013, 1.07.00 1.08.00 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 2013, 1.08.01 1.08.02 Ord. 1866 23 Oct 2012, Ord. 1889 25 Feb 2014,  
CHAPTER 2 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND USES 
2.00.00 - GENERALLY 

2.00.01 - Purpose and Intent. 
    It is the intent of Chapter 2 to describe the zoning districts and permissible uses of land within the City. The zoning districts are established to implement the Comprehensive Plan and to meet the following purposes: 
A.  Promote health, safety, and the general welfare. 
B.  Encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the City. 
C.  Conserve the value of land and structures. 
D.  Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. 
E.  Provide adequate light and air. 
F.  Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers. 
G.  Lessen congestion in the streets. 
H.  Avoid undue concentration of population. 
I.  Prevent the overcrowding of land. 
2.00.02 - Official Zoning Map. 
    Zoning districts and zoning district boundaries are hereby established and declared to be in effect upon all land and water areas included within the boundaries of each district as shown on the map designated the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida." The Official Zoning Map is on file in the Fort Walton Beach City Hall. Such map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are as much a part of this chapter as if the information set forth thereon was fully described and set out in this section. 
2.01.00 - ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF ZONING DISTRICTS 
    The City is divided into zoning districts as described in Sections 2.01.01 through 2.01.04. 

2.01.01 - Residential Districts. 
A.  R-1E - Residential Single-family Estate Zoning District. The estate residential zoning district is established to provide for waterfront locations for single-family dwellings, accessory dwelling units, and accessory structures customarily associated with residential development. The maximum density is 3.0 dwelling units per acre. 
B.  R-1 - Residential Single-family Low Density Zoning District. The low density residential zoning district is established to provide for single-family homes in traditional residential neighborhoods. The R-1 zoning district is limited to single-family homes and accessory structures customarily associated with residential development. Accessory dwelling units may be permissible when standards for such uses can be met, including lot sizes and compatibility standards. The maximum density is six (6.0) dwelling units per acre. 
C.  R-2 - Residential Multifamily Low to Medium Density Zoning District. The low to medium density residential zoning district is established to provide locations for single-family and multifamily structures. All styles of housing are permissible: single-family dwellings, mobile homes, duplex and triplex structures, townhouse structures, apartments, and other styles of multifamily development. Accessory uses in this district may include onsite amenities, such as recreation facilities, carports, garages, storage buildings, parking lots, transit stops, and community buildings. Day care centers and public schools may be permissible when complying with supplemental standards set forth in Chapter 5. The maximum density is twenty (20.0) dwelling units per acre. Bonus provisions may be authorized to allow a maximum density up to thirty (30.0) dwelling units per acre. 
2.01.02 - Mixed Use Districts. 
A.  MX-1 - Mixed-use (Medium Intensity) Zoning District. The mixed-use zoning district is established to provide for a wide variety of land uses, including single-family housing, multifamily structures, commercial and office uses, artisan studios, and cottage industries. Accessory uses for residential developments include onsite amenities, such as recreation facilities, carports, garages, storage buildings, parking lots, transit stops, and community buildings. Accessory uses for nonresidential developments include such onsite amenities as parking lots, parking structures, storage buildings, or transit stops. Open space in the form of plazas and courtyards may be provided. Waterfront locations may include accessory uses such as docks, boardwalks, or facilities for direct water access to support water-dependent uses. Uses within the MX-1 zoning district may be mixed within one (1) parcel or lot and may be mixed within one (1) building. The maximum density is twenty (20.0) dwelling units per acre. Bonus provisions may be authorized to allow a maximum density up to thirty (30.0) dwelling units per acre. The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for nonresidential development is one (1.0) FAR. Bonus provisions may be authorized to allow a maximum floor area ratio of one and one-half (1.5) FAR. 
B.  MX-2 - Mixed-use (High Intensity) Zoning District. The mixed-use zoning district is established to provide for a wide variety of land uses, including multifamily structures, commercial and office uses, artisan studios, and cottage industries. Accessory uses for residential developments include onsite amenities, such as recreation facilities, carports, garages, storage buildings, parking lots, transit stops, and community buildings. Accessory uses for nonresidential developments include such onsite amenities as parking lots, parking structures, storage buildings, or transit stops. Open space in the form of plazas and courtyards may be provided. Waterfront locations may include accessory uses such as docks, boardwalks, or facilities for direct water access to support water-dependent uses. Uses within the MX-2 zoning district may be mixed within one (1) parcel or lot and may be mixed within one (1) building. The maximum density is thirty (30.0) dwelling units per acre. Bonus provisions may be authorized to allow a maximum density up to forty-five (45.0) dwelling units per acre. The maximum floor area ratio for nonresidential development is two (2.0) FAR. Bonus provisions may be authorized to allow a maximum floor area ratio of three (3.0) FAR. 
C.  YC - Yacht Club Zoning District. The yacht club zoning district is a specialized district designed for waterfront residential development with integrated private and semiprivate yacht clubs and associated accessory uses. Residential development is limited to single-family dwellings with a maximum density of six (6.0) dwelling units per acre. 
2.01.03 - Institutional, Commercial, and Industrial Districts. 
A.  CF - Community Facilities Zoning District. The community facilities zoning district is established to provide for civic, cultural, government operations, utility, academic school, and park uses. 
B.  CG - Commercial Zoning District. The commercial zoning district is established to provide for offices, a wide range of retail uses, large scale discount centers, personal service uses, day care, light repair (such as small appliances, small equipment, jewelry, shoes, computers and small electronic equipment, etc.), entertainment and hospitality uses, lodging facilities, medical facilities and uses, commercial or trade schools, civic or cultural uses, vehicle sales and rentals, vehicle repair, commercial parking in lots or structures, parks and recreation, and similar activities. Uses may be limited by location due to impacts and compatibility issues. Accessory uses and structures include parking lots and structures, plazas, courtyards, transit stops, and may include employee support facilities such as fitness centers, day care centers, or cafeterias. Prohibited uses include manufacturing, distribution centers, or similar industrial activities. Residential uses are prohibited, except that one (1) onsite caretaker dwelling may be permissible. 
C.  CTP - Commerce and Technology Park Zoning District. The commerce and technology park zoning district is established to provide locations for a wide range of industrial and high-tech industrial activities that may be carried out primarily within a building or an enclosed outside space. Included in this zoning district are assembly, fabrication, processing, repair, warehousing or storage, distribution, intense industrial activities that may be associated with nuisance or pollution, and ancillary uses directly associated with the industrial activities such as office operations. Onsite administrative and operations offices for industrial activities are permissible. Permissible uses may be mixed on a development site or within a single building. Accessory uses and structures include parking lots or structures, plazas, courtyards, fences, hedges, walls, dumpsters, storage buildings, transit stops, and may include employee support facilities such as fitness centers, day care centers, or cafeterias. Residential uses are prohibited, except that one (1) onsite caretaker dwelling may be permissible. Freestanding commercial and office uses are prohibited. 
D.  MB - Mixed Business and Manufacturing Zoning District. The mixed business and manufacturing zoning district is intended to provide for a mix of light industrial activities, high-tech industrial activities, commercial, and office uses. The industrial activities include assembly, repair, warehousing or storage, and distribution, all conducted within a building or an enclosed outdoor space. Ancillary industrial activities on the industrial site may include such uses as office operations or storage, which may be provided in an enclosed outdoor location. Permissible commercial activities include retail, large scale discount centers, restaurants, personal services, offices, medical facilities and uses, commercial or trade schools, vehicle sales and rentals, vehicle repair, commercial parking in lots or structures, and similar activities. Entertainment, hospitality, and lodging are prohibited. Uses may be limited by location due to impacts and compatibility issues. Accessory uses and structures include parking lots and structures, plazas, courtyards, transit stops, and may include employee support facilities such as fitness centers, day care centers, or cafeterias. Residential uses are prohibited, except that one (1) onsite caretaker dwelling may be permissible. 
2.01.04 - Recreation and Open Space Districts. 
A.  REC - Recreation and Open Space Zoning District. The recreation and open space zoning district is established to provide locations for passive recreation uses, such as passive parks, open spaces, and areas designated for protection, such as water bodies, shorelines, and habitats for protected species. 
2.01.05 - Zoning District Comparison to Future Land Use Categories. 
A.  The Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan establishes allowable land uses within the City. The zoning districts set forth within this LDC must be consistent with the Future Land Use Map. Any rezoning of land must maintain this consistency. Table 2.01.05 sets forth the allowable zoning districts which are consistent with each land use category from the Future Land Use Map. 
B.  From time to time it is necessary to assign a zoning district to land due to annexation or to assign a new zoning district in a rezoning action. The following criteria shall be applied to the determination of the appropriate zoning district. 
1.  Whether the requested zoning district is consistent with the future land use category according to Table 2.01.05. 
2.  Whether the uses within the requested zoning district are compatible with the uses in adjacent zoning districts. Compatibility is determined by considering scale of use; intensity of use as determined by floor area ratio and impervious surface coverage; hours of operation; impacts from noise in parking lots or structures; noise from outdoor gathering places (recreation areas, plazas, courtyards); noise from outdoor speakers; noise from processes such as from body shops, equipment shops, and industrial activities; lighting from parking lots or structures and vehicles; and security lighting. Compatibility shall consider the range of allowable uses on parcels adjacent to the proposed rezoning parcel and the typical impacts for those uses. 
3.  Whether the requested use is substantially more intense or less intense than allowable development on adjacent parcels. The range of uses permissible according to the land use category and zoning district on the adjacent parcels is the basis for determination. The existence of a nonconforming use on adjacent parcels which is substantially more or less intense than the requested zoning shall not establish the sole reason for denial of the requested zoning. 
4.  Whether the requested use is based on soil types, topography, protection of natural resources, and protection of designated historic areas. 
Table 2.01.05. Relationship Between Zoning Districts and Future Land Use Map Categories 
FLUM Land Use: Zoning Districts: R-1E R-1 R-2 MX-1 MX-2 YC CF CG CTP MB REC Low Density Residential (LDR) X X X Medium Density Residential (MDR) X X Commercial (COM) X X Mixed Business and Industry (MBI) X X Industrial (IND) X Mixed-Use (MU) X X X X X X X Civic, Institutional, Utility (CIU) X Recreation (REC) X Conservation (CNS) X Private Club (PC) X  
2.02.00 - ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

2.02.01 - Generally. 
    The purpose of overlay districts is to provide a means of modifying the site design and development requirements applicable to the underlying zoning district(s). 
2.02.02 - Downtown Design Overlay District (DDOD). 
    The Downtown Design Overlay District (DDOD) is established to preserve and promote the downtown area of Fort Walton Beach. The intent of the DDOD is to provide flexibility in location and design requirements to support and encourage economic development in the downtown area. 
A.  The DDOD is intended as a location where specific site design features will be provided to ensure flexibility in the location of activities, accessory structures, and other site design requirements, consistent with a downtown location. 
B.  The DDOD is intended to encourage the provision of design features necessary to support economic development and to maintain appropriate the development characteristics within the DDOD. 
2.03.00 - LAND USES PERMISSIBLE IN EACH ZONING DISTRICT 

2.03.01 - How to Read the Table of Permissible Uses. 
A.  Within the Table 2.03.01 the letter "P" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district. 
B.  The letter "S" indicates that the use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district, and the supplemental standards specified for the use. Supplemental standards are contained in Sections 4.01.02, 5.02.03, 5.04.00. 
C.  An empty cell indicates the use is prohibited. 
D.  Any use that is not identified in Table 2.03.02 is prohibited unless it is found to be substantially similar by the Development Administrator. 
1.  A requested use shall be considered substantially similar when the characteristics of the requested use are equivalent in type, intensity, degree, or impact when compared to a use named in Table 2.03.02. Examples of characteristics to be considered include the following: 
a.  Typical hours of operation; 
b.  Use of outdoor storage; 
c.  Trip generation rates; 
d.  Generation of noise, light pollution, odor, smoke, electromagnetic interference, or vibration; and 
e.  Customary activities associated with the use. 
2.  A requested use shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  A requested use shall be consistent with the purposes of the zoning district applicable to the parcel. 
4.  The administrative interpretation of uses shall be subject to appeal, as set forth in Chapter 8. 
2.03.02 - Table of Permissible Uses. 
Table 2.03.02. Permissible Uses in Each Zoning District 
Principle Land Uses: Zoning Districts: R-1E R-1 R-2 MX-1 MX-2 YC CF CG CTP MB REC Residential Uses Single-family dwelling P P P P P Duplex or triplex structure P P P Multifamily structure P P P Townhouse S 
5.04.02 S 
5.04.02 S 
5.04.02 S 
5.04.02 Manufactured homes S 
4.01.02 S 
4.01.02 S 
4.01.02 Manufactured homes in parks S 
5.04.14 Nonresidential Uses Adult-Oriented Uses, including book stores, movie stores, theaters, entertainment,and retail stores S 
5.04.26 P P Alcohol package store, no consumption on premises P P P Animal hospital or veterinary clinic P P Arenas, band shell, amphitheater, outdoor performance area S 
5.04.10 S 
5.04.10 S 
5.04.10 Artisan studio P P P P Asphalt or concrete plant P P ATM kiosk P P P P P Bait and tackle P P P P Barber, beauty salon, nail salons, aesthetician, skin care salon and similar P P P Bed and breakfast lodging S 
5.04.15 P P P Boatyard S 
5.04.30 S 
5.04.30 Building materials, building supply, enclosed lumber yard P P P Building materials, outdoor storage, onsite lumber processing P Business support services, such as copying, mailing, printing, private mail service P P P P Car wash or detailing facility S 
5.04.16 S 
5.04.16 S 
5.04.16 Cemetery P Community center, club, or lodge P P P P P Cultural facility, such as library, museum, or gallery P P P P Day-care (child), nursery school, kindergarten, or pre-kindergarten P P P P P Day care, adult P P P P Distribution centers, may include warehousing, dispatch offices, vehicle yards S 
5.04.17 P S 
5.04.17 Drug stores and pharmacies P P P P Dry storage for watercraft S 
5.04.07 S 
5.04.07 S 
5.04.07 S 
5.04.07 Essential public services P P P P P P P P P P P Farmer's market, outdoor sales, roadside vendors S 
5.02.03 S 
5.02.03 S 
5.02.03 S 
5.02.03 S 
5.02.03 Financial institutions, banks, credit unions, brokerages, no drive-up window P P P P Financial institutions, banks, credit unions, brokerages, with drive-up window P P Financial Institutions, Nonchartered, such as payday loan establishments and check-cashing facilities S 
5.04.24 S 
5.04.24 P P Food stores, specialty, such as bakeries, candy, ethnic groceries, catering services P P P Fortune tellers and psychics S 
5.04.27 S 
5.04.27 P P Freight and moving companies S 
5.04.17 P S 
5.04.17 Fuel/gasoline station, may include convenience store, restaurant, automotive supplies, but not repair S 
5.04.05 S 
5.04.05 S 
5.04.05 Funeral homes, mortuaries, crematoria P P P Garden, community or neighborhood S 
5.04.20 S 
5.04.20 S 
5.04.20 S 
5.04.20 S 
5.04.20 S 
5.04.20 S 
5.04.20 S 
5.04.20 S 
5.04.20 S 
5.04.20 S 
5.04.20 Golf course S 
5.04.19 S 
5.04.19 Grocery store, supermarket P P P P Group home, congregate living facility and similar uses S 
5.04.11 S 
5.04.11 S 
5.04.11 S 
5.04.11 S 
5.04.11 S 
5.04.11 S 
5.04.11 Health clubs, exercise clubs, spas, gyms P P P P Hospital P P P Hotels, motels, inns and similar lodging facilities P P P Ice vending machine S 
5.04.18 S 
5.04.18 Industrial uses, heavy industry with nuisance factors, such as odor, noise, vibration, electronic interference P Junk or salvage yards, recycling facilities S 
5.04.03 S 
5.04.03 Kennel with outdoor runs P Kennel, no outdoor runs P Laboratories, medical P P P Laboratories, industrial P P Landscaping materials, plants, stone, mulch, gravel, supplies, greenhouse, nursery yards P P P Laundry facility, self-service P P P P Lounge, bar, or nightclub P P P P P Manufacturing, and intense industrial activities, includes production, fabrication, assembly, may include outdoor storage, includes bottling plant, dry cleaning plant, gas and fuel storage and wholesaling P Manufacturing, light assembly, fully enclosed building P P Marinas, including fuel, supplies, docking, boat ramps S 
5.04.13 S 
5.04.13 S 
5.04.13 Medical and dental clinics, outpatient facilities P P P P Medical facility for recovery or rehabilitation services, includes substance abuse center, physical or mental rehabilitation, overnight stays S 
5.04.28 S 
5.04.28 S 
5.04.28 S 
5.04.28 Medical Marijuana Dispensary S 
5.04.31 S 
5.04.31 S 
5.04.31 Nursing home or convalescent facility, overnight stay P P P Offices, general, includes offices for trades or construction businesses P P P P Parking lot or parking garage, commercial P P P P P P Pawnshops S 
5.04.25 S 
5.04.25 P P Personal services, such as jewelry repair, shoe repair, tailoring, dry cleaning pick-up center P P P P Professional offices, accounting, government operations, legal services, bookkeeping, realtors, brokers, insurance, etc. P P P P P Public service facilities such as fire stations, emergency services, or public works, includes vehicle storage and maintenance P P P Recreation, indoor, such as pool, bowling, game rooms, video arcades P P P P P P Recreation, indoor, intense, such as skating rinks, indoor shooting range, indoor kart tracks, and similar P P P P P P Recreation, outdoor, active, such as sports fields, courts, playgrounds P P P P Recreation, outdoor, intense, such as go-karts, miniature golf, lighted courts and fields, water slides, boat ramps, and similar amusements P P P P Recreation, outdoor, passive, such as picnic areas, trails, open spaces, includes botanical gardens P P P P P Religious facility S 
5.04.06 S 
5.04.06 S 
5.04.06 S 
5.04.06 P P P Repair shops, small equipment, small appliances S 
5.04.04 S 
5.04.04 P P Restaurants, indoor, enclosed outdoor seating, without drive-up windows P P P P P Restaurants, drive-up and fast food S 
5.04.21 P P Retail shops, freestanding or within centers, includes department stores or specialty shops, such as art, antiques, furniture, florist, appliances, jewelry, books, electronic media, office supplies, automotive supplies, etc. P P P P Retail, large-scale discount establishments, big-box stores P P RV, motor homes, travel trailers, or manufactured home sales lot P Schools, academic, charter, public or private S 
5.04.22 P S 
5.04.22 Schools, business, commercial, trade, vocational P P S 
5.04.29 P Self-storage, mini-storage facilities S 
5.04.12 P S 
5.04.12 Stone, granite, monument sales P P Studios for personal instruction, such as music, dancing, art, or photography P P P Tattoo parlors and body-piercing studios S 
5.04.23 S 
5.04.23 P P Terminals, bus, transit, includes truck stop P P Theaters, movie or performing arts P P P Towers, radio, TV, telecommunication S 
5.04.09 S 
5.04.09 S 
5.04.09 S 
5.04.09 Trades, maintenance services, and heavy repair services, including outdoor storage, equipment yards, machine shops, welding shops, towing services P Utility facilities, such as water towers, treatment plants, public wells P Vehicle repair, body shop S 
5.04.04 S 
5.04.04 S 
5.04.04 S 
5.04.04 Vehicle sales and rentals, including automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles S 
5.04.08 S 
5.04.08 Vehicles, watercraft rentals S 
5.04.08 P S 
5.04.08 Vehicles, construction, heavy equipment, sales and rental P S 
5.04.08 Vehicles, storage yards P Warehousing, not including self-service storage P P Wholesalers P P  
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-15-16; Ord. No. 1968 , § 2, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 1971 , § 2, 3-28-17; Ord. No. 1972 , § 2, 3-28-17) 
2.03.03 - Accessory Uses in Each Zoning District. 
A.  The letter "A" indicates the use is permissible as an accessory use subject to compliance with the standards for accessory uses set forth in Section 5.01.00. 
B.  A blank cell indicates that the use is prohibited. 
Table 2.03.03. Accessory Uses and Structures in Each Zoning District 
Accessory Uses 
and Structures Zoning Districts: R-1E R-1 R-2 MX-1 MX-2 YC CF CG CTP MB REC Accessory dwelling A 
5.01.03 A 
5.01.03 A 
5.01.03 ATM A A A A A A Cafeteria or employee restaurant A 
5.01.05 A 
5.01.05 Caretaker/security/onsite manager housing A 
5.01.04 A 
5.01.04 A 
5.01.04 Community building A 
5.01.02 A 
5.01.02 A 
5.01.02 A 
5.01.02 A 
5.01.02 A 
5.01.02 Day care center A A Detached garage or carport A 
5.01.07 A 
5.01.07 
5.01.07 A 
5.01.07 Docks, boathouses, boat lifts, boat ramp, boat davits, piers, seawalls or boardwalks A 
5.01.15 A 
5.01.15 A 
5.01.15 A 
5.01.15 A 
5.01.15 A 
5.01.15 A 
5.01.15 A 
5.01.15 A 
5.01.15 Dumpsters A 
5.01.06 A 
5.01.06 A 
5.01.06 A 
5.01.06 A 
5.01.06 A 
5.01.06 A 
5.01.06 A 
5.01.06 A 
5.01.06 Fences, hedges, and walls A 
5.01.08 A 
5.01.08 A 
5.01.08 A 
5.01.08 A 
5.01.08 A 
5.01.08 A 
5.01.08 A 
5.01.08 A 
5.01.08 A 
5.01.08 A 
5.01.08 Gardens A 
5.01.02 A 
5.01.02 A 
5.01.02 A 
5.01.02 A 
5.01.02 A 
5.01.02 Home occupation A 
5.01.01 A 
5.01.01 A 
5.01.01 A 
5.01.01 A 
5.01.01 A 
5.01.01 Kennel, private, for resident pets A 
5.01.16 A 
5.01.16 A 
5.01.16 A 
5.01.16 A 
5.01.16 A 
5.01.16 Outdoor storage A 
5.01.13 A 
5.01.13 A 
5.01.13 A 
5.01.13 A 
5.01.13 A 
5.01.13 A 
5.01.13 A 
5.01.13 A 
5.01.13 A 
5.01.13 A 
5.01.13 Recreation facilities, such as parks, tennis courts, and golf courses A 
5.01.17 A 
5.01.17 A 
5.01.17 A 
5.01.17 A 
5.01.17 A 
5.01.17 Storage buildings, utility buildings, greenhouses, tool sheds, maintenance buildings A 
5.01.07 A 
5.01.07 A 
5.01.07 A 
5.01.07 A 
5.01.07 A 
5.01.07 A 
5.01.07 A 
5.01.07 A 
5.01.07 A 
5.01.07 A 
5.01.07 Swimming pools A 
5.01.10 A 
5.01.10 A 
5.01.10 A 
5.01.10 A 
5.01.10 A 
5.01.10 A 
5.01.10 Vending machines, boxes, kiosks A 
5.01.14 A 
5.01.14 A 
5.01.14 A 
5.01.14 A 
5.01.14 A 
5.01.14 A 
5.01.14  
2.03.04 - Change of Use Requirements. 
A.  A request to change the permissible use of a parcel of land or structure shall be considered according to the procedures established in Section 8.01.04. 
B.  A change of the permissible use of a parcel of land or structure shall meet the following criteria. 
1.  The requested use is permissible according to Table 2.03.02, Permissible Uses in Each Zoning District. 
2.  When the requested use has greater impacts than the existing use it shall be established only in compliance with the following site design and development standards. 
a.  Parking, loading, handicapped access, stacking lanes, or driveway standards set forth in Chapter 6. 
b.  Landscaping and buffering requirements set forth in Section 4.08.00. 
c.  Level of service standards set forth in Section 9.03.00. 
d.  Impervious surface coverage standards for the applicable zoning district, set forth in Sections 4.01.00 through 4.04.00. 
3.  The requested use does not require exterior building alterations, except that such alterations may be permissible in compliance with applicable building and safety codes. 
4.  The requested use can be granted a new Certificate of Occupancy. 
2.03.05 - Mix of Uses Within the MU Future Land Use Category. 
A.  The general mix of uses within the Mixed-Use future land use category (MU) shall be consistent with the following range of uses. 
B.  Table of mixed-uses within the MU future land use category. 
    The general type of use identified in Table 2.03.05 will be provided in the MU land use category. It is intended that the implementation of the minimum and maximum amount of development shall be evaluated for the entire MU land use category and shall not be applied within a zoning district or development. 
Table 2.03.05. Minimum and Maximum Uses Within the MU Future Land Use Category 
Type of Use Minimum % Maximum % Residential 20 40 Commercial Retail 20 45 Personal Service and Office 5 10 Entertainment, Hospitality, Tourist-oriented establishments 20 45 Civic, Institutional, Educational, Cultural, or Public 10 25 Limited Industrial (artisan studios or similar) 0 20  
CHAPTER 2 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
LDC Effective 
1 May 2012 LDC Effective 
9/2008-4/2012 State Law References/Other Historical Notes Authority Chpt. 166.021 F.S., Chpt. 163.3161 F.S., Chpt 163.3202 F.S., City Charter § 2, Ord. 1861 27 Mar 2012 2.00.00 2.00.01 2.00.02 2.01.00 2.01.01 2.01.02 2.01.03 2.01.04 2.01.05 2.02.00 2.02.01 2.02.02 2.03.00 2.03.01 2.03.02 Ord. 1870 (23 Oct 2012), Ord 1887 (3-25-14) 2.03.03 2.03.04 2.03.05  
CHAPTER 3 - ENVIRONMENTAL AND RESOURCE PROTECTION 
3.00.00 - GENERALLY 

3.00.01 - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the existing natural resources in the City. These standards preserve the natural environment, and protect wildlife habitat and migration corridors. 
3.00.02 - Applicability. 
    The standards in this chapter shall apply to all new development and redevelopment within the City, except for development on lots of record that were approved for single-family residential use prior to the effective date of this LDC. 
3.01.00 - ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LANDS AND HABITATS 

3.01.01 - Wetlands and Shoreline Protection. 
A.  The natural function of wetlands within the City shall be protected. Potential wetlands are identified in the Comprehensive Plan; however, final delineation shall be established by an independent survey conducted in accordance with the methodology set forth in the Florida Statutes. The applicant may request that the delineation survey be conducted by the City. A fee is established in the City fee schedule for such delineation survey. 
1.  Wetlands shall not be removed, altered, or destroyed, except where permitted and mitigated as required by the Florida DEP, NWFWMD, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Proof of permit shall be provided to the City. Areas approved for mitigation shall be protected through a conservation easement with the City as a party to the easement. 
2.  A de minimus exemption may be granted by the Florida DEP, NWFWMD, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Where exempted, proof of exemption shall be provided to the City. 
3.  Where an applicant is exempt from permitting requirements of the State of Florida or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the City shall determine whether a local development permit is required to protect the natural function of wetlands. The local development permit requirements are set forth in Chapter 9. 
B.  Setbacks required. 
1.  Principal buildings and all site development shall be setback from wetlands and water bodies a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
2.  Within the required setback the following activities are permissible: 
a.  Marinas; 
b.  Piers; 
c.  Boardwalks; 
d.  Walking trails; 
e.  Riprap, but not shoreline armoring; 
f.  Installation of buoys or other aids to navigation; 
g.  Fences; 
h.  Bridges, both pedestrian and vehicular; or 
i.  Docks. 
3.  Development activity which is determined by the City to be water dependent or water related may be allowed. 
4.  Native vegetation located within the required setback on estuarine shorelines shall be protected. Where removal of native vegetation is permissible, replacement of such vegetation shall be required. 
3.01.02 - Habitat Protection. 
A.  It is the purpose of this section to provide standards necessary to protect the habitats of species, both flora and fauna, of endangered, threatened, or special concern status in the City. It is the intent of this section to require that an appropriate amount of land shall be set aside to protect habitat of rare, endangered, or special concern plant and animal species. 
B.  Areas subject to the standards of this section shall be those identified in the Comprehensive Plan as habitat for rare and endangered species, threatened species, or species of special concern. 
C.  A habitat management plan shall be prepared as a prerequisite to the approval of any development proposed on a site containing areas subject to this section. The habitat management plan shall be prepared by an ecologist, biologist, or other related professional. The plan shall document the presence of affected species, the land needs of the species that may be met on the development site, and shall recommend appropriate habitat management plans and other measures to protect the subject wildlife. 
D.  A site development plan for a site containing protected habitat shall not be approved except in compliance with the requirements for habitat protection set forth in the habitat management plan. Where land is set aside as protected habitat, such land shall be adjacent to existing viable habitat, a wetland, floodplain, or wildlife corridor, except when such locations are not available. 
3.02.00 - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

3.02.01 - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose of this section is to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City. Standards are described in this section with the intent of protecting both the quantity and quality of the potable water supply. It is further the intent of this section to control development in and adjacent to designated wellheads to protect water supplies from potential contamination. 
3.02.02 - Wellhead Protection Area. 
A.  A 500-foot wellhead protection area is established surrounding the wellhead of existing and new wells drawing water from the Floridan aquifer to supply potable water for public consumption. The following development activities are prohibited within the wellhead protection area: 
1.  Landfills; 
2.  Facilities for the bulk storage, handling, or processing of materials on the Florida substance list; 
3.  Activities that require the storage, use, handling, production, or transportation of restricted substances: agricultural chemicals, petroleum products, hazardous/toxic wastes, industrial chemicals, medical wastes, etc.; 
4.  Feedlots or other concentrated animal facilities; 
5.  Wastewater treatment plants, percolation ponds, and similar facilities; 
6.  Mines; 
7.  Excavation of waterways or drainage facilities which intersect the water table; and 
8.  Drainage wells and sinkholes for stormwater disposal where recharge is into potable water aquifers. 
B.  A 200-foot wellhead protection area is established surrounding the wellhead of existing and new wells drawing water from the sand and gravel aquifer to supply potable water for public consumption. All development activity is prohibited within this wellhead protection area. 
3.03.00 - AIR QUALITY 

3.03.01 - Compliance with State and Federal Regulations. 
    To protect and enhance the air quality of the City, all sources of air pollution shall comply with rules set forth by the Environmental Protection Agency (Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40) and the Florida DEP. In all cases the strictest of the applicable standards shall apply. No person shall operate a regulated source of air pollution without a valid operation permit. 
3.03.02 - Testing Required. 
    Air pollution emissions shall be tested and results reported in accordance with techniques and methods adopted by the Florida DEP and submitted to the State. These tests shall be carried out under the supervision of the State and at the expense of the person responsible for the source of emissions. 
3.04.00 - HISTORICAL AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES 

3.04.01 - Applicability. 
    The requirements of this section pertain to all structures and sites with identified historical or archaeological significance as determined by listing on the Florida Master Site File or the National Register of Historic Places. 
3.04.02 - Survey Requirements. 
A.  Where a proposed development is located on a protected historical or archaeological site, a survey shall be conducted by a State of Florida qualified archaeologist or similar expert. The survey shall contain recommendations on methods of preservation, protection, or mitigation of resources on the site. The survey shall be submitted along with the application according to the submittal, review, and decision-making procedures set forth in Chapter 9. Any proposed development shall be consistent with the findings and recommendations contained in the survey. 
B.  Where previously unidentified historical or archaeological resources are unearthed during site preparation, excavation, construction, or development activity on a site, development shall be suspended and the City shall be notified. The City shall determine if a survey is required. 
3.05.00 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 

3.05.01 - Title & Intent. 
    These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of City of Fort Walton Beach, hereinafter referred to as "this section." 
A.  Scope. The provisions of Section 3.05.00 shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
B.  Intent. The purposes of this section and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
1.  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access, and public service during times of flooding; 
2.  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
3.  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
4.  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
5.  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
7.  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
8.  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
C.  Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This section is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
D.  Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this section and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the Flood Insurance Study and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this section. 
E.  Disclaimer of Liability. This section shall not create liability on the part of City Council of City of Fort Walton Beach or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-2019) 
3.05.02 - Applicability. 
A.  General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
B.  Areas to which this section applies. This section shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Fort Walton Beach, as established in Section 3.05.02(c), except as provided in Section 3.05.09(d). 
C.  Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The Flood Insurance Study for Okaloosa County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated December 6, 2002, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this section and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the City of Fort Walton Beach City Hall, located at 105 Miracle Strip Parkway SW, Fort Walton Beach, FL, 32548. 
D.  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to Section 3.05.05 of this code, the Floodplain Administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field-surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
1.  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this section and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
2.  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
E.  Other laws. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state, or federal law. 
F.  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This section supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this section and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This section shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant, or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this section. 
G.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-2019) 
3.05.03 - Duties and Powers of the Floodplain Administrator. 
A.  Designation. The Building Official is designated as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
B.  General. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. The Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this section consistent with the intent and purpose of this section and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this section without the granting of a variance pursuant to section 3.05.07. 
C.  Applications and permits. The Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
1.  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
2.  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this section; 
3.  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
4.  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
5.  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
6.  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
7.  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures, and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this section is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
8.  Coordinate with and provide comments to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this section. 
D.  Substantial improvement and substantial damage-determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Building Official, shall: 
1.  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
2.  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre- damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
3.  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
4.  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this section is required. 
E.  Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The Building Official shall review requests submitted that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to section 3.05.07 of this code. 
F.  Notices and orders. The Floodplain Administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this section. 
G.  Inspections. The Floodplain Administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in section 3.05.06 of the code for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
H.  Other duties of the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
1.  Establish procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to section 3.05.03(D) of this code; 
2.  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
3.  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
4.  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this section and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; 
5.  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of City of Fort Walton Beach are modified; and 
6.  Advise applicants for new buildings and structures, including substantial improvements, that are located in any unit of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) and the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-591) that federal flood insurance is not available on such construction; areas subject to this limitation are identified on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as "Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas" and "Otherwise Protected Areas." 
I.  Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps; Letters of Map Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this section; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at City of Fort Walton Beach City Hall, located at 105 Miracle Strip Parkway SW, Fort Walton Beach, FL, 32548. 
(Ord. No. 1969 , § 2, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.04 - Permits. 
A.  Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this section, including buildings, structures, and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the Floodplain Administrator, and the Building Official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this section and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
B.  Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this section for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures, and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the Floodplain Administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
C.  Buildings, structures, and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, Building and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this section: 
1.  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
2.  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
3.  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
4.  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
5.  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
6.  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
7.  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
8.  Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
9.  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on Flood Insurance Rate Maps. 
D.  Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
1.  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
2.  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
3.  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
4.  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in section 3.05.05. 
5.  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
6.  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
7.  Give such other data and information as required by the Floodplain Administrator. 
8.  For projects proposing to enclose areas under elevated buildings, include a signed Declaration of Land Restriction (Nonconversion Agreement); the agreement shall be recorded on the property deed prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
E.  Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this section shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this section, the Florida Building Code, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the Floodplain Administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
F.  Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
G.  Suspension or revocation. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error,; on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate, or incomplete information,; or in violation of this section or any other ordinance, regulation, or requirement of this community. 
H.  Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable federal, state, or local permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  The North West Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036; 
2.  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065, and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C.; 
3.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for construction, reconstruction, changes, or physical activities for shore protection or other activities seaward of the coastal construction control line; F.S. § 161.141; 
4.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055; 
5.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act; 
6.  Compliance with the Endangered Species Act by obtaining an Incidental Take Permit, an Incidental Take Statement, a "not likely to adversely affect" determination from the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) or the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), or an official letter from NMFS or USFWS concurring that the project has "No Effect" on proposed or listed species or designated critical habitat; and 
7.  Other federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.05 - Site Plans and Construction Documents. 
A.  Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this section shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
1.  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
2.  Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be established in accordance with section 3.05.05(B)(2) or (3) of this code. 
3.  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with section 3.05.05(B)(1) of this code. 
4.  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal high hazard areas, new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
5.  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
6.  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
7.  Delineation of the Coastal Construction Control Line or notation that the site is seaward of the coastal construction control line, if applicable. 
8.  Extent of any proposed alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, provided such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
9.  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
    The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this section but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this section. 
B.  Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the Floodplain Administrator shall: 
1.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; 
2.  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source, or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
3.  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two (2) feet. 
Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a Letter of Map Change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
C.  Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
1.  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in section 3.05.05(D) of this code and shall submit the Conditional Letter of Map Revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
2.  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the Flood Insurance Study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
3.  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in section 3.05.05(D) of this code. 
4.  For activities that propose to alter sand dunes or mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas (Zones V and VE), an engineering analysis that demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. 
D.  Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a Letter of Map Change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.06 - Inspections. 
A.  General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
B.  Development other than buildings and structures. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
C.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
D.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the Floodplain Administrator: 
1.  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
2.  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 3.05.05(B)(3)b. of this code, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
E.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the Floodplain Administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in Section 3.05.06(D). 
F.  Manufactured homes. The Building Official shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.07 - Variances and Appeals. 
A.  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this section. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. This section does not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
B.  Appeals. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the administration and enforcement of this section. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
C.  Limitations on authority to grant variances. The Board of Adjustment shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in section 3.05.07(G) of this code, the conditions of issuance set forth in section 3.05.07(H) of this code, and the comments and recommendations of the Floodplain Administrator and the Building Official. The Board of Adjustment has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this section. 
D.  Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in section 3.05.05 (C) of this code. 
E.  Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 1112 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
F.  Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this section, provided the variance meets the requirements of section 3.05.07(D), is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
G.  Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this section, and the following: 
1.  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
2.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
5.  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
6.  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
7.  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
8.  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
9.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters, and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
10.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
H.  Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
1.  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this section or the required elevation standards; 
2.  Determination by the Board of Adjustment that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
3.  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
4.  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the Floodplain Administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.08 - Violations. 
A.  Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this section that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this section, shall be deemed a violation of this section. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this section or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
B.  Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this section and that is determined to be a violation, the Floodplain Administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
C.  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.09 - Flood Resistant Development-Buildings and Structures. 
A.  Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to section 3.05.04(C) of this code, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of section 3.05.15 of this code. 
B.  Buildings and structures seaward of the coastal construction control line. If extending, in whole or in part, seaward of the coastal construction control line and also located, in whole or in part, in a flood hazard area: 
1.  Buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed to comply with the more restrictive applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building Section 3109 and Section 1612 or Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
2.  Minor structures and non-habitable major structures as defined in F.S. § 161.54, shall be designed and constructed to comply with the intent and applicable provisions of this section and ASCE 24. 
C.  Critical facilities. No new critical facilities shall be permitted or constructed within the 500-year floodplain. 
D.  Minimum elevation. In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, the elevation of the lowest floor of all buildings, including those outside the special flood hazard area, shall be at least 12 inches above the higher of the elevation of the surface of the center of the street or of the curb of the street abutting or adjacent to the property. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.10 - Flood Resistant Development-Subdivisions. 
A.  Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
1.  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
B.  Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
1.  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats and final plats; 
2.  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 3.05.05(B)(1) of this code; and 
3.  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of section 3.05.11 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.11 - Flood Resistant Development-Site Improvements, Utilities, and Limitations. 
A.  Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
1.  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
B.  Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
C.  Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
D.  Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in section 3.05.05(C)(1) of this code demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
E.  Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this section, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zones A, AE, AH, and AO only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, and be designed and compacted per section 2.4 of ASCE 24. 
F.  Limitations on sites in coastal high hazard areas (Zones V and VE). In coastal high hazard areas, alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be permitted only if such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and only if the engineering analysis required by section 3.05.05(C)(4) of this code demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. Construction or restoration of dunes under or around elevated buildings and structures shall comply with section 3.05.15(H)(3) of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.12 - Flood Resistant Development-Manufactured Homes. 
A.  General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this section. If located seaward of the coastal construction control line, all manufactured homes shall comply with the more restrictive of the applicable requirements. 
B.  Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that: 
1.  In flood hazard areas (Zones A, AE, AH, and AO) other than coastal high hazard areas, are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 and this section. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to section 3.05.12(F) are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. 
2.  In coastal high hazard areas (Zones V and VE), are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.3 and this section. 
C.  Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
D.  Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with section 3.05.12(E) or 3.05.12(F) of this code, as applicable. 
E.  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of section 3.05.12(F) of this code, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zones A, AE, AH, and AO) or Section R322.3 (Zones V and VE). 
F.  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to section 3.05.12 (E) of this code, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
1.  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zones A, AE, AH, and AO) or Section R322.3 (Zones V and VE); or 
2.  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 48 inches in height above grade. 
G.  Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322 for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
H.  Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.13 - Flood Resistant Development-Recreational Vehicles and Park Trailers. 
A.  Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
B.  Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in section 3.05.13(A) of this code for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of section 3.05.12 of this code for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.14 - Flood Resistant Development-Tanks. 
A.  Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
B.  Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of section 3.05.14(C) of this code shall: 
1.  Be permitted in flood hazard areas (Zones A, AE, AH, and AO) other than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
2.  Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (Zones V and VE). 
C.  Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be elevated to or above the design flood elevation , and attached to a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
D.  Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets, and vents shall be: 
1.  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
2.  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.15 - Flood Resistant Development-Other Development. 
A.  General requirements for other development. All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this section or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
1.  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
2.  Meet the limitations of section 3.05.11(D) of this code if located in a regulated floodway; 
3.  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
4.  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
5.  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
B.  Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of section 3.05.11(D) of this code. 
C.  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 3.05.11(D) of this code. 
D.  Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 3.05.11(D) of this code. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of section 3.05.05(C)(3) of this code. 
E.  Concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses in coastal high hazard areas (Zones V and VE). In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios, and similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be: 
1.  Structurally independent of the foundation system of the building or structure; 
2.  Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any structure; and 
3.  Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four (4) inches. 
F.  Decks and patios in coastal high hazard areas (Zones V and VE). In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following: 
1.  A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck. 
2.  A deck or patio that is located below the design flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
3.  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than twelve (12) inches or that is constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
4.  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of twelve (12) inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection. 
G.  Other development in coastal high hazard areas (Zones V and VE). In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the appropriate federal, state, or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities include but are not limited to: 
1.  Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control structures; 
2.  Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters; and 
3.  On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems defined in 64E-6.002, F.A.C., as filled systems or mound systems. 
H.  Nonstructural fill in coastal high hazard areas (Zones V and VE). In coastal high hazard areas: 
1.  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings. 
2.  Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than one unit vertical to five units horizontal shall be permitted only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
3.  Where authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the diversion of floodwater or wave runup and wave reflection if the scale and location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the lowest horizontal structural member of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
3.05.16 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), adopted February 26, 2019 repealed § 3.05.16 in its entirety. Former § 3.05.16 pertained to Florida Building Code, Building, Administrative Amendments and derived from the original codification of the Land Development Code. 
3.05.17 - Definitions. 
A.  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings shown in this section. 
B.  Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this section and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
C.  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this section or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
    Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Appeal. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this section . 
    ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Base flood. A flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [(Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) 
    Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202; see "Basement (for flood loads).") 
    Coastal construction control line. The line established by the State of Florida pursuant to F.S. § 161.053, and recorded in the official records of the community, which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a 100-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions. 
    Coastal high hazard area. A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V Zones" and are designated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V. 
    Critical facilities. All manmade structures or other improvements that, because of their function, size, service area, or uniqueness, have the potential to cause serious bodily harm, extensive property damage, or disruption of vital socioeconomic activities if they are destroyed, damaged, or if their functionality is impaired. These include emergency response facilities (fire stations, police stations, rescue squads, emergency vehicle garages, and emergency operations centers), custodial facilities (jails and other detention centers, long-term care facilities, hospitals, and other health care facilities), schools, day care facilities, emergency shelters, utilities (water supply, wastewater treatment facilities, and power), communications facilities, hazardous materials facilities, and any other assets determined by the community to be of critical importance for the protection of the health and safety of the population. 
    Declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement). A form provided by the floodplain administrator to be signed by the owner and recorded on the property deed in official records of the clerk of courts, for the owner to agree not to convert or modify in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the building permit and these regulations, enclosures below elevated buildings. 
    Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) 
1.  Area with a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
2.  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.); 
    Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations, or any other land disturbing activities. 
    Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures, or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine or other non-coastal flood hazard areas. 
    Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 14, 1976 (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202). 
    i>Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before September 14, 1976. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Five-hundred year (500-year) floodplain. The special flood hazard area plus the area shown on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone X (Shaded). Until the time a Zone X (Shaded) has been designated on the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map, the 500-year floodplain shall include the preliminary 500-year floodplain as shown on the City Engineering/Geographic Information System Division website. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials . Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) 
    Flood hazard area . The greater of the following two areas: (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) 
1.  The area within a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
2.  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) 
    Flood Insurance Study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) 
    Floodplain Administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this section (may be referred to as the Floodplain Manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this section. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) 
    Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings. 
    Letter of Map Change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include: 
1.  Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
2.  Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
3.  Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
4.  Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
1.  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle,; or 
2.  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
3.  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and greater than four hundred (400) square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." (Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.) 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this section, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, Actual Cash Value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the Property Appraiser. 
    New construction. For the purposes of administration of this section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after September 14, 1976 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed on or after September 14, 1976. 
    Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding fourteen (14) feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. (Defined in F.S. § 320.01). 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: (See F.S. § 320.01) 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self -propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Sand dunes . Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) 
    Start of construction . The date of issuance of a permit for new construction and substantial improvements , provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, or the construction of columns. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling); the installation of streets or walkways,; excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations,; the erection of temporary forms; or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. (Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.) 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) 
    Substantial improvement Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.) 
1.  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to section 3.05.07 of this code. 
    Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this section, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this section or the Florida Building Code. 
    Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2005 , 2(Exh. A), 2-26-19) 
CHAPTER 3 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
LDC Effective 
1 May 2012 LDC Effective 
9/2008-4/2012 State Law References/Other Historical Notes Authority Chpt. 166.021 F.S., Chpt. 163.3161 F.S., Chpt 163.3202 F.S., City Charter § 2, Ord. 1861 27 Mar 2012 3.00.00 3.00.01 3.00.02 3.01.00 3.01.01 3.01.02 3.02.00 3.02.01 3.02.02 3.03.00 3.03.01 3.03.02 3.04.00 3.04.01 3.04.02 3.05.00 3.05.01 3.05.02 3.05.03 3.05.04 3.05.05 3.05.06 3.05.07 3.05.08 3.05.09 3.05.10 3.05.11 3.05.12 3.05.13 3.05.14 3.05.15 3.05.16 3.05.17  
CHAPTER 4 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
4.00.00 - GENERALLY 

4.00.01 - Applicability. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide development standards applicable to all development activity within the City. Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures shall be designed, constructed, and established in compliance with the development standards for the applicable zoning district and the development standards for all zoning districts as set forth in this chapter. 
4.00.02 - Measurements. 
A.  Lot Width and Lot Frontage. 
1.  Lot width is the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the mid-point between the endpoints of the side lot lines. 

Figure 4.00.02 (A). Lot Width
2.  Lot frontage is the property line affronting a roadway right-of-way which provides the principal access and is used by the U.S. Postal Service for the delivery of mail to the structure located on the property. 
a.  Minimum lot frontage for residential zoned property shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
B.  Setbacks. 
1.  Setbacks are measured as the shortest distance from the exterior building wall to the property line. 
2.  The rear yard setback for any waterfront lot is measured to the mean high water line. 
3.  Eave overhangs shall not be included as a main part of any building, provided, however, that no eave overhang shall exceed three (3) feet and shall not be less than eight (8) feet from ground level. 
C.  Specific measurement requirements for flag lots. 
1.  The design requirements for platting flag lots are set forth in Section 4.07.03.C. 
2.  A flag lot is exempt from the frontage requirements set forth in this LDC, provided that the width of the pole or access portion of the lot is not less than twenty (20) feet. 
3.  The maximum length of the pole portion of the lot, measured from the right-of-way to the end of the pole at the point of connection to the flag is 150 feet. 
4.  The setbacks for a flag lot are measured for the flag portion of the lot, excluding the pole portion of the lot. 
D.  The impervious surface ratio is calculated by dividing the total of all impervious surfaces on the lot by the total lot area. Water bodies are impervious surfaces. 
E.  Building height. 

Figure 4.00.02 (E). Building Height.
1.  Building height is measured from the top of the floor at the finished floor elevation to the top plate of the highest habitable floor. 
2.  Calculation of maximum building height shall not include the roof above the top plate of the highest habitable floor. 
3.  Calculation of maximum building heights shall not include water towers, utility facility, or appurtenances or attachments such as chimneys, elevator shafts, antennas, decorative architectural features, steeples, air conditioning equipment enclosures, cupolas, weather vanes, and other similar building features. All appurtenances or attachments which are exempt for purposes of calculating the maximum height shall not be habitable. In certain zoning districts, it may be necessary to calculate the height of a building from mean sea level in order to determine compatibility with the Eglin Air Force Base mission, in which case appurtenances shall also be considered. 
(Ord. No. 1969 , § 2, 2-14-17) 
4.00.03 - Compatibility Standards Pertaining to Building Height in All Zoning Districts. 
A.  Applicability. The standards set forth in this section apply to buildings other than single-family dwellings when such buildings are located adjacent to parcels zoned to allow single-family residential use. 
B.  Maximum height standards. 

Figure 4.00.03 (B). Building Height & Distance from SFR
1.  The maximum height for buildings located 100 feet or less from a parcel with a single-family residential use shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5) times the average height of single-family dwellings in the adjacent or surrounding block. 
4.00.04 - Standards Pertaining to Metal Buildings in all Zoning Districts. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  The standards set forth in this section apply to principal buildings and accessory buildings larger than 1,000 sq.ft. 
2.  The requirement for a veneer applies to metal building facades that are visible from a public right-of-way. 
3.  Metal buildings within the CTP zoning district are exempt from the requirements in this section. 
B.  Standards. 
1.  Facades subject to this section shall have a veneer added consisting of brick, stucco, stone, or a similar decorative material. 
2.  The decorative material shall be applied to 100 percent of the façade. 
C.  Waiver Entitlement. The requirements of this section may be waived by the Board of Adjustment, pursuant to certain review criteria as outlined in Section 8.00.01. 
4.01.00 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

4.01.01 - Site Development Standards. 
A.  The base standards for development in residential zoning districts are provided in Table 4.01.01. 
B.  A lot of record in the R-1E zoning district is a lot with an area of at least 8,000 s.f., provided that such lot was established on or before December 10, 2002. A lot of record is exempt from the lot area requirements set forth in Table 4.01.01. 
Table 4.01.01. Development Standards in Residential Zoning Districts. 
Development Feature R-1E R-1 R-2 YC Maximum base density (dwelling units per acre) 3.0 6.0 20.0 6.0 Maximum density with bonus provisions 1 NA NA 30.0 NA Minimum lot area (square feet) 15,000 7,200 5,000 1 acre Minimum lot area for flag lots (square feet) 22,500 12,000 7,500 NA Minimum lot area for zero lot line development (square feet) NA 5,500 4,000 NA Minimum lot width (feet) 75 75 50 None Maximum impervious surface (%) 50 50 75 50 Minimum setbacks (feet) Front yard 25 25 25 10 Side yard, interior 7.5 7.5 7.5 5.0 2 Side yard, adjacent to a street 15 15 15 NA Rear yard 50 25 20 NA  Rear yard, adjacent to state water body 50 NA 50 NA Maximum building height (feet) 35 35 70 35  
1 See Section 4.05.00 for bonus provisions. 
2 The side setback in the YC zoning district is increased to ten (10) feet when abutting R-1E, R-1, or R-2 zoned lots or parcels. 
4.01.02 - Residential Design Standards. 
    All single-family dwellings, whether site-built or built off-site and moved onto the lot shall comply with the following design standards. 
A.  The minimum width of the building shall exceed sixteen (16) feet. 
B.  The minimum roof pitch shall be 3:12. 
C.  The minimum roof overhang shall be twelve (12) inches, exclusive of porches and patios. 
D.  All homes shall be situated on the lot so that the conventional front of the home faces the front yard. 
E.  The building shall be constructed according to standards established by the State. 
F.  The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, or vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance. Where vinyl lap siding is used, the siding shall not have a shiny surface or be reflective. 
G.  The dwelling shall be attached to a permanent foundation system, including supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, and anchoring the home and connecting multiple and expandable sections of the home. The foundation shall be designed and constructed according to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
H.  Roof materials shall be wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, standing seam metal, raised rib metal, other typical residential metal roofing systems, concrete, clay tile, fiberglass tiles, slate, or built-up gravel materials. 
I.  For dwellings elevated forty-eight (48) inches or less, the area beneath the home shall be enclosed by brick, concrete, wood, rock, vinyl or other materials specifically manufactured for this purpose and shall enclose the space between the floor joists and the ground level, except for the required minimum ventilation and access. Such access shall remain closed when not being used for that purpose. Dwellings located within flood zones A or V are exempt from this requirement. 
J.  For manufactured homes, all tongues, wheels, axles, transporting lights and other towing apparatus shall be removed from the site prior to occupancy. 
K.  At each exterior door, there shall be a landing that is a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. Such landing shall be permanently affixed to the ground and shall be constructed of materials similar to other housing in the surrounding area, where porches, landings, or stoops are constructed. 
4.02.00 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN MIXED-USE DISTRICTS 

4.02.01 - Site Development Standards. 
A.  The base standards for development in the mixed-use zoning districts are provided in Table 4.02.01, except as modified below. 
B.  Specific site development standards are provided for townhouse development in Section 5.04.02. 
C.  Specific site development standards apply within the Downtown Design Overlay District, as set forth in Section 4.02.04. Standards in the DDOD supersede the standards in the underlying zoning district. 
D.  Proposed building height, including appurtenances and building attachments, in the MX-2 district shall be analyzed to determine if it exceeds the limitations of the Eglin Air Force Base Tall Structure Analysis Map. In consultation with an Eglin AFB representative, the City may establish the maximum height at less than one-hundred-twenty (120) feet in the MX-2 district, but no less than the maximum structure height (above mean sea level) causing no major negative mission impacts for Eglin AFB, as depicted in the Map. 
E.  Parcels abutting the water which have a view corridor established by a valid development order approved prior to the date of adoption of this LDC shall maintain such view corridor according to the terms and conditions set forth in the development order. No development shall be approved which results in encroachment into such established view corridors. 
F.  New view corridors may be provided as a bonus provision, as set forth in Section 4.05.00. When a view corridor is established, the following standards for design and use of the view corridor shall apply: 
1.  Sidewalks, pedestrian paths, bicycle paths, or driveways may cross or be located within the corridor, provided that no fixtures, street furniture, or other structures obstructs the view between two and one-half feet (2.5) above the natural grade and eight (8) feet above the natural grade. 
2.  Landscaping, vegetation, and trees shall not obstruct the view of the waterfront between two and one-half feet (2.5) above the natural grade and eight (8) feet above the natural grade. 
3.  Balconies, awnings, or other permissible structures or structural components that overhang the view corridor shall be designed, constructed, and installed such that the lowest structural component is at least eight (8) feet above the natural grade. 
Table 4.02.01. Development Standards in Mixed-Use Zoning Districts. 
Development Feature MX-1 MX-2 Maximum base density (dwelling units per acre) 20.0 30.0 Maximum density with bonus provisions 1 30.0 45.0 Maximum base floor area ratio 1.0 2.0 Maximum floor area ratio with bonus provisions 1 1.5 3.0 Minimum lot area None None Minimum lot width (feet) 50 75 Maximum impervious surface (%) 75 75 Minimum setbacks (feet)  Front yard 10 5  Side yard 7.5 5  Side yard, abutting R-1E, R-1, or R-2 15 15  Rear yard 15 15  Rear yard, abutting R-1E, R-1, or R-2 20 20  Rear yard, adjacent to state water body 25 25 Maximum building height (feet) 70 120  
1 See Section 4.05.00 for bonus provisions. 
4.02.02 - Standards for Mixing Uses on One (1) Lot. 
A.  Uses identified in Table 2.03.02 for the MX-1 and MX-2 zoning districts may be combined on one (1) development lot or parcel. 
B.  When combining uses, the development may include the maximum number of residential units based on the density calculation plus the maximum amount of floor area based on the floor area ratio. Residential dwelling units are not included in the calculation of floor area. 
C.  Shared parking is required. A parking study shall be prepared according to the standards set forth in Section 6.04.06 to demonstrate the actual parking requirements for the project. 
D.  Where multiple uses and multiple buildings are proposed on one (1) lot, there is no buffer requirement between buildings containing different uses. 
E.  Multiple buildings proposed on one (1) lot shall have an integrated design. An integrated design shall not be construed to mean that buildings are identical. 
F.  Access to residential units shall be separated from access to nonresidential development in order to provide privacy for residents. A shared entrance to a building may be established, provided that the interior entrances to the residential areas and nonresidential areas are separated. 
G.  Balconies, courtyards, plazas, recreation areas, and outdoor gathering places shall be located and designed to ensure privacy for residents. 
H.  Buildings may have a common wall. However, when separated, the separation shall be a minimum of five (5) feet to ensure space for maintenance of each building. 
4.02.03 - Standards for Mixing Uses Within One (1) Building. 
A.  Uses identified in Table 2.03.02 for the MX-1 and MX-2 zoning districts may be combined within one (1) building. The building may stand alone on a development parcel or may be integrated into a mixed use development consisting of multiple buildings. 
B.  When combining uses, the development may include the maximum number of residential units based on the density calculation plus the maximum amount of floor area based on the floor area ratio. Residential dwelling units shall not be included in the calculation of floor area. 
C.  Shared parking is required. A parking study shall be prepared according to the standards set forth in Section 6.04.06 to demonstrate the actual parking requirements for the project. 
D.  Access to residential units shall be separated from access to nonresidential development in order to provide privacy for residents within the building. This requirement may be met when an elevator serves upper floor residential units through a secured access method, such as key-activated access to residential floors. 
E.  Balconies, courtyards, plazas, recreation areas, and outdoor gathering places shall be located and designed to ensure privacy for residents. 
4.02.04 - Site Development Standards for the Downtown Design Overlay District (DDOD). 
A.  The DDOD is intended to provide development standards specific to the downtown area of Fort Walton Beach. The boundary is shown on the Official Zoning Map. 
B.  The development standards shown in Table 4.02.04 below supersede and replace the development standards otherwise required for the underlying zoning district. Where no standard is provided in Table 4.02.04, the standards of the underlying zoning district are required. 
C.  Buildings within the DDOD are not subject to the standards set forth in Section 4.00.03. 
D.  In addition to signs permissible subject to the standards set forth in Section 5.03.00, development within the DDOD may have one (1) sandwich sign in compliance with the following standards: 
1.  The sign shall not exceed two (2) feet in width. 
2.  The color and font shall be consistent with the color and font of other signs for the business displaying the sandwich sign. 
3.  The sign shall include the business name or logo. 
4.  The sign shall be located on private property. Where five (5) feet of width on the sidewalk can be maintained free of obstruction, the sign may be placed on the public sidewalk. When a sign is proposed to be located on the public sidewalk, the owner shall provide proof of insurance naming the City as an insured party. 
5.  A sandwich sign shall only be displayed during the hours of operation of the business named on the sign. 
E.  New development or redevelopment shall include sidewalks that are consistent with the requirements in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
F.  Development in the DDOD is exempt from providing additional off-street parking spaces as set forth in Section 6.04.02 provided that there is sufficient public parking capacity in the block in which the proposed business is located. 

Figure 4.02.04 (F). Boundaries of DDOD
1.  The City shall evaluate the available capacity of public parking in the DDOD on a regular basis and make the information available to applicants upon request. 
2.  If the City determines that available public parking capacity is insufficient for the proposed business, the applicant shall provide the required number of off-street parking spaces. The applicant may submit a parking study acceptable to the City that demonstrates the parking needs of the proposed business. 
Table 4.02.04. Development Standards Within the Downtown Design Overlay District. 
Development Feature Standards Minimum lot width (feet) None Maximum impervious surface (%) 100 Minimum setbacks (feet) Front yard 0 Side yard 0 Rear yard 0 Rear yard, adjacent to state water body 25 Rear yard, abutting an alley 10 Maximum building height (feet) 120  
4.03.00 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR INSTITUTIONAL, COMMERCIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

4.03.01 - Site Development Standards. 
A.  The base standards for development in institutional, commercial, and industrial zoning districts are provided in Table 4.03.01. 
B.  Specific site development standards apply within the Downtown Design Overlay District, as set forth in Section 4.02.04. 
Table 4.03.01. Development Standards in Institutional, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts. 
Development Feature CF CG CTP MB Maximum base floor area ratio 2.0 1.5 None 1.5 Maximum floor area ratio with bonus provisions 1 NA 2.25 NA 2.25 Minimum lot area None None 32,000 s.f. 16,000 s.f. Minimum lot width (feet) None None 100 100 Maximum impervious surface (%) 75 75 75 75 Minimum setbacks (feet)  Front yard 25 5 50 10  Side yard, interior 15 0 10 0  Side yard, adjacent to a street 25 7.5 10 10  Side yard, adjacent to R-1E, R-1, or R-2 NA 20 50 20  Rear yard 30 10 20 20  Rear yard, adjacent to R-1E, R-1, or R-2 NA 20 50 30 Maximum building height (feet) 35 120 50 70  
1 See Section 4.05.00 for bonus provisions. 
C.  Proposed building height, including appurtenances and building attachments, in the MX-2 CG district shall be analyzed to determine if it exceeds the limitations of the Eglin Air Force Base Tall Structure Analysis Map. In consultation with an Eglin AFB representative, the City may establish the maximum height at less than one-hundred-twenty (120) feet in the MX-2 CG district, but no less than the maximum structure height (above mean sea level) causing no major negative mission impacts for Eglin AFB, as depicted in the Map. 
4.03.02 - Nuisance/Pollution Standards for Industrial Developments. 
    All uses and activities conducted in the CTP zoning district shall conform to the standards of performance described below. The failure to conform to any such standards is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
A.  Fire and explosion hazards: All activities and all storage of flammable and explosive materials or products at any place shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazards of fire and explosion, including adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment, as prescribed by all applicable fire prevention laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
B.  Radiation: Any operation involving radiation (e.g. the use of neutrons, protons and other atomic or nuclear particles) shall be conducted in accordance with the codes, rules, and regulations of State and Federal regulating agencies. Radiation limitations shall not exceed quantities established as safe by the United States Bureau of Standards. 
C.  Electromagnetic radiation: For the purpose of these regulations, electromagnetic interference shall be defined as disturbances of an electromagnetic nature which are generated by the use of electrical equipment, other than planned and intentional sources of electromagnetic energy, which would interfere with the proper operation of electromagnetic radiation for such purposes as communication, experimentation, entertainment, broadcasting, heating, navigation, therapy, vehicle velocity measurement, weather survey, aircraft detection, topographical survey, personal pleasure or any other use directly or indirectly associated with these purposes which does not comply with the current regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regarding such sources of electromagnetic radiation. Further, said operations, in compliance with the FCC regulations, shall be unlawful if such radiation causes an abnormal degradation of performance of other electromagnetic radiators or electromagnetic receptors of quality and proper design because of proximity, primary field, blanketing, spurious re-radiation, conducted energy in power or telephone systems or harmonic content. The determination of "abnormal degradation of performance" and of "quality and proper design" shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the latest principles and standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of Radio Engineers and the Radio Manufacturers' Association. 
D.  Toxic or hazardous matter: Any activity involving the use or storage of toxic or hazardous matter shall comply with all State, Federal and local laws and all regulations of any Federal, State, or local agency concerning pollution control or toxic substances. 
E.  Waste disposal: No activity shall be conducted which results in the discharge of any liquid or solid waste, including industrial wastes, into any public or private sewage system, the ground, or any lake, stream, or other body of water, in violation of any provision of State, Federal or local law or any regulation of any State, Federal or local agency. 
F.  Vibration: No use of any property shall cause perceptible earth vibrations beyond any property line, except when pilings are driven for structure foundations. All stamping machines, punch presses, press brakes, hot forgings, steam board hammers, or similar devices shall be placed on shock absorption mountings and on suitable reinforced concrete footings. No machine shall be loaded beyond the capacity, as described by the manufacturers. 
G.  Heat, cold, dampness, or movement of air: Activities on any property which produce any adverse effect on the temperature, motion, or humidity of the atmosphere beyond the lot lines are not permitted. 
H.  Glare: There shall be no direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights, high temperature processing, combustion, welding, or otherwise so as to be visible at, or interfere with uses on, adjacent properties. 
I.  Smoke, dust, and particulate matter: There shall be no emission of visible smoke, dust, dirt, fly ash, or any particulate matter from any pipes, vents, or other openings or from any other source, into the air which can cause damage or irritation to health, animals, vegetation, or to any form of property or which results in the violation of any applicable Federal, State or local requirements. 
J.  Odor: There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at the points of measurement. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any such odors shall be provided with both a primary and a secondary safeguard system so that control may be maintained in the event of failure of the primary safeguard system. 
K.  Noise: Reserved. 
4.04.00 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT 

4.04.01 - Site Development Standards. 
    The standards for development in the recreation and open space zoning district are provided in Table 4.04.01. 
Table 4.04.01. Development Standards in the Recreation and Open Space Zoning District. 
Development Feature REC Maximum base floor area ratio 0.1 Minimum lot area (square feet) None Minimum lot width (feet) None Maximum impervious surface (%) 40 Minimum setbacks (feet)  Front yard 25  Side yard, interior 7.5  Side yard, adjacent to street 15  Rear yard 25 Maximum building height (feet) 35  
4.05.00 - DENSITY AND INTENSITY BONUS PROVISIONS 

4.05.01 - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose of this section is to outline the standards for obtaining additional density and floor area above the maximum, but not to exceed one and one-half (1.5) times the maximum base density and intensity. The bonus provisions set forth are generally intended to offset the added impact that additional density and intensity may have on the environment and the public welfare. 
4.05.02 - Eligibility. 
A.  Additional density and floor area beyond the maximum base standards may be obtained by demonstrating compliance with standards set forth in Table 4.05.03 that add up to a corresponding number of points. Eligible sites include property in the R-2, MX-1, MX-2, CG, and MB zoning districts that are proposed for new development or redevelopment. This includes improvements to existing buildings. Sites shall not be nonconforming unless proposed improvements bring property into conformity. 
B.  Applicants shall demonstrate desire for additional density and/or intensity by submitting a completed Bonus Scorecard and depicting proposed improvements in the development application submitted to the City. Application requirements are set forth in Chapter 9. 
4.05.03 - Bonus Features Available by Category. 
    Available bonus features are provided in Table 4.05.03. The points attainable for each feature may differ between zoning districts. 
Table 4.05.03. Development Features Available and Corresponding Bonus Points. 
Category Points 1. Energy Efficiency R-2 MX-1 MX-2 CG/MB • Installation of tankless water heater OR 
• Installation of solar water heater 1/unit 1/unit 1/unit 1/unit • 75% or more of appliances are energy star rated 10 5 5 5 • Installation of energy efficient irrigation system 5 5 5 5 • HERS Rating of 15 or below OR 
• HERS Rating of 16-50 OR 
• HERS Rating of 51-70 50 50 50 50 25 25 25 25 10 10 10 10 • Installation of cool roof designed to achieve SRI index of 78 or greater OR 
• Installation of energy star certified roofing materials 25 25 25 25 10 10 10 10 • Provision of at least 2 designated (preferred) parking spaces for energy efficient/alternative energy vehicles beyond the requirements of this LDC 5 5 5 5 • Provision of designated parking areas with electric vehicle plug-in stations beyond the requirements of this LDC 20 20 20 20 • Provision of annual transit passes to 25% or more of building occupants OR 
• Provision of annual transit passes to 50% or more of building occupants beyond the requirements of this LDC 20 15 15 15 25 20 20 20 • Project contains useable on-site renewable energy (ex: solar panels) 30 30 30 30 2. Low Impact/Site Design Features R-2 MX-1 MX-2 CG/MB • Installation of pedestrian scale awning or canopy that covers building entrance/frontage beyond the requirements of this LDC 10 15 15 15 • Façade improvements consistent with CRA guidelines (in CRA only) 10 15 15 15 • Site is a designated infill lot 15 15 15 15 • Site is in a designated brownfield area 20 20 20 20 • Provision of at least 10% view corridor (if adjacent to water body) 15 15 15 15 • Project incorporates working waterfront (marina, boat tie-up) or watercraft rentals NA 15 15 15 • Provision of outdoor seating 
• Outdoor seating integrates water view 10 15 15 10 10 10 10 10 • Mix of uses within one building AND 
• Mix of uses within one building provides retail and/or offices on ground floor AND offices and/or residential units on upper floor(s) NA 20 20 NA NA 10 10 NA • Site provides internal interconnected pedestrian ways to building 20 25 25 25 • Project is LEED certified or Florida Green Building certified 75 75 75 75 3. Water Quality & Conservation R-2 MX-1 MX-2 CG/MB • Landscaping integrates 50% or more native vegetation OR 
• Landscaping integrates 75% or more native vegetation 10 10 10 10 15 15 15 15 • Landscaping design completely integrates Florida Xeriscaping principles 15 15 15 15 • Project utilizes on site-collection and re-use of storm water (rain barrels or engineered re-use system) 20 20 20 20 • Use of pervious parking areas 15 15 15 15 • Use of drip irrigation system 15 15 15 15 • All water fixtures are low flow (exceed current federal and state requirements) 5 5 5 5 • Site contains bio-retention areas or rain gardens 15 15 15 20 • Installation of "green" roof designed to reduce stormwater runoff by at least 25% 25 25 25 30 4. Public Improvements R-2 MX-1 MX-2 CG/MB • Provision of streetscape design that includes at least 6 ft wide sidewalk with pavers (consistent with CRA streetscape guidelines if in CRA) 25 30 30 25 • Installation of sidewalk when not required by LDC, replacement of dilapidated sidewalk, or installation of sidewalk wider than required 20 20 20 25 • Provision of outdoor public space such as a public plaza or courtyard AND 
• Public space incorporates waterfront view n/a 15 15 15 n/a 10 10 10 • Installation of waterfront public boardwalk (dedicated easement required) OR 
• Other public waterfront access provided 25 25 25 n/a 10 15 15 20 Installation of pedestrian scale street lights 
• Installation of pedestrian scale street furniture 5 10 10 10 Installation of bicycle improvements consistent with the City's bikeways improvement list beyond the requirements of this LDC 10 10 10 10 5. Affordable/Workforce Housing R-2 MX-1 MX-2 CG/MB Project provides units for sale that meet the criteria for affordable or workforce housing OR 
Project provides units for rent that meet the criteria for affordable or workforce housing 30 30 30 30 25 25 25 25  
4.05.04 - Density and Intensity Available with Bonus Points (Bonus Scorecard). 
    Table 4.05.04 contains the maximum allowable dwelling units or floor area as it corresponds to the accumulated points obtained from completed bonus features. 
Table 4.05.04. Bonus Scorecard. 
Points Accumulated R-2 MX-1 MX-2 CG MB du/ac du/ac FAR du/ac FAR FAR FAR 10-20 22.0 22.0 1.1 32.0 2.1 1.60 1.60 21-30 23.0 23.0 1.15 33.0 2.2 1.65 1.65 31-40 24.0 24.0 1.2 34.0 2.4 1.70 1.70 41-50 25.0 25.0 1.25 36.0 2.4 1.75 1.75 51-60 26.0 26.0 1.3 38.0 2.6 1.80 1.80 61-70 27.0 27.0 1.35 40.0 2.7 1.90 1.90 71-80 28.0 28.0 1.4 42.0 2.8 2.00 2.00 81-90 29.0 29.0 1.45 44.0 2.9 2.10 2.10 91-100 30.0 30.0 1.5 45.0 3.0 2.25 2.25  
4.06.00 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD) 

4.06.01 - Generally. 
A.  Purpose and intent. A planned unit development (PUD) is an overlay available to encourage flexibility in the design and development of land and allow improved design and quality in new development. The PUD is intended to provide for diversification and integration of uses and structures consistent with the underlying zoning district. The PUD is specifically intended to: 
1.  Promote more efficient and economic uses of land; 
2.  Lower development and building costs by permitting smaller networks of utilities and streets and the use of more economical building types and shared facilities; 
3.  Provide for open spaces and common areas and provide usable and suitably located recreation facilities within the development; and 
4.  Allow clustering or other innovative designs to protect sensitive environmental areas within the proposed site. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  A proposal for a PUD overlay district shall be an entirely voluntary procedure. 
2.  The minimum area of a PUD overlay district shall be two (2) acres. 
3.  The PUD overlay district shall be permissible in all zoning districts. 
4.  A PUD requires a preliminary and final site development plan prepared, reviewed, and approved according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 9. 
5.  A PUD requires a preliminary and final plat approval, if applicable, according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 9. 
6.  Preliminary and final site development plans and plats may be combined upon approval of the Development Administrator. 
C.  Uses. Permissible uses in a PUD are limited to those identified for the underlying zoning district, as set forth in Table 2.03.02. 
4.06.02 - Site Development Standards. 
A.  A proposed PUD shall include design standards necessary to meet the unique design requirements of the proposed development, in compliance with the following: 
1.  The maximum residential density shall not exceed the permissible maximum density of the underlying zoning district. 
2.  The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall not exceed the permissible FAR of the underlying zoning district. 
3.  The setback on the perimeter of the development parcel shall not be less than required by the underlying zoning district. 
4.  Building height and building height compatibility, consistent with the standards set forth in Sections 4.00.02 and 4.00.03. 
5.  Maximum lot coverage for the underlying zoning district. 
6.  Parking. 
7.  Accessory structures. 
8.  Signage. 
9.  Landscaping, tree protection, buffers, and stormwater management. 
10.  Other applicable standards in Chapter 3, Environmental and Resource Protection. 
11.  All remaining aspects of the proposed development shall comply with the standards of the underlying zoning district and the requirements of this LDC. 
B.  Upon approval and recordation of the final development plan for a PUD, the site development standards contained in the final development plan shall be binding upon all future development on the PUD site. The PUD may be amended as contained in Chapter 9, Administrative Procedures. 
4.06.03 - Compatibility Standards. 
    A PUD provides the means to depart from the site development standards required for the underlying zoning district. The purpose of this departure is to allow flexibility in design toward the end of creating better design and higher quality development. However, the variation in site development standards also has the potential for incompatibility with adjacent development. Therefore, a proposed PUD shall demonstrate that compatibility is maintained in compliance with the following standards: 
A.  Landscaped buffers shall be provided at the perimeter of the development parcel when the adjacent zoning district provides for less intense development as measured by residential density and floor area ratio. 
B.  Plazas, courtyards, recreation facilities, and outdoor gathering spaces shall be located and buffered to protect adjacent properties from noise and loss of privacy. 
C.  Outdoor lighting for security, pedestrian paths, parking lots, and other purposes shall be shielded and directed to avoid glare and spillover onto adjacent properties. 
D.  Parking lots, drive-thru lanes, and loading areas shall be located and buffered to protect adjacent properties from noise, light, and loss of privacy. 
E.  Dumpsters shall not be located at the perimeter adjacent to property zoned for residential use. 
F.  Loudspeakers, including equipment for fast-food restaurant ordering, shall be located to protect adjacent property zoned for residential use from noise. 
4.06.04 - Conditions of Approval. 
    Specific conditions may be required to address compatibility, including conditions to address the situations identified in Section 4.06.03, and any other compatibility factors that may be identified during the review process. Such conditions shall be depicted upon the approved and recorded site development plan and shall be binding upon all future development on the PUD site. 
4.07.00 - STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS 

4.07.01 - Purpose and Applicability. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  The provisions of this section apply to all divisions of land within the City. All development shall be on a designated, platted, and recorded lot that meets all standards set forth in this LDC. 
2.  Property owned by the City within the Fort Walton Beach Industrial Park shall be exempt from the provisions set forth in this section. The City shall not be construed to be a developer, person, or sub-divider. The City may divide and convey parcels of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership within the Industrial Park by metes and bounds description. 
B.  Purpose. This section is provided for the following purposes: 
1.  To establish the standards for the division of land within the City and ensure proper legal description, identification, monumentation, and recordation of real estate boundaries; 
2.  To assure the orderly layout of parcels, blocks, and lots; 
3.  To provide suitable building sites; 
4.  To provide for well-planned neighborhoods; and 
5.  To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
D.  Procedures for preparing, reviewing, approving, and recording plats are set forth in Chapter 9, Administrative Procedures. 
4.07.02 - Generally. 
A.  A proposal to subdivide a parcel into three (3) or more lots is considered a subdivision. A subdivision shall comply with the design standards set forth in Section 4.07.03. 
B.  A proposal to divide a parcel into two (2) lots shall be considered a minor lot split and shall comply with the standards set forth in Chapter 9, Administrative Procedures. A proposal to adjust the common lot lines between two (2) or more parcels or defining ownership of property by describing parcel as parts of existing platted lots shall be considered a lot line adjustment. A lot line adjustment shall comply with the standards set forth in Chapter 9, Administrative Procedures. 
4.07.03 - Design Standards for Subdivisions. 
A.  Blocks. 
1.  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
a.  The provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
b.  The need for convenient and safe access, circulation and control of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
c.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; and 
d.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
2.  Blocks shall be a minimum of five hundred (500) feet and a maximum of 1,320 feet in length. 
3.  Rights-of-way for pedestrian crosswalks may be required in order to provide direct pedestrian access to schools, shopping centers, and parks. Such crosswalks shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. 
B.  Lots. 
1.  The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall comply with the requirements for the zoning district set forth in this LDC. 
2.  Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from, and orientation to, adjacent streets on all sides. 
3.  Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to straight right-of-way lines or radial to curved right-of-way lines. 
4.  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided. Where such lots are necessary to provide separation of residential development from arterial streets or to meet specific orientation requirements, the access to such lots shall be from the street with the lower functional classification. A landscaped buffer strip, in addition to landscaping and buffering required by Section 4.08.05 shall be provided along the property line abutting the street with the higher functional classification. 
C.  Specific requirements for flag lots. 

Figure 4.07.03 (C). Illustration of a flag lot
1.  A flag lot is any lot that does not front on a public street. Frontage is provided by a private driveway. See Figure 4.07.03.C for an illustration of a flag lot. 
2.  Flag lots are permissible in the R-1 zoning district and shall be measured and meet the dimensional requirements set forth in Sections 4.00.02.C and Table 4.01.01. 
3.  Each private driveway shall serve only one (1) flag lot. 
4.  There shall be no more than two (2) abutting private driveways. 
5.  The design, dimensions, and construction requirements for driveways shall comply with the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
6.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit flag lots in a planned unit development or zero lot line development. 
D.  Access requirements. 
1.  Each lot shall have frontage on and permanent access to an existing or proposed paved public street. 
2.  A subdivision plat shall include streets as established by transportation plans in the Comprehensive Plan and plans by the Transportation Planning Organization. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the plans of the State, Okaloosa County, and the City, respectively, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, and to public convenience and safety. 
3.  Alleys shall be provided to serve multifamily development, commercial development, and industrial development. 
4.  Private streets are prohibited. 
5.  All streets shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the standards of the City set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. All costs shall be paid by the subdivider. 
6.  Subdivisions shall include sidewalks and bicycle paths or lanes in compliance with the standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
E.  Easements. All lots within a subdivision shall provide easements for stormwater drainage, water systems, sanitary sewer systems, gas lines, electric lines, cables, telephone lines, and utility poles. Standards for such utility easements are set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
F.  Site improvements. 
1.  All subdivisions shall be required to have underground utility service (electrical, cable television and telephone) unless all lots within the subdivision front existing streets that currently are serviced above ground. 
2.  Land shall be dedicated for parks if the subdivision plat proposes ten (10) lots or more. The amount of land to be dedicated shall equal at least five percent (5%) of the gross area of the land to be subdivided. The park shall be deeded to the City and open to the public for park purposes. 
3.  Land which is determined to be unsuitable for subdivision due to flooding, bad drainage, or other features likely to be harmful to the health, safety, and general welfare of future residents, shall not be subdivided, unless adequate methods of correction are formulated by the subdivider and approved by the City. 
4.  All standards for site preparation and improvement set forth in Section 4.09.00 shall be met. 
5.  All applicable standards set forth in Chapter 3, Environmental and Resource Protection, shall be met. 
4.07.04 - Specific Requirements for Zero Lot Line Development. 
    A parcel may be platted and developed as a zero lot line development, according to the standards set forth in this section. 
A.  Purpose. Zero lot line development is intended to meet the following purposes: 
1.  More efficient and affordable single-family development. 
2.  Design of dwellings that integrates and relates internal-external living areas, resulting in more pleasant and enjoyable living facilities. 
3.  Designing and using outdoor space to its maximum benefit by placing the dwelling along one (1) property line. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Zero lot line development shall be permissible in R-1 and R-2 zoning districts. 
2.  Zero lot line development shall comply with the standards of the R-1 and R-2 zoning districts, except where such standards are in conflict with the standards set forth in this section. The standards in Section 4.07.04 shall supersede the standards for the applicable zoning district. 
3.  Zero lot line development shall meet the subdivision standards set forth in Section 4.07.03, except where such standards are in conflict with the standards set forth in this section. Standards in Section 4.07.04 shall supersede the subdivision standards. 
a.  A zero lot line development in the R-1 zoning district shall have a minimum of ten (10) lots. 
b.  A zero lot line development in the R-2 zoning district shall have a minimum of three (3) lots. 
4.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the construction of a zero lot line structure in a platted subdivision in existence as of January 1, 1985. 
C.  Site development standards. 
1.  The uses permissible on a lot in a zero lot line development are limited to detached single-family dwellings on individually platted lots, including customary accessory uses according to standards for accessory uses set forth in Chapter 5. 
2.  Fencing, walls, trellises, and other similar features may be used as connecting elements between single-family dwellings on adjacent lots. Garages, carports, and utility storage structures shall not be constructed or used as connecting elements. 
3.  Lots shall be designed and buildings placed to meet the setback standards in Table 4.07.04. There is no minimum lot width or lot area requirement. The lot width and lot area shall be determined by the site design, meeting the lot coverage and building setback requirements. 
Table 4.07.04. Site Development Standards for Zero Lot Line Development. 
Development Feature R-1 R-2 Setback, interior side yard (feet) 0 0 Setback, opposite interior side yard (feet) 15 10 Setback, side street 15 15 Setback, front yard 25 20 Setback, rear yard 20 15 Setback, adjacent subdivision 10 10  
4.  Setbacks shall not include connecting elements. Patios, garden elements, and other similar elements are permissible within the side setback area. 
5.  The total lot coverage shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area. 
6.  The maximum building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
7.  Access of a total of ten percent (10%) of the linear length of the total perimeter wall area of the dwelling unit, as measured in plan form, shall be provided to exterior patio and court areas. Such access shall be totally visible and physically passable. 
8.  The wall of the dwelling located on the lot line shall have no windows, doors, air conditioning units, or other openings. However, atriums or courts shall be permitted on the zero-lot line side when the court or atrium is enclosed by three (3) walls of the dwelling unit and a solid wall of at least eight (8) feet in height is provided on the zero-lot line. Such wall shall be constructed of the same material as the exterior walls of the unit. 
D.  Maintenance and drainage easements. A perpetual four (4)-foot wall-maintenance easement shall be provided on the lot adjacent to the zero-lot line property line, which, with the exception of walls and/or fences, shall be kept clear of structures. This easement shall be shown on the plat and incorporated into each deed transferring title to the property. The wall shall be maintained in its original color and treatment, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the two (2) affected lot owners. Roof overhangs may penetrate the easement on the adjacent lot a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches, but the roof shall be so designed that water runoff from the dwelling placed on the lot line is limited to the easement area. 
4.08.00 - STANDARDS FOR LANDSCAPING, BUFFERS, AND TREE PROTECTION 

4.08.01 - Generally. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide requirements for landscaping, buffering of developments, and tree protection within Fort Walton Beach. 
B.  Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish minimum requirements for the development, installation, and maintenance of landscaped areas without inhibiting creative landscape design and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. The specific intent of the City is to reduce potential adverse visual, environmental, and aesthetic effects of development in order to: 
1.  Minimize the rate of stormwater runoff; 
2.  Maximize the capability of groundwater recharge; 
3.  Provide shade for the ground surfaces; 
4.  Buffer adjacent incompatible land uses; 
5.  Filter and reduce the glare of headlights and reflected sunlight from parked automobiles onto the public street rights-of-way and adjacent properties; 
6.  Improve the appearance of parking areas and vehicular surface areas; 
7.  Assist in energy conservation, production of oxygen, and reduction of carbon dioxide; 
8.  Filter dust and pollutants; 
9.  Reduce the negative impacts of noise; and 
10.  Provide habitats. 
C.  Specific intent for water conservation. It is further the intent of the City that creative site development concepts shall be used to promote water conservation. Water requirements may be reduced by providing for: 
1.  The preservation of existing plant communities; 
2.  The reestablishment of native plant communities; 
3.  The use of site specific plant materials; 
4.  Site development that retains stormwater runoff on site; 
5.  The use of pervious paving materials; 
6.  The use of water efficiency in landscaping; and 
7.  Other environmentally sensitive site development concepts. 
D.  Applicability. This section shall apply to all new construction; site modification of areas devoted to parking, driveways, access points, pavements, buffers, stormwater management, or open spaces, and clearing and grubbing when affecting ten (10) percent or more of the site; redevelopment; change of use; and maintenance of all property within the City except for the following situations: 
1.  Single-family and two-family dwellings; 
2.  Applications for accessory uses, accessory structures, or temporary uses; 
3.  Plant or tree nurseries or botanical gardens; 
4.  The City or its authorized agent for the purpose of removal of a tree on City-owned property or a public right-of-way that is dead or a hazard to the public; 
5.  Utility companies or their authorized agents for the purpose of removal of a tree that is a substantial hazard to overhead wires or for trimming that is necessary for establishment or maintenance of service; 
6.  The trimming or pruning of trees or the removal of underbrush; or 
7.  The removal of trees or other landscaping damaged by fire, windstorm, lightning, or other acts of nature, which pose imminent danger to life or property. 
E.  Landscaping plan required. In order to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section, a landscaping plan shall be submitted in compliance with the following standards: 
1.  The landscaping plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect; the landscape plan may be prepared by another licensed design professional when such plan is submitted as part of the site development application. 
2.  The landscaping plan shall include a maintenance plan and schedule, soils analysis, and an irrigation plan. 
3.  The requirements for plan contents and procedures for submittal, review, and approval of all applications are set forth in Chapter 9, Administrative Procedures. 
F.  Prohibited conditions. The following conditions regarding landscaping and plant materials are prohibited: 
1.  Trees, plants, shrubs, vegetation, or parts thereof, which overhang any sidewalk, street, alley or fire hydrant, and obstruct or impair the free and full use of the sidewalk, street, alley, or fire hydrant by the public. 
2.  Grass, weeds, shrubs, bushes, trees, or vegetation which constitutes a fire hazard or a menace to public health, safety, or welfare. 
4.08.02 - Requirements for Irrigation and Irrigation Systems. 
A.  All new, preserved, or retained landscaped areas shall be divided into water use zones. The irrigation system shall be included in the landscaping plan and shall be designed to correlate to the water use zones. 
1.  The high water use area shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total landscaped area. A non-potable water source shall be used. A central, automatic water system shall be installed. 
2.  The moderate water use area shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total landscaped area. A non-potable water source shall be available within twenty-five (25) feet of the landscaped area to allow watering during periods of drought or low rainfall. 
3.  The low water use area shall be comprised of drought-tolerant or Xeriscape plant materials. A non-potable water source shall be available within fifty (50) feet of the landscaped area to allow watering during periods of extreme drought. 
B.  The irrigation system shall be designed to provide only the water required to sustain the plants and vegetation. 
C.  New and replacement irrigation systems shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Moisture sensor and rain shut-off equipment shall be required on automatic irrigation systems. The equipment shall consist of an automatic mechanical or electronic sensing device or switch which will override the irrigation cycle of the sprinkler system when adequate rainfall has occurred. 
2.  Only non-potable or reclaimed water shall be used in the irrigation system. 
3.  Drip or trickle irrigation systems shall be used to deliver water directly to the root system of plants. Where drip systems are impractical due to the large area to be irrigated, micro-sprinkler systems may be approved. Only drip, trickle, or micro-sprinkler systems are permissible in new or replacement irrigation systems. 
4.08.03 - Specifications for Landscape Materials and Vegetation. 
A.  Minimum specifications for plant materials: 
1.  All plant material shall be nursery grown, number 1 grade, meet current American Association of Nurseryman Standards, and installed according to accepted planting procedures. 
2.  Shrubs shall be at least eighteen (18) inches in height at the time of installation. 
3.  Shrubs shall be planted approximately thirty-six (36) inches apart, measured on center. 
4.  Hedges shall be planted in double-staggered rows. 
5.  Trees shall be a minimum of four (4) inches dbh (diameter at breast height) at the time of installation. 
6.  Trees shall be planted to provide a minimum growing area consistent with best horticultural practices. 
7.  Trees shall be properly guyed, braced, and/or staked at the time of planting to ensure established and erect growth. Nail staking or other methods that cause cosmetic or biological damage to the tree are prohibited. Trees shall be re-staked within twenty-four (24) hours in the event of failure of the guying or staking system. Stakes shall be removed when the tree is established, and not later than twelve (12) months after installation. 
8.  Canopy trees shall not be installed under any overhead utility line, over any buried utilities, or within a utility easement. 
9.  All landscaped areas and buffers shall be stabilized with grass (sod or seeded) or ground cover. Ground cover used in lieu of grass shall be planted so as to present a finished appearance and substantially complete coverage. 
10.  Mulch or other acceptable ground cover material may be used in lieu of grass or ground cover. Mulch shall be provided in planting areas for shrubs and ornamental plants and around individual trees. Mulch shall be organic and provided to a depth of three (3) inches. The use of impervious materials as a weed barrier under mulch is prohibited. Mulch shall be maintained free of debris and replaced as needed to comply with best horticultural management practices. 
11.  Landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular or pedestrian encroachment through the use of wheel stops, curbs, raised planting areas, or other approved protection devices. Vehicles may overhang not more than one (1) foot into landscape areas. 
12.  Trees, shrubs, grasses, and ground cover for landscaped and buffer areas shall be selected from lists of appropriate plants for north Florida identified by the Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. 
13.  Landscaping materials qualify as native plants and drought tolerant plants when selected from the Florida-Friendly Landscaping Pattern Book: Sample plant lists and designs for four Florida regions - USDA Hardiness Zones 8A and 8B, North Florida. 
B.  Prohibited plant materials include all vegetation identified on the Noxious Weed List as adopted in the Florida Statutes. 
C.  Synthetic and artificial plants are prohibited outdoors. 
D.  Site preparation shall be limited to the minimum area necessary for plantings and shall occur in stages based on the proposed planting schedule. Site preparation shall include erosion control measures consistent with the requirements set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
4.08.04 - Requirements for Trees and Tree Protection. 
A.  Preservation of protected trees. 
1.  The trees listed in Table 4.08.04.A are protected in the sizes indicated. 
Table 4.08.04.A. Protected Trees. 
Small, 
4 inches dbh + Medium, 
6 inches dbh + Large (canopy or shade) 
8 inches dbh + • Dogwood (Cornus florida) • Eastern Red Cedar (Juniperus virginiana) • Live Oak (Quercus virginiana) • Redbud (Cercis canadensis) • Southern Red Cedar (Juniperus silicola) • Sweet Gum (Liquidambar styraciflus) • Red Maple (Acer rubrum) • Southern Magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora) • Sycamore (Platanus occidentalis) • Willow Oak (Quercus phellos) • Pecan (Carga illinoensis) • Water Oak (Quercus nigra) • Red Oak (Quercus falcuta) • White Oak (Quercus alba) • Shumard Oak (Quercus shumardii)  
2.  Removal of any protected tree shall require a tree removal and replacement permit (local development permit). Procedures for local development permits are set forth in Chapter 9. 
3.  Protected trees removed for any purpose shall be replaced on an inch-for-inch basis, measured as diameter at breast height (dbh). 
4.  The applicant may elect to replace the trees at a pre-approved off-site location or pay into the Tree Mitigation Fund if it is demonstrated to the Development Administrator that the site cannot accommodate the total number of replacement trees required by this section as a result of insufficient planting area. The replacement value and payment into the Tree Mitigation Fund will be established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
5.  Trees for replacement shall be native and selected from a list of trees for reforestation from the Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida. 
6.  The design of any required perimeter or interior landscaping or buffers shall include preservation of protected trees on the development site to the maximum extent possible. 
B.  Reduction of required parking spaces for tree protection. The required number of parking spaces may be reduced when such reduction results in the preservation of a protected tree at least eight (8) inches dbh. Table 4.08.04.C provides the allowable reduction in required spaces. When the calculation results in a fraction of a parking space, the number of spaces shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
Table 4.08.04.B. Parking Reduction for Tree Protection. 
Number of Required Parking Spaces Maximum Spaces to be Reduced 1-9 0 10-19 1 20 or more 10% of the total requirement, not to exceed 10 spaces  
C.  During development activity, preserved trees shall be protected from activities which may injure or kill them. Tree protection techniques found in the Urban Forestry Manual, Southern Group of State Foresters and USDA Forest Service, Southern Region, or equivalent techniques, shall be used. 
D.  Trees shall be maintained or removed as follows: Dead, dying, damaged, or diseased trees are prohibited. The Development Administrator may make a determination that a tree is in danger of falling upon an adjacent lot or street due to death, disease, or damage, including damage caused by weather conditions, which shall be considered prima facie evidence of a violation. 
4.08.05 - Landscape and Buffer Requirements. 
A.  All development sites not otherwise exempt as set forth in Section 4.08.01.D shall provide a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the site as landscaped area in compliance with the standards in this section. 
B.  The number of trees required shall be calculated as one (1) tree for each twenty-five (25) linear feet of the perimeter dimension of the site, except as follows: 
1.  On lands zoned CTP, the number of trees required shall be calculated as one (1) tree for each sixty-five (65) linear feet of the perimeter dimension of the site. 
2.  Existing trees located on the proposed development site within the interior or perimeter landscaped use areas shall be eligible for credit against the total number of trees required on the site given the following: 
a.  The trees shall be native and be a minimum of eight (8) inches dbh, or if included in Table 4.08.04.A, shall meet the dbh standards of the table. 
b.  Trees that are dead, diseased, dying, or prohibited are not eligible for credit. 
c.  One-half (1/2) of the area within the drip line of preserved trees, which are eligible for credit pursuant to this section, shall be maintained in either vegetative landscape material or pervious surface cover. 
C.  Both canopy (shade) and under-story trees shall be provided. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the trees shall be canopy trees. 
D.  Where nonresidential development abuts on the side or rear property line land zoned for residential purposes, the following standards apply: 
1.  A landscaped buffer shall be provided on land zoned CTP adjacent to land zoned for residential purposes. The buffer shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and shall include under-story trees, a hedge, and a fence or wall. The fence or wall shall be six (6) feet in height and shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 5.01.08. The buffer strip and plantings shall be counted toward meeting the landscaping requirement for the site. 
2.  A landscaped buffer shall be provided on land zoned CG, MB, MX-1, or MX-2 adjacent to land zoned for residential purposes. The buffer shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. 
3.  Access ways, sidewalks, and pedestrian paths may cross buffer areas. 
E.  Where industrial uses are located within the MB zoning district, a landscaped buffer shall be provided in compliance with the following standards: 
1.  The buffer shall be provided on the perimeter of the property on which industrial uses are located. 
2.  The buffer shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and shall include under-story trees and a hedge, fence, or wall. The fence of wall shall be six (6) feet in height and shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 5.01.08. The buffer strip and plantings shall be counted toward meeting the landscaping requirement for the site. 
E.  Utility and service equipment shall be buffered by a continuous hedge. An access across the buffer, not to exceed five (5) feet in width, may be provided. 
F.  Planters may be used in landscaped areas provided that such plants are integrated into the design of the site, provide adequate depth and area consistent with best horticultural practices, and are maintained free of debris and litter. 
G.  Where property abuts a water body, watercourse, wetland, or shoreline, the natural shoreline vegetation shall be retained. Where no shoreline vegetation exists, a vegetated buffer shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 2, 4-26-16) 
4.08.06 - Landscaping Requirements for Vehicle Use Areas. 
A.  All new or redeveloped off-street parking lots with ten (10) or more required parking spaces, including access drives, service drives, and loading areas, shall be landscaped as set forth in this section. 
B.  Perimeter landscaping. 
1.  A landscaped area not less than five (5) feet in width shall be located around the perimeter of the parking lot. 
2.  Where the parking lot abuts a side or rear property line, and a buffer is required, the buffer shall satisfy the requirements for perimeter landscaping of the parking lot. 
3.  A vehicular or pedestrian access way may be provided through the required perimeter landscaping. 
4.  Perimeter landscaping of parking lots shall include canopy trees consistent with best horticultural practices. 
C.  Interior landscaping. 
1.  Parking lots with more than twenty-five (25) parking spaces shall be required to provide interior landscaping. 
a.  On lands zoned CTP, interior landscape planting areas shall not be required where parking spaces abut warehouse building space/doors. 
2.  Interior planting areas shall be provided as tree islands, terminal islands, or medians. 
3.  Canopy trees should be included in the interior planting areas consistent with best horticultural practices. 
4.  There shall be not more than ten (10) contiguous parking spaces (twenty [20] in a double parking row) between interior planting areas. 
5.  Interior planting areas shall be located and designed to accommodate stormwater runoff. 
6.  Where existing trees are preserved within the vehicular use area, tree wells, tree islands, or other protection shall be provided to protect the trunk and root system from damage. A drainage system shall be provided within the area defined by the drip line of the tree(s). 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 2, 4-7-16) 
4.08.07 - Requirements for Street Trees. 
A.  Street trees are trees located on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, and rights-of-way within the City. 
B.  The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove street trees as well as plants and shrubs within the public right-of-way. 
4.08.08 - Maintenance Requirements. 
A.  All landscaped areas shall be maintained to ensure that plant materials are healthy and thriving, and present an orderly appearance, clear of weeds, refuse, and debris. Structural elements relating to nonliving landscape material shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Any diseased or dead plant materials shall be replaced as soon as reasonably possible based on the growing season, but not later than six (6) months following identification of the need for replacement. Upon inspection, the City may provide notice regarding corrective action to replace plant materials or other elements of the landscaped area. (See Chapter 9 regarding code enforcement procedures.) 
B.  A watering plan shall be provided and implemented to ensure that plants are established in a healthy growing condition. Standards for irrigation are set forth in Section 4.08.02. 
C.  Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be performed to maintain the health of the plant materials, to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to assure that the landscaped and buffer areas serve the intended purpose. 
D.  No required landscaped area shall be used for stormwater retention, sidewalks, recreation facilities, parking, storage, dumpsters, or other structures, except as specifically permissible according to the standards set forth in this LDC. 
4.09.00 - STANDARDS FOR SITE PREPARATION AND IMPROVEMENTS 
    Site preparation and site improvements shall comply with the requirements set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 

4.09.01 - Site Lighting. 
    Site lighting is not required. However, where site lighting is proposed, a lighting plan shall be provided to demonstrate compliance with the following standards: 
A.  Lighting shall be designed to shine downward and not skyward. 
B.  Lighting shall be shielded to avoid glare and direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
C.  Only full-cut off lighting fixtures shall be permitted. 
CHAPTER 4 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
LDC Effective 
1 May 2012 LDC Effective 
9/2008-4/2012 State Law References/Other Historical Notes Authority Chpt. 166.021 F.S., Chpt. 163.3161 F.S., Chpt 163.3202 F.S., City Charter § 2, Ord. 1861 27 Mar 2012 4.00.00 4.00.01 4.00.02 4.00.03 4.00.04 4.01.00 4.01.01 4.01.02 4.02.00 4.02.01 4.02.02 4.02.03 4.02.04 4.03.00 4.03.01 4.03.02 4.04.00 4.04.01 4.05.00 4.05.01 4.05.02 4.05.03 4.05.04 4.06.00 4.06.01 4.06.02 4.06.03 4.06.04 4.07.00 4.07.01 4.07.02 4.07.03 4.07.04 Ord. 1872, 23 Oct 2012, 4.08.00 4.08.01 4.08.02 4.08.03 4.08.04 Ord. 1888 25 Feb 2014, 4.08.05 4.08.06 4.08.07 4.08.08 4.09.00 4.09.01  
CHAPTER 5 - ACCESSORY, TEMPORARY, AND SPECIAL USE SITUATIONS 
5.00.00 - GENERALLY 

5.00.01 - Purpose and Intent. 
A.  It is the purpose of this section to regulate the installation, configuration, and use of accessory structures, and the conduct of accessory uses, in order to ensure that such structures and uses are compatible with surrounding areas. 
B.  Accessory structures and uses are those uses, activities, and structures that are customarily associated with the principal uses permissible in a zoning district. Accessory uses and structures shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to permissible principal uses. 
C.  Permissible accessory uses and structures are identified in Chapter 2, Table 2.03.03. 
D.  No accessory use or structure shall be established prior to the establishment of a principal use on the site where an accessory use or structure is proposed. 
5.01.00 - ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES 

5.01.01 - Home Occupations. 
A.  Home occupations may be permitted as an accessory use in a lawfully established dwelling unit located in the R-1E, R-1, and R-2 zoning districts. The standards for home occupations are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted uses and with the residential character of the neighborhood. 
B.  The following and similar uses shall be considered home occupations: 
1.  An office, such as for professionals and general businesses. 
2.  Instruction or teaching, such as, but not limited to, academic tutoring, performing arts, or fine arts, provided that no more than two (2) students are instructed at any one (1) time. 
3.  Administrative or clerical support services, such as transcription, court reporting, stenography, notary public, or word processing, data entry, or addressing services. 
4.  Authors, composers, or creators of intellectual property. 
5.  Telephone answering services. 
6.  Beauty salons, barber shops, nail technicians, or similar personal service, limited to one (1) chair or station. 
7.  Similar uses: An interpretation that a use is similar shall be based on the tasks and activities normally associated with the proposed use and the similarity of those tasks and activities with the tasks and activities of a listed use. 
C.  The following uses are specifically prohibited as home occupations: 
1.  Appliance and motor repairs (small or large). 
2.  Automotive, vehicle, or watercraft repairs. 
3.  Florist. 
4.  Veterinary clinic. 
5.  Office for a doctor, dentist, or other medical practitioner. 
6.  Repair of radios, televisions, computers, CD or DVD players, or other similar equipment. 
7.  Any occupation involving hazardous materials. 
8.  Restaurants. 
9.  Any other occupation which does not meet the standards in Section 5.01.01. 
D.  All home occupations shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Employees of the home occupation shall be limited to the residents of the dwelling in which the occupation is located. 
2.  A home occupation shall be required to have a City Business Tax Receipt (BTR). There shall be one (1) BTR for each business conducted in the dwelling. 
3.  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes, and shall not change the residential character of the structure. 
4.  Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the habitable floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation. 
5.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation including outside storage or signs pertaining to the home occupation. However, one (1) unlighted nameplate, not more than one (1) square foot in area, may be attached to the front wall of the dwelling unit identifying the name of the business which constitutes the home occupation. 
6.  No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building, except for the permissible parking of vehicles in a garage or carport. 
7.  No open storage of equipment shall be permitted except that which is of a quantity and configuration normally used for purely domestic purposes. 
8.  The home occupation shall not generate noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference to adjacent properties. 
9.  Up to two (2) passenger vehicles, which may be commercially marked, are permissible in association with the home occupation. All permissible vehicles shall be parked within a lawful garage, lawful carport, or on the driveway. However, vehicles with a primary purpose of commercial use are prohibited; such vehicles include well-drilling trucks, tow-trucks, cement mixers, semi-trailers, tractors, refrigerated trucks or vans, graders, or other earth moving equipment. Lawn equipment trailers and similar vehicles are permissible provided that they are screened from public view and limited to one (1) per dwelling. Taxi cabs may be permissible, provided that all such vehicles can be parked within a garage, or carport, or on the driveway. 
10.  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. The basis for evaluating traffic generated shall be data available from the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
11.  Any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met by the parking areas serving the residential use, such as the driveway, garage, or carport. No vehicle shall block access to the driveway or pedestrian movement on a sidewalk. 
5.01.02 - Accessory Structures and Uses in All Zoning Districts. 
A.  Accessory uses and structures may be located on a parcel, provided that the following requirements are met: 
1.  There shall be a permitted principal structure or use on the development site, located in full compliance with all standards and requirements of this LDC. 
2.  Accessory structures shall be included in all calculations of impervious surface and stormwater runoff. 
3.  Accessory structures shall be on the same development site, which may consist of combined lots, and shall be subordinate to the principal use or structure. 
4.  Permanent accessory structures shall not be located within or on any required easement. 
5.  Accessory structures, other than fences and flagpoles located in compliance with the requirements of Sections 5.01.08 and 5.03.07, shall not be located within any required buffer or landscaping area, parking lot, or protected area. The applicant shall demonstrate that accessory structures proposed in a stormwater management area shall have no negative impact on the intended function of the area. 
B.  Accessory uses and structures that contain recreation facilities, gyms and health club facilities, parks, playgrounds, play courts, and play fields shall not be open to the general public. Such accessory uses and structures are intended for the use of the residents or employees of the principal use. 
1.  There shall be no signage advertising the uses and structures. 
2.  Parking to support the accessory use or structure shall be provided as set forth in Section 6.04.02. 
3.  Accessory structures shall be designed for consistency and compatibility with the principal building(s) on the site. 
C.  Site development standards for accessory buildings. 
1.  An accessory building in the R-1E, R-1, R-2, YC, MX-1, and MX-2 zoning districts shall not exceed one (1) story, except where an accessory dwelling unit is approved in the second story above a garage. 
2.  An accessory building built on site in the R-1E, R-1, R-2, YC, MX-1, and MX-2 zoning districts shall have a minimum roof pitch of 3 :12 or shall match the roof pitch of the principal building. 
3.  The required side and rear yard setbacks for accessory buildings in the R-1E, R-1, R-2, YC, MX-1, and MX-2 zoning districts are shown below. 
a.  Accessory buildings up to 200 s.f. in floor area shall be setback three (3) feet from side and rear property lines. 
b.  Accessory buildings in excess of 200 s.f. in floor area shall be setback seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet from side and rear property lines. 
c.  Accessory buildings on a corner lot shall have a setback of fifteen (15) feet from the property line abutting a street. 
4.  An accessory building in the YC zoning district shall be setback from the rear property line ten (10) feet when the cumulative total square feet of floor area in all buildings is less than five (5) percent of the land area required for the wetland buffer. When the cumulative total square feet of floor area in all buildings exceeds five (5) percent, the rear setback shall be fifty (50) feet. 
5.  Accessory buildings in the CF and CG zoning districts shall have a minimum rear yard setback of seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet. 
D.  Standards for specific accessory structures are set forth in Section 5.01.03 through 5.01.17. 
(Ord. No. 1990 , § 2, 4-24-18) 
5.01.03 - Accessory Dwellings in Residential Zoning Districts. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this section is to help ensure a wide variety of housing choices to City residents and allow opportunities for extended family living. 
2.  This section provides for accessory dwellings, also called accessory apartments, guesthouses, helper quarters, mother-in-law suites, and granny flats. 
3.  The intent of this section is to ensure that the establishment of an accessory dwelling in a residential zoning district maintains compatibility of the area by minimizing or avoiding potential negative impacts from a secondary dwelling unit. 
B.  Applicability. Accessory dwelling units are permissible in R-1E and R-1 when established in compliance with the standards set forth in this section. 
C.  No more than one (1) accessory dwelling shall be established on a single-family lot. 
D.  Standards for an accessory dwelling located within the principal dwelling 
1.  An accessory dwelling shall be an integral part of the principal dwelling structure. It shall not be construed to be located within a principal dwelling when it is connected to the principal dwelling only by a breezeway or roofed passageway. 
2.  An accessory dwelling shall not be permissible within a nonconforming dwelling. 
3.  The establishment of an accessory dwelling shall only be permissible when the principal dwelling can continue to meet all site development standards, including setbacks, height limits, stormwater management, landscaping and tree protection, and impervious surface coverage after establishment of the accessory dwelling unit. An accessory dwelling shall not be permissible where a variance or waiver is necessary in order to allow the accessory dwelling. 
4.  One (1) additional parking space shall be provided, either within an existing garage, or carport, or on the driveway. Where on-street parking is established for the neighborhood, on-street parking may be counted to meet this requirement. No parking shall be located within or on a front or side yard setback. 
5.  An accessory dwelling shall be limited to a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total livable floor area of the principal dwelling. 
6.  An accessory dwelling shall not result in changes to the exterior appearance of the principal dwelling that are inconsistent and incompatible with the style and appearance of the neighborhood. 
7.  The existence of an accessory dwelling shall not be construed to allow additional accessory structures on a single-family parcel beyond the number and type of accessory structures permissible with the principal dwelling. 
8.  There shall be no additional signage to identify the accessory dwelling, other than the signage permissible for the principal dwelling. Standards for signs in a residential zoning district are set forth in Section 5.03.00. 
9.  There shall be no additional mailbox, exterior utility equipment, or other evidence of an accessory dwelling unit. An accessory dwelling shall not have separate metered utility service, except as otherwise provided in the Florida Building Code. 
E.  Standards for an accessory dwelling within a detached garage structure. 
1.  An accessory dwelling shall be an integral part of the detached garage structure. The accessory dwelling may be located on the ground floor or a second floor above the garage, provided that the height limit for the zoning district is met. 
2.  An accessory dwelling shall not be permissible within a nonconforming structure. 
3.  The garage together with the accessory dwelling shall comply with all site development standards pertaining to the district, except that setback standards for a detached garage are applicable as set forth in Section 5.01.07. 
4.  An accessory dwelling located within a detached garage shall not exceed 600 square feet or twenty-five (25) percent of the total living area of the principal dwelling on the site, whichever is less. 
5.  One (1) additional parking space shall be provided, either within an existing garage, or carport, or on the driveway. Where on-street parking is established for the neighborhood, on-street parking may be counted to meet this requirement. No parking shall be located within or on a front or side yard setback. 
6.  The existence of an accessory dwelling shall not be construed to allow additional accessory structures on a single-family parcel beyond the number and type of accessory structures permissible with the principal dwelling. 
7.  There shall be no additional signage to identify the accessory dwelling, other than the signage permissible for the principal dwelling. Standards for signs in a residential zoning district are set forth in Section 5.03.00. 
8.  There shall be no additional mailbox, exterior utility equipment, or other evidence of an accessory dwelling unit. 
9.  The exterior appearance of the detached garage together with the accessory dwelling shall be consistent and compatible with the principal dwelling, considering architectural style, color, building materials, and roof design and materials. 
5.01.04 - Caretaker/Security Dwellings (Accessory Dwellings) in Specified Nonresidential Zoning Districts. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for a dwelling unit as an accessory to commercial and industrial uses where such dwelling provides for security and caretaking of the principal use. 
B.  Applicability. One (1) caretaker dwelling shall be permissible as an accessory structure in the CG, CTP, and MB zoning districts. 
C.  Standards. 
1.  There shall be no more than one (1) caretaker dwelling unit per lot or business establishment, whichever is more restrictive. 
2.  The caretaker dwelling shall be provided for the manager, owner, or caretaker of the principal use. 
3.  The caretaker dwelling shall be located only within a side or rear yard. 
4.  The caretaker dwelling shall not exceed 750 square feet. 
5.  The caretaker dwelling shall be included in calculations of maximum impervious surface coverage for the site. 
6.  The caretaker dwelling shall not be located in any required buffer, landscaped area, easement, or stormwater management area. 
7.  The caretaker dwelling shall comply with the setback and height standards applicable to the principal building. 
8.  Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided, which may be shared with the parking for the principal use. 
9.  No residential accessory structures shall be permitted, including recreational facilities and equipment, swimming pools, storage sheds, detached garages or carports, or other similar residential accessory structures. 
10.  No home occupation shall be conducted in the caretaker dwelling. 
5.01.05 - Employee Cafeteria/Dining Room. 
    A principal use located in the CTP or MB zoning districts may provide an employee cafeteria or dining room, subject to the following standards: 
A.  The facility shall not be open to the general public. 
B.  There shall be no signs advertising the presence of the facility. 
C.  The facility shall be an integral part of the permitted principal building. 
D.  The cafeteria or dining room shall occupy not more than ten (10) percent of the total gross floor area of the principal building or buildings on the site. 
5.01.06 - Dumpsters. 
A.  Dumpsters shall be located for easy access for pick-up, and shall be located a minimum of thirty (30) feet from a property line abutting property zoned for residential uses. 
B.  Dumpsters shall be located to the rear or side of the principal building. A location in the front of the principal building shall be permissible only where side and rear yard locations prevent adequate access for pick-up. 
C.  Dumpsters shall be located to avoid or minimize visibility of the dumpster from any public area or right-of-way. 
D.  Dumpsters shall be screened on three (3) sides, with a gate on the fourth side for access. 
1.  Screening shall be a solid masonry wall, wood fence, or landscaping. 
2.  Where a fence or wall is installed, it shall be a minimum of six (6) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height. The fence or wall shall be designed as an integral part of the site, considering color and materials of the principal building. No signs shall be posted on the fence or wall. 
E.  Dumpsters shall be located on a paved surface of sufficient size to accommodate the dumpster. 
F.  Dumpsters for food service establishments shall provide a drain and grease trap. 
G.  Dumpsters shall not be located within any required buffer area, required landscaped area, required parking lot landscaping, or stormwater management area. 
H.  A sign may be placed on a dumpster to identify the owner or to provide notice of "no parking," "private dumpster," "no dumping," or similar messages. Such a sign shall not exceed one (1) s.f. in area. All other signage, including advertising, is prohibited. 
I.  The design of the dumpster and dumpster pad shall comply with the standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
5.01.07 - Storage Buildings, Storage Sheds, Greenhouses, and Detached Garages or Carports. 
A.  Storage buildings, storage sheds, and detached garages in the CG, and MB zoning districts that exceed 600 s.f. of floor area, must provide brick veneer, stone, stucco, or other similar decorative materials to the façade on all sides of the building that are visible from the public right-of-way. 
B.  Detached garages and carports shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. 
C.  A detached garage may be located within the front yard in the R-1E zoning, provided that the detached garage or carport shall comply with the setback standards for the R-1E zoning district set forth in Section 4.01.01. 
D.  Storage buildings, storage sheds, greenhouses, detached garages, and carports shall not be located within any required buffer area, required landscaped area, required parking lot landscaping, stormwater management area, driveway, or easement. 
E.  Vehicles shall not be used as storage buildings, utility buildings or other such uses. Vehicles includes: travel trailers, motor homes, and similar recreational vehicles; manufactured housing and mobile homes; trucks; cargo trailers; or other similar vehicles. 
5.01.08 - Fences, Hedges, and Walls. 
A.  Location of fences, perimeter hedges, and walls. 
1.  Fences, perimeter hedges, and walls may be located on, at, or inside the property line. 
a.  All fence material must be located on, at or inside the property line and shall not be located outside of the property line. 
2.  A fence located on the property line may be shared by adjacent properties. 
3.  Owners of fences on adjacent properties that are not shared shall make provisions for maintenance. 
4.  Setback requirements applicable to principal buildings shall not prohibit or restrict the installation of a retaining wall. 
5.  Fences, perimeter hedges, and walls shall not be located within the required clear visibility area designed in Section 6.03.00. 
6.  Fences, perimeter hedges, and walls shall not obstruct, hinder, or impede the safe movement of pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular traffic. 
B.  Materials and appearance requirements. 
1.  Fences and walls shall be constructed of wood, masonry, stone, wrought iron, chain link, vinyl, or composite materials. 
2.  The following fence types are prohibited: wire and welded wire. 
3.  All fences shall be installed with the finished side facing outward, except for the following: 
a.  Where a fence cannot be constructed on the property line due to an existing fence on the adjacent property line, the finished side may face inward. 
b.  When an applicant is not granted permission to access the adjacent property to install the fence, the finished side may face inward. 
4.  Fences located at the front yard setback or in the area between the front yard setback and the front property line shall not be solid and shall be a minimum of fifty (50) percent open. 
5.  A fence installed for security purposes for industrial uses may include barbed wire, provided that the barbed wire is eight (8) feet above ground. 
C.  Electrical fencing may be installed for security purposes and shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Electrical fencing may be installed on the top of a fence in the CG, CTP, or MB zoning districts, provided that the electrical fencing is a minimum of six (6) feet above the ground. 
2.  Electrical fencing may be installed in residential areas provided that such fencing shall be limited to rear yards and shall be contained within a fence structure. 
3.  All electrical fencing shall be accompanied by signs to provide a warning of the type of fence and the voltage of the fence. Warning signs in shall be placed at each corner of the enclosed area; additional signs shall be placed fifteen (15) feet apart along the entire fence. Warning signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area each. 
D.  Mandatory fencing. Where the YC zoning district abuts property zoned to allow residential use, a fence or hedge shall be installed on or at the abutting property line. The fence or hedge shall be opaque and shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height. 
E.  Height standards. 
1.  Fence and wall height shall be measured from the natural grade at the base of the fence to the topmost part of the fence. 
2.  The maximum height for a fence on a lot line on property zoned R-1E, R-1, or R-2 and adjacent to a property zoned CG, MB, or CTP shall be eight (8) feet. 
3.  The maximum height for a fence on a property with the existing use of medical facility for recovery or rehabilitation services shall be eight (8) feet in the side or rear yard. 
4.  Fence may contain decorative columns spaced no less than six (6) feet apart that shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
5.  Height standards are provided in Table 5.01.08. 
Table 5.01.08. Standards for Fence Heights. 
Zoning District Maximum Height in a Side or Rear Yard (feet) Maximum Height in a Front Yard 1 (feet) R-1E 6 4-6 R-1 6 4 R-2 6 4 YC 6 4-6 CF 6 6 CG 8 6 MX-1 6 6 MX-2 6 6 CTP 8 8 MB 8 6 REC 6 6 *The maximum height for a fence on a property with the existing use of medical facility for recovery or rehabilitation services shall be eight (8) feet.  
1 The front yard is the area between the principal structure and the front property line. 
(Ord. No. 1974 , § 2, 6-27-17) 
5.01.09 - Building Attachments (awnings, porches, carports, etc). 
A.  Awnings. All awnings placed on or attached to buildings in the R-1E, R-1, R-2, CG, MX-1, MX-2, CTP, and MB zoning districts shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The front edge of the awning in the R-1E, R-1, R-2, CG, MX-1, MX-2, and MB zoning districts may encroach into the required setback, provided that the front edge of the awning shall be a minimum of four (4) feet from the property line. 
2.  An awning located on a building in the CTP zoning district shall not encroach into a required setback. 
3.  All supporting poles or structures shall be located outside the public right-of-way. 
4.  The lowest part of the awning, including supporting poles, structures, or other framework, shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet above the ground or paved surface under the awning. 

Figure 5.01.09 (A). Location of Awnings
B.  Porches. Porches may be included in the initial construction or added to a principal building in any zoning district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  An existing porch in R-1E, R-1, and R-2 zoning districts may encroach into a required front or rear yard setback up to ten (10) feet. A roof overhang of up to eighteen (18) inches is permissible. An encroachment into a required side yard setback is prohibited. 
2.  An existing porch that encroaches into a required yard setback may be enclosed with transparent insect screening so long as the original design features, such as railings, columns, and other building details are maintained. 

Figure 5.01.09 (B). Porch encroachment into a required setback
3.  An existing porch that does not encroach into a required yard setback may be enclosed with walls, windows, and/or doors. The building materials, roof style and materials, architectural style, and color of the porch enclosure shall be consistent with the principal building, such that the porch forms an integral part of the principal building. 
4.  A porch may be added to an existing principal building, provided it complies with the following standards: 
a.  A proposed porch shall be compatible with the principal building in scale and mass. 
b.  The porch shall not be enclosed except with screen. 
c.  The porch may encroach into a required front or rear yard setback in R-1E, R-1, and R-2 zoning districts up to ten (10) feet, provided that such encroachment is not more than ten (10) feet, measured to the outermost edge of the porch. A roof overhang of up to eighteen (18) inches or the depth of the roof overhang on the existing principal structure, whichever is less, is permissible 
d.  A roof overhang of up to eighteen (18) inches or the depth of the roof overhang on the existing principal structure, whichever is less, is permissible. 
e.  A porch in all remaining zoning districts shall comply with the required front and rear yard setbacks. 
f.  A porch shall not encroach into any required side yard setback. 
g.  The building materials, roof style and materials, architectural style, and color of the porch shall be consistent with the principal building, such that the porch forms an integral part of the principal building. 
C.  Carports. Attached carports may be included in the initial construction or added to a principal building in any zoning district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  A carport shall be attached to the principal building on at least one (1) side. 
2.  The support columns shall be consistent with the materials, style, and color of building materials for the principal building. Notwithstanding this provision, decorative wrought iron columns may be used. 

Figure 5.01.09 (C-1). Carport height requirements
3.  The lowest structural member of the carport shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet and a maximum of ten (10) above the ground. 
4.  The area under the carport shall not exceed 600 s.f. 
5.  The area under the carport shall be paved or a stabilized all-weather surface. 
6.  A carport located in a side or rear yard shall be setback at least three (3) feet, measured to the outermost edge of the carport, including the eave. 

Figure 5.01.09 (C-2). Carport encroachment into a required setback
7.  A carport may be located within a required front yard setback in a R-1E, R-1, or R-2 zoning district provided that such encroachment is not more than ten (10) feet, measured to the outermost edge of the carport. A roof overhang of up to eighteen (18) inches or the depth of the roof overhang on the existing principal structure, whichever is less, is permissible. 
5.01.10 - Swimming Pools. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the location of swimming pools, spas, and associated decks and enclosures as accessory uses and structures to principal residential dwelling units and lodging establishments. Swimming pools that are principal, freestanding uses are permissible, subject to the site development standards of the zoning district and the Florida Building Code. 
B.  Standards. 
1.  A deck or patio shall be limited to a wooden deck or patio constructed of pavement or concrete pavers and without a roof or other covering. 
2.  A swimming pool, with or without spa, deck, patio, or screen enclosure, is permissible as an accessory structure to a principal dwelling unit in a zoning district allowing residential uses. 
3.  A swimming pool, with or without spa, deck, patio, or screen enclosure, is permissible as an accessory structure to a principal building providing transient lodging facilities, such as a hotel, motel, or bed and breakfast establishment. 
4.  A swimming pool or spa shall meet setback standards set forth in Table 5.01.10. Setbacks for pools shall be measured to the edge of water. 
5.  Swimming pools or spas on a lot developed according to the zero-lot line requirements shall have a minimum three (3) foot setback on the side where the residence is constructed without setback. 
6.  A screened enclosure without a solid roof, pool deck, or patio is permissible as an accessory when installed in conjunction with the pool or spa. A screened enclosure, pool deck, or patio shall meet setback standards set forth in Table 5.01.10. 
7.  Screened enclosures or patios in a zero-lot line development are permitted without a setback on the side where the residence is constructed without setback. 
8.  A screened enclosure with a solid roof shall meet the minimum setback requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, as set forth in Chapter 4. 
9.  Pool equipment shall be screened with a wall, fence, or landscaping. 
Table 5.01.10. Setback Standards for Swimming Pools, Spas, Screened Enclosures, and Patios. 
Minimum Front Yard Setback (feet) Minimum Rear Yard Setback (feet) Minimum Interior Yard Setback (feet) Minimum Side Yard Setback, Corner Lot (feet) Pools and Spas Single-family, duplex, and triplex structures 28 8 8 18 Multifamily structures and lodging establishments Shall meet the setbacks for accessory structures plus three (3) feet for the pool perimeter. Screened enclosure, pool deck, or patio Single-family, duplex, and triplex structures 25 5 5 3 Multifamily structures and lodging establishments Shall meet the setbacks for accessory structures.  
5.01.11 - Specific Requirements for Accessory Structures in the R-1E Zoning District. 
    The following accessory structures may be located within the rear yard of lots zoned R-1E, provided that such structures are located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the mean high water line or the seawall: pool and pool deck; gazebo; cabana with shower and/or rest room facilities; outdoor kitchen, which may include a grill, wet bar, and associated storage; deck; paved or wooden terrace; and a walkway connecting to a dock, provided that the walkway is limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in width. 
5.01.12 - Specific Requirements for Accessory Structures in the YC Zoning District. 
A.  Parking and storage for boats and boat trailers may be located within the front yard, provided that the front yard is a minimum of 150 feet. 
B.  Tennis courts may be located within the front yard, provided that the front yard is a minimum of fifty (50) feet. 
5.01.13 - Outdoor Storage Areas. 
A.  Outdoor (or outside) storage includes the storage of equipment, machinery, or materials outside of the principal building on a site. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the outdoor storage of non-commercial lawn equipment in residential areas. 
C.  Outdoor storage shall be located within a rear yard or side yard. 
D.  Except in the CTP zoning district, outdoor storage shall be fully concealed from public view and shall be enclosed with a solid fence, solid wall, or landscaping. 
E.  Outdoor storage of parts, materials, equipment, machinery, or vehicles shall be maintained in a neat, orderly, dust free, and safe manner. 
F.  Stored materials and parts shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
G.  Outdoor storage shall not be located within any required buffer or other landscaped area, stormwater management area, easement, required parking spaces, driveway or parking aisle, or loading spaces. 
5.01.14 - Vending Machines and Vending Boxes. 
A.  Vending machines and vending boxes include devices which dispense a product, either by coin operation or freely distributed. Examples include food and beverages, newspapers, flyers, cigarettes, media such as DVDs, and ice. Ice vending kiosks and buildings are regulated in Section 5.04.08. 
B.  Vending machines and vending boxes are permissible within a principal building, within an accessory building, and under the roof of a principal or accessory building. 
1.  The principal or accessory building shall be in conformance with the requirements of this LDC. 
2.  The principal or accessory building shall be a commercial, office, business, industrial, civic, cultural, or multifamily building. 
3.  The vending machines and vending boxes shall be licensed as required by the City. 
4.  When located outside under the roof of a principal or accessory building, vending machines and vending boxes shall be flush against the facade of the building. 
5.  Vending machines and vending boxes shall not be located to impede or interfere with pedestrian access, pedestrian circulation, emergency access, or otherwise present an impediment to public health and safety. 
6.  There are no additional requirements regarding location, placement, or number of such machines or boxes. 
C.  Vending machines and vending boxes may be located outside on private property, subject to the following standards: 
1.  Outdoor vending machines and boxes shall be placed on an impervious surface. 
2.  Outdoor vending machines and boxes shall be placed in groups of no more than six (6) such machines or boxes. Groups of such machines and boxes shall be separated by a minimum of fifty (50) feet. 
3.  Vending machines and boxes shall not be located in such a manner as to impede pedestrian access, obstruct parking areas or driveways, obstruct emergency lanes or access, or otherwise create an unsafe situation. 
4.  The property on which the vending machines or boxes are located shall remain in compliance with ADA standards. 
5.  Vending machines and boxes shall be maintained in good operating condition. 
D.  Vending machines and boxes may be placed on public property, subject to the following standards. 
1.  The machine owner shall obtain permission from the City for the proposed location. 
2.  Vending machines and boxes shall not be located on public sidewalks. 
3.  Vending machines and boxes shall not obstruct pedestrian access to transit shelters, business entrances, driveways, parking areas, crosswalks, or other pedestrian facilities. 
4.  Vending machines and boxes shall not be located in such a manner as to interfere with or damage landscaping and street trees. 
5.  Vending machines and boxes shall not be attached to or interfere with the operation of traffic signs, traffic signals, fire hydrants, public safety call boxes, utility poles, mail boxes, or street furniture such as benches. 
6.  Vending machines and boxes shall be in groups of no more than six (6) such machines or boxes in any one location. Groups of machines and boxes shall be separated by a minimum of fifty (50) feet. 
7.  Vending machines and boxes shall not be placed to allow drive-up access from a vehicle. 
5.01.15 - Boathouses, Docks, Piers, and Seawalls. 
A.  Construction of new or repair of existing boathouses, docks, piers, or seawalls shall comply with all State of Florida Department of Environmental Protection and United States Army Corps of Engineers Regulations. 
B.  Boathouses, docks, piers, and seawalls shall be designed and located to avoid channeling stormwater runoff directly into adjacent wetlands and bodies of water. 
C.  For all boathouses, docks, and piers, the applicant shall provide refuse containers in a way that is secured to prevent leaking tipping, or spilling. Dumping garbage, trash, or any kind of refuse into wetlands, bodies of water, waterways, or shorelines is prohibited. 
D.  Boathouses, docks, and piers on Bass Lake shall be limited to twenty (20) feet in length; piers, docks, and connected walkways shall be a minimum of seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet from any side property line. 
E.  Boathouses, docks, piers, and seawalls shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner. 
5.01.16 - Kennels. 
    Kennels are permissible accessory structures in areas zoned for residential use, subject to the following standards: 
A.  Kennels shall be for the private use of residents on the property on which they are located. Commercial activity, such as breeding, grooming, or training, is prohibited. 
B.  Kennels shall be located within a fenced enclosure. 
C.  Kennels shall be designed and constructed to provide for waste management and pest control consistent with best practices for animal husbandry. 
5.01.17 - Recreation Facilities. 
    Recreation facilities, such as tennis courts, playing fields, ball courts, playgrounds, and other similar recreational amenities, are permissible accessory structures and uses in areas zoned for residential use, subject to the following standards: 
A.  Recreation facilities shall be for the private use of residents on the property on which they are located. 
B.  Recreation facilities shall provide for off-street parking in compliance with the parking standards in Section 6.04.02. 
C.  Recreation facilities shall provide safety fencing to ensure that playing equipment is contained within the recreation site. 
D.  Lighting for security and use of facilities after dusk shall be shielded and directed to avoid direct glare and illumination of residential structures. Lighting shall be limited to the hours from dusk to 10:00 p.m. 
5.02.00 - TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES 

5.02.01 - Temporary Dwellings. 
    One (1) on-site manufactured home may be located on a residential construction site as a temporary residence for the owner or builder, subject to the following standards: 
A.  A local development permit is required for installation of the temporary residence, and shall not be issued until a valid local development permit has been issued for construction of the principal dwelling. 
B.  The applicant shall connect the temporary dwelling to the City sewer system whenever possible. Where such connection is not possible, the applicant shall demonstrate adequate provisions for sewage pump-out and disposal. 
C.  The dwelling shall be setback from all property lines a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
D.  Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided on the site to serve the dwelling. 
E.  The temporary dwelling shall be removed within thirty (30) days following issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal dwelling. 
F.  One (1) temporary storage shed may be located on the site to support use of the temporary dwelling, subject to the following standards. 
1.  The storage shed shall not be installed prior to installation of the temporary dwelling. 
2.  The storage shed shall be removed not later than removal of the temporary dwelling, or not later than twenty-four (24) months, whichever is less. 
3.  The storage shed may be relocated as a permissible accessory building for the principal dwelling, subject to the standards of Section 5.01.07. 
5.02.02 - Construction and Job Site Buildings and Storage Yards. 
    Temporary buildings or uses in connection with a construction project shall be permissible during the construction period. The following standards shall be met by temporary uses established during construction: 
A.  A local development permit is required. 
B.  Temporary buildings and storage yards shall not be established until a valid building permit has been issued for the construction activity on the site. 
C.  Temporary buildings shall comply with the accessibility requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
D.  All construction buildings shall meet tie-down requirements for mobile structures. 
E.  Portable sanitation facilities shall be provided for the construction site. 
F.  Construction buildings, equipment, machinery, and materials shall be removed within thirty (30) days of completion of the construction site for which they are permitted. 
G.  A temporary office may be located on a construction site to be used for administrative functions during construction. 
H.  A temporary office may be allowed for sales functions or sales offices, allowing for the sale, resale, or marketing of dwellings, structures, or property within the development in which it is located, or adjacent developments under the same control. 
I.  If restrooms are provided in the temporary office buildings, the applicant shall demonstrate adequate provisions for sewage pump-out or disposal. 
J.  On-site outdoor storage of equipment and construction materials shall be allowed during the period of construction. Stored materials shall be located at least one (1) foot from all property lines. Equipment and materials shall be stored in a safe manner. 
K.  Construction and demolition debris dumpsters are allowable and are not required to be screened. Dumpsters shall not be located to occupy or obstruct required parking spaces, driveways, or aisles. 
L.  Adequate parking shall be provided. 
M.  Additional parking areas shall be designated for construction vehicles, sufficient to accommodate all such vehicles off the public right-of-way. 
N.  Location of temporary buildings, parking areas, dumpsters, and storage yards shall comply with the tree protection requirements of Section 4.08.04. 
O.  Construction signs are permissible and shall comply with the requirements of Section 5.03.00. 
5.02.03 - Roadside and Mobile Vendors. 
A.  Applicability. Roadside and mobile vendors conducting retail sales or displays are permissible as a temporary use in the MX-1, MX-2, MB, and CG zoning districts in accordance with the standards of this section. 
B.  Temporary uses subject to this section shall not exceed fifteen (15) days in any one (1) month. 
C.  A temporary use permit is required according to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
D.  Standards for roadside and mobile vendors 
1.  The applicant shall possess a valid City Business Tax Receipt. 
2.  The applicant shall have written permission from the property owner and the business owner of the site on which the roadside or mobile vendor is proposed. 
3.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed use meets all applicable City, Okaloosa County, and State requirements, including, but not limited to a Florida Department of Professional and Business Regulation Mobile Food Dispensing Vehicle License and/or Public Food Service License, if applicable. Proof of an approved Florida Plan Review for hot dog carts and other mobile vendors shall also be submitted, if applicable. 
4.  The proposed use shall provide sufficient on-site parking. 
5.  The proposed use shall not be located in or block a fire lane. 
6.  The hours of operation shall be appropriate for the location. 
7.  The proposed use shall not block or impede any roadway, driveway, accessway, or sidewalk in a way that hinders normal traffic flow or pedestrian traffic flow. 
8.  The applicant shall demonstrate proper control of sanitation and litter associated with the proposed use. 
9.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed use includes proper restroom facilities available during all hours of operation. 
5.02.04 - Modular Storage Containers. 
    Modular storage containers (sometimes called storage pods) are permissible temporary structures, provided they are located in compliance with the following standards: 
A.  A temporary structure permit is required. 
B.  Location of the storage pod is limited to a maximum of thirty (30) days per installation, renewable one (1) time, not to exceed sixty (60) days per year. 
C.  The storage pod may be placed on a paved or unpaved surface. When the authorized location is unpaved, the temporary use permit shall include a condition that grass or landscaping shall be restored upon removal of the unit. 
D.  The storage pod may be placed in a required front or rear yard setback, provided that it is setback a minimum of five (5) feet. Placement in a side yard shall comply with the required side yard setback. 
E.  The storage pod shall not be placed within a required easement, required parking space, stormwater management area, or required buffer. 
F.  Placement of the storage pod shall not interfere with or obstruct pedestrian access. 
G.  Placement of the storage pod shall not interfere with the required visibility triangle standards set forth in Section 6.03.00. 
5.03.00 - SIGNS 

5.03.01 - Generally. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide comprehensive and balanced sign regulations that are consistent with constitutional guarantees, promote business growth and retention, achieve clear and effective communication in the City's environment, and to authorize signs which are: 
1.  Consistent with the objectives of the comprehensive plan; 
2.  Compatible with their surroundings; 
3.  Integrated and harmonious with the appearance of the community; 
4.  Legible under the circumstances in which they are seen; and 
5.  Safe for motorists, by preventing visual distraction and visual clutter. 
B.  In interpreting and applying the provisions of Section 5.03.00, the sign regulations are declared to authorize the maximum allowable signage for the purposes set forth. Any sign authorized by Section 5.03.00 may display noncommercial messages. Nothing in Section 5.03.00 shall be construed to regulate the content of the message displayed on any sign. 
C.  No person shall move, erect, post, construct, paint, alter, or maintain a sign except in compliance with the standards and requirements set forth in Section 5.03.00. 
1.  A local development permit is required for any sign that is not exempt from the standards and provisions of Section 5.03.00. Application and review procedures for obtaining sign permits are set forth in Chapter 9. 
2.  The installation and maintenance of signs and sign structures shall comply with all applicable building, electrical, and other codes of the City. 
3.  All signs shall be located to comply with the clear visibility requirements set forth in Section 6.03.00. 
D.  All signs shall be adequately maintained in a structurally sound and safe condition. At a minimum, the following standards shall be met: 
1.  The area around the sign shall be clear of overgrown vegetation or other obstacles so as to make the sign readily visible. 
2.  All damaged or deteriorated panels or structural components shall be replaced. 
3.  Any sign copy shall be maintained securely to the face, and all missing copy shall be replaced. 
4.  All defective, discolored, faded, broken, or torn parts shall be replaced or repaired. 
5.  A sign that becomes unsafe, dangerous, or a threat to public safety shall be replaced, repaired, or otherwise made safe within the time limit set by the City. 
E.  Campaign signs shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours after the campaign issue has been decided. 
(Ord. No. 1970 , § 2, 2-14-17) 
5.03.02 - Exempt Signs. 
    The following signs are exempt from the requirement to obtain a local development permit. 
A.  Regulatory, statutory, traffic control, or directional signs erected on public property by or with permission of the State of Florida, the United States, or the City. 
B.  Legal notices and official instruments. 
C.  Signs incorporated into machinery or equipment by a manufacturer or distributor, which identify or advertise only the product or service dispensed by the machine or equipment, such as signs customarily affixed to vending machines, newspaper boxes, and gasoline pumps. 
D.  Advertising and identifying signs located on taxicabs, buses, trailers, trucks, or vehicle bumpers. 
E.  Public warning signs to indicate the dangers of swimming, animals, or similar hazards. 
F.  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, and dates of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials. 
G.  Signs carried by a person. 
5.03.03 - Provisionally Exempt Signs. 
    Signs identified in this section may be placed without a local development permit, provided that such signs comply with the standards set forth in Table 5.03.03. 
Table 5.03.03. Standards for Provisionally Exempt Signs. 
Sign Type Standards Entrance, exit, or other directional signs, including parking identification signs • Maximum area not to exceed four (4) s.f. 
• No individual letters, symbols, logos, or designs in excess of eight (8) inches in vertical or horizontal dimension. 
• Signs shall not be lighted. "No trespassing" or "no dumping" signs • Maximum area not to exceed four (4) s.f. Real estate signs, R-1E, R-1, R-2, and YC zoning districts • Limited to one (1) sign per dwelling offered for sale or rent. 
• Located on the property offered for sale or rent. 
• Maximum area not to exceed nine (9) s.f. 
• Maximum height not to exceed six (6) feet. 
• Setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the street curb or edge of pavement. 
• Removed not more than ten (10) days after the property is no longer for sale or rent. Real estate signs, CF, CG, MX-1, MX-2, CTP, and MB zoning districts • Limited to one (1) sign per street frontage. 
• Located on the property offered for sale or rent. 
• Maximum area not to exceed thirty-two (32) s.f. 
• Maximum height not to exceed six (6) feet. 
• Setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the street curb or edge of pavement. 
• Removed not more than ten (10) days after the property is no longer for sale or rent. Construction signs, R-1E, R-1, R-2, and YC zoning districts • Located on property where a valid building permit has been issued and has not expired. 
• Maximum area not to exceed sixteen (16) s.f. 
• Maximum height not to exceed eight (8) feet. 
• Removed when the certificate of occupancy has been issued. Construction signs, CF, CG, MX-1, MX-2, CTP, and MB zoning districts • Located on property where a valid building permit has been issued and has not expired. 
• Maximum area for all signs combined not to exceed thirty-two (32) s.f. 
• Maximum height not to exceed eight (8) feet. 
• Removed when the certificate of occupancy has been issued. Yard or garage sale signs • Maximum area not to exceed four (4) s.f. 
• Located on the property on which a sale is being conducted. 
• Limited to the period of the sale. 
• Limited to a maximum of two (2) weeks per year per parcel. Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) signs • Not more than one (1) wall sign. 
• Maximum are not to exceed four (4) square feet. 
• Mounted not more than eight (8) feet above the finished elevation of the ATM  
(Ord. No. 1970 , § 3, 2-14-17) 
5.03.04 - Prohibited Signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited. 
A.  Off-premises signs, except in the CTP district (see Table 5.03.06 for standards applicable to off-premises signs in the CTP district). 
B.  Portable signs. 
C.  Snipe signs, including temporary signs stuck in the ground (sometimes also called bandit signs), and signs attached to utility poles, trees, rocks, or other natural object. 
D.  Signs with visible moving, revolving, or rotating parts, flashing or oscillating lights, or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic, or mechanical means. 
E.  Any sign which constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by reason of its size, location, movement, content, coloring, or method of illumination. 
F.  Signs or sign structures that interfere in any way with free use of any fire escape, emergency exit, or standpipe. 
G.  Signs that are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair the vision of any motorist, cyclist, or pedestrian using or entering a public way, or that are a hazard or a nuisance to occupants of any property because of glare or other characteristics. 
H.  Abandoned signs. 
I.  Signs erected on public property, with the exception of signs erected by public authority for public purposes. 
J.  Any other signs that are not specifically permitted or exempted as set forth in Section 5.03.00. 
5.03.05 - Temporary Signs. 
    Temporary signs shall comply with the following standards. 
A.  Temporary signs are permissible subject to receipt of a temporary sign permit specifying type, size, location, and duration of placement. Temporary sign permits are limited to three (3) per business in any one (1) calendar year. Temporary signs may be displayed for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days. 
B.  Temporary signs shall not be placed in the public right-of-way. 
C.  Temporary signs shall not flash, blink, spin, or rotate. 
D.  Temporary signs include banners, flags, and pennants. The placement of temporary signs shall comply with the clear visibility requirements set forth in Section 6.03.00, and such signs shall not block traffic or pedestrian visibility, or constitute a vehicular or pedestrian traffic hazard. 
E.  The placement of temporary signs shall not cause a public nuisance. 
F.  Permissible temporary signs shall be firmly secured to the ground or to a building according to the requirements of the temporary permit. Temporary signs may be attached to or cover an existing permitted sign only for the period during which the temporary sign is permitted. 
5.03.06 - Permissible Permanent On-Site Signs. 
    Permanent on-site signs shall be erected, placed, constructed, located, or installed only in compliance with the standards set forth in this section. 
A.  Standards for number, type, and size of signs are set forth in Table 5.03.06. 
B.  Signs located on property in the R-1 and R-1E districts shall not exceed a total of four (4) square feet in area. 
Table 5.03.06. Sign Standards. 
MX-1, MX-2, CF, CG, CTP, MB, and REC Zoning Districts Type of Sign Maximum Number Max Sign Face Area Sign Dimensions Max Sign Height Setback Wall 1 per facade per tenant Maximum of 20% of the facade NA 24 feet NA Awning No maximum NA 75% of awning length 2 feet NA Projecting/Perpendicular 1 per tenant 6 sq. ft. Width - 4 feet 3 feet NA Window No maximum 25% of window NA NA NA Monument 1 or Ground 1 per street frontage in all districts 2 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage to a maximum of 150 sq. ft. No required dimensions 12 feet in MX-1 Front - 5 feet 
Driveway - 10 feet 
Intersection - 50 feet 1 sign per access point in the CTP zoning district Within the CTP zoning district, 2 sq. ft. per linear foot of width of the development lot to a maximum of 150 sq. ft. 24 feet in MX-2, MB, CG, CF, CTP, and REC R-2 and YC Zoning Districts Monument 1 per street frontage 1 50 sq. ft. No required dimensions 12 feet Front/Side - 5 feet  
1 V-shaped monument signs shall be limited to an interior angle no greater than thirty (30) degrees. 
Additional Signage for Large-Scale Commercial Centers Maximum Number Max Total Sign Face Area More than 150 feet of street frontage 1 additional 200 sq. ft. More than 250 feet of street frontage 2 additional 300 .ft.  
C.  Lighting. External lighting of signs is allowed, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The light source is directed onto the sign face. 
2.  The light source is shielded to prevent spill-over or glare onto adjacent properties. 
3.  Within the DDOD, neon signs are permissible as interior window signs. The maximum sign area devoted to a neon sign shall not exceed four (4) s.f. and shall be included in the calculation of maximum sign area for a permissible window sign. Sandwich signs are also permissible in the DDOD. 
E.  Signs that electronically produce changeable copy are permitted provided they flash or move or otherwise change at intervals consistent with the Florida Department of Transportation standards. 
F.  Measurement. 
1.  Where a sign is composed of letters or pictures attached directly to a facade, wall, window, door, awning, monument sign, or freestanding sign, and the letters or pictures are not enclosed by a border or trimming, the sign area shall be the area within the smallest rectangle, parallelogram, triangle, circle, semicircle, or a combination of any of these geometric shapes, the sides of which touch the extreme points of the letters or pictures as a whole. 
2.  Where a sign is composed of letters or pictures enclosed by a border or trimming, the sign area shall be the area within the border or trim. 
3.  In cases where material is displayed in a random or unconnected manner without organized relationship of the components, each such component shall be considered a single sign. 
4.  The area of a freestanding sign shall include the area of the outside frame, but not of the supporting structure. 
G.  Determining the number of signs. 
1.  The number of signs shall be the number of structures with a sign face. 
2.  A double-faced projecting or freestanding sign shall be construed as having the area of a single face, provided that the sign faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than four (4) feet apart. 
H.  Specific requirements for commercial establishments with street frontage at the intersection of two (2) streets. 
1.  The owner of the establishment may elect in writing to display only one (1) freestanding sign equal to seventy-five (75) percent of the total maximum aggregate sign area for the two (2) street frontages, instead of displaying one (2) freestanding sign per street frontage. 
2.  Large scale commercial centers shall be exempt from this requirement. 
I.  Specific standards for pennants. 
1.  Pennants are permissible for multi-tenant centers and car dealerships. 
2.  Pennants shall be identified in a sign plan. 
3.  Pennants shall be part of a coordinated decorative scheme and shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
4.  Pennants shall be attached to freestanding poles or freestanding light fixtures. 
5.03.07 - Flagpoles. 
    Flagpoles are permissible as an accessory structure provided the following standards are met: 
A.  Flagpoles shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet from a side or rear property line. 
B.  Flagpoles shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from a front property line. 
C.  Flagpoles shall not exceed 200 feet in height. 
5.04.00 - SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES 

5.04.01 - Generally. 
A.  This section sets forth standards for specific uses that are permissible subject to supplemental standards. Uses that are permissible subject to these supplemental standards are identified by the letter "S" in Table 2.03.02. 
B.  Where there is a conflict between a standard applicable to the zoning district in which the use is located and the supplemental standards set forth below, the more restrictive standard shall apply. 
5.04.02 - Townhouses. 
A.  A townhouse is a single-family dwelling unit attached horizontally by a common or party wall to one (1) or more dwelling units. 
B.  A townhouse development shall be designed and developed as a single, integrated development project. The development and the individual townhouse units shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  A townhouse shall be not less than two (2) stories. 
2.  An individual townhouse unit shall be located on a platted lot, established in compliance with the standards for subdivisions set forth in Section 4.07.00. 
a.  The minimum lot area for an individual townhouse unit is 1,400 s.f. 
b.  The minimum lot width for an individual townhouse unit at the end of a group of units and adjacent to a street on the side property line shall be twenty-five and one-half (25 1/2) feet. 
c.  The minimum lot width for all individual townhouse units, other than the end unit, is eighteen (18) feet. 
3.  The structures containing townhouse units shall comply with the zoning standards setting forth maximum impervious surface, maximum height, and maximum density on a development site. 
a.  The minimum setback from a side property line shall be seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet. 
b.  There shall be a maximum of six (6) individual townhouse units within one structure. 
c.  Each individual townhouse unit shall have a private entrance. 
d.  The front façade of each structure shall include projections. 
4.  Where a townhouse development abuts property zoned or used for single-family or duplex development, a fence, six (6) feet high, shall be provided. The finished side of the fence shall face outward. No fence is required where an alley separates the townhouse development from the single-family or duplex development. Each portion of the fence shall be the property of the owner of the townhouse lot on which it is located; such owner is responsible for maintenance of that portion of the fence. 
5.  Standards for refuse containers. 
a.  Individual refuse containers shall be provided for each townhouse and all such containers shall be located together on a paved area not larger than five (5) feet by five (5) feet. 
b.  The refuse area shall be setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any property line. Where an alley is provided, the dumpster or refuse area may be located adjacent to the alley. 
c.  The dumpster or refuse area shall be screened in compliance with the standards set forth in Section 5.01.06.D. 
5.04.03 - Junkyards, Scrap Metal Yards, and Recycling Facilities. 
A.  This section is intended to address facilities where worn out and discarded materials are collected, accumulated, stored, disassembled, processed, or handled. 
B.  Materials may include: 
1.  Scrap metals such as iron, steel, brass, copper, aluminum, tin, lead, or other base metals; 
2.  Plastics; 
3.  Rubber; 
4.  Glass; 
5.  Paper or cardboard; 
6.  Inoperable machinery, equipment and parts; 
7.  Inoperable vehicles or parts; and 
8.  Other similar waste or scrap materials. 
C.  Collection, storage, or handling of hazardous materials shall comply with State and Federal standards. 
D.  The outdoor portion of the facility shall be screened with a fence, wall, or landscaped buffer. 
1.  The facility shall not be visible from a public right-of-way or from land zoned to allow residential use. 
2.  The facility shall be enclosed with a fence or wall not less than eight (8) feet and not more than ten (10) feet high. The fence or wall shall be solid. The finished side shall face outward. 
3.  Where a landscaped buffer is provided, the plants shall include evergreen trees and shrubs. 
a.  The planting strip shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet wide and located on the perimeter of the site. 
b.  Plant materials shall comply with the specifications set forth in Section 4.08.03. 
c.  Trees and shrubs shall be planted in double-staggered rows and shall be of sufficient size to form an opaque screen at least eight (8) feet in height. 
d.  The landscaping shall be maintained to ensure continuation of the vegetative screen. Dead or damaged plant materials shall be replaced as soon as possible based on the growing season. 
e.  Where the landscaped buffer is not adequately maintained, the City may require replacement of the landscaped buffer with a solid wall or fence. 
E.  Storage of materials. 
1.  Inoperable machinery, equipment, and vehicles may be stored on the ground. 
2.  Parts, scrap materials, and materials for recycling shall be stored within leak proof bins or trailers. 
3.  Stored machinery, equipment, vehicles, parts, scraps, and materials shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. 
4.  The limitation on the height of stored materials shall not be construed to prohibit equipment and vehicles used in the operation of the facility. 
F.  Operation of the facility. 
1.  Materials may be collected, sorted, separated, disassembled, bagged, baled, or packaged for shipping. 
2.  Operations shall comply with the standards for industrial activities set forth in Section 4.03.02. 
G.  Exterior lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid illumination of adjacent properties. 
5.04.04 - Vehicle Repair and Body Shops, Including Small Equipment and Small Appliances. 
A.  Vehicle repair and body shops are establishments for the mechanical repair, maintenance, painting, and body repair of passenger vehicles; standards also apply to small equipment and small appliance facilities. 
B.  Any outside storage of vehicles awaiting repair and maintenance shall be enclosed with a fence, wall, or landscaped screen. 
1.  A fence or wall shall be a minimum of six (6) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height. 
2.  A fence or wall shall be solid. The finished side shall face outward. 
3.  Where a landscaped buffer is provided, the plants shall include evergreen trees and shrubs. The trees and shrubs shall be planted in double staggered rows to form a continuous screen at least six (6) feet in height. 
4.  The landscaping shall be maintained to ensure continuation of the vegetative screen. Dead or damaged plant materials shall be replaced as soon as possible based on the growing season. 
5.  Where the landscaped buffer is not adequately maintained, the City may require replacement of the landscaped buffer with a solid wall or fence. 
C.  Parts and materials shall be stored within the principal building or a permissible accessory storage building. Outside storage of parts and materials is prohibited. 
D.  The sale of vehicles is prohibited on the vehicle repair facility site and any adjacent right-of-way. 
E.  Drainage pits for oil and fluid change shall be located within an enclosed structure. 
F.  Doors or openings to service bays shall not open toward adjacent properties with a residential use. 
G.  Perimeter landscaping required by Section 4.08.05 shall be doubled. 
H.  Loading docks shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way and properties with a residential use. 
I.  Dumpsters shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from a property line adjacent to a residential use. 
J.  All exterior lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
K.  Audio amplification systems, including, but not limited to, telephone loudspeakers or paging systems, shall be located to ensure that the sound cannot be heard on adjacent properties. 
L.  The owner of the vehicle repair establishment shall prepare and provide to the City a plan for the safe storage of flammable or hazardous materials to be stored or used on the property and an inventory of such materials. The plan shall provide for the prevention, containment, recovery, and mitigation of spilled fuel or other hazardous material. The inventory shall be submitted to the City prior to the building permit approval, listing the type, quantity, and location of these materials. The inventory shall be kept current pursuant to direction provided by the City. 
5.04.05 - Fuel/Gasoline Stations. 
A.  The term gas station includes convenience stores with gas pumps, and establishments that provide the following accessory uses in addition to gas or other fuel pumps: oil change and light repair (but not including body work) for automobiles; car wash facility; fast food restaurants; drive-through restaurants; groceries; sundries; supplies for the traveling public; food; and beverages. 
B.  Access shall be from a collector or arterial street. 
C.  Fuel pump islands shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any property line. 
D.  Underground storage tanks shall be designed, located, and monitored in full compliance with State requirements. Evidence of such compliance shall be provided to the City. 
E.  Oil drainage pits and hydraulic lifts shall be located within an enclosed structure. 
F.  Gasoline service stations located within 100 feet of any property zoned to allow residential uses shall be buffered in compliance with the following standards: 
1.  A masonry, wooden, or solid fence shall be required on any side or rear property line that is within 100 feet of any property in a district zoned to allow residential uses; 
2.  The decorative or finished side of the fence shall face outward; 
3.  Perimeter landscaping shall include evergreen shrubs or understory trees planted in a double staggered row to form a continuous hedge. The landscaping shall comply with the specifications set forth in Section 4.08.03 and the number of plants shall be doubled. 
G.  Drive-through lanes for restaurants or car wash facilities associated with the gasoline service station shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property zoned to allow residential uses. Distance shall be measured from the outermost edge of the drive-through lane to the property line of property zoned to allow residential use. 
H.  Dumpsters shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the property line of property zoned to allow residential use. 
I.  All exterior lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
J.  Audio amplification systems, including, but not limited to, telephone loudspeakers or paging systems, shall be located to ensure that the sound cannot be heard on adjacent properties. 
K.  Repair services shall be limited to minor repairs to passenger vehicles, such as tires repair or replacement; oil and other fluid changing; replacement of belts, hoses, filters, and windshield wipers; and similar minor repairs. No body work, painting, engine tune-up or overhaul, or repair of trucks, RVs, or commercial vehicles shall be provided. All permissible repair services shall be carried out only within an enclosed building. 
L.  Vehicle parts, supplies, damaged parts, or other materials and supplies shall be stored within an enclosed building. 
M.  Canopies over gas pumps or pump islands shall meet the setback requirements for the zoning district in which they are located. 
N.  The sale of vehicles is prohibited on the gas station site and any adjacent right-of-way. 
5.04.06 - Religious Facilities. 
A.  The principal use for a site developed for religious uses is worship. Worship is a form of religious practice with its creed and ritual. 
B.  Uses and activities other than worship shall be considered accessory uses and shall be clearly ancillary to the principal use. Such uses and activities shall be limited to: 
1.  Religious instruction (such as "Sunday School," Bible school, or similar instruction or study typically associated with the religion); offices to support the religious facility. 
2.  Child day care, adult day care, preschool, or child nursery school subject to the standards of Section 5.04.06.E. 
3.  Private academic school, subject to the standards of Section 5.04.06.H. 
4.  Fellowship hall or social hall, which may be known as a community center, activity hall, or life center, with or without a kitchen, subject to the standards of Section 5.04.06.I. 
5.  Individual meeting spaces. 
C.  All accessory uses are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The accessory use shall be owned and operated only by the owner of the principal use. 
2.  The facility housing the accessory use shall meet all local, State, or Federal standards. 
3.  The owner of the principal use shall obtain any licenses required to conduct the accessory use. Any approval of the accessory use shall be contingent upon demonstrating that all licenses have been obtained. 
4.  Audio amplification systems, including, but not limited to, telephone loudspeakers or paging systems, shall be located to ensure that the sound cannot be heard on adjacent properties. 
5.  All outdoor activities shall occur no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 10:00 p.m. 
6.  All exterior lighting shall be directed or shielded to avoid illumination of adjacent properties. 
7.  Outdoor play or activity areas shall be no closer than thirty (30) feet from property designated for residential use, as measured to the nearest residential property line. 
D.  The following activities shall be prohibited in association with religious uses: overnight lodging facilities or other temporary sleeping quarters; and any use not specifically identified as an allowable accessory use. Notwithstanding the prohibition of overnight lodging, one (1) residential dwelling unit may be provided as a parsonage, subject to the standards of Section 5.04.06.H. 
E.  Child day care, adult day care, preschool, or child nursery school uses are allowable accessory uses subject to the following standards: 
1.  The total floor area allocated to the child day care, adult day care, preschool, or child nursery school uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total gross floor area on the site. The calculation of total floor area allocated to the uses shall be cumulative and shall include all child day care, adult day care, preschool, and child nursery school facilities, and mechanical and support facilities required for operation of the child day care, adult day care, preschool, or child nursery. 
2.  An off-street drop-off area for persons served by the facility shall be provided. 
F.  Private academic schools are allowable accessory uses subject to the following standards: 
1.  The total floor area allocated to the school shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total gross floor area on the site. The calculation of total floor area allocated to the school shall include all components of the school: classrooms, school library, school offices, teacher work areas, and the like, including related mechanical and support facilities. 
2.  An off-street drop-off area for persons served by the facility shall be provided. 
G.  A fellowship hall is an allowable accessory use subject to the following standards: 
1.  Dining, including dining open to the public as a "soup kitchen," is permitted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., provided: 
a.  The owner of the religious use ensures that meal recipients remain on the site except during travel to and from the fellowship hall; and 
b.  No consideration or value of any kind is given, directly or indirectly, in exchange for the meal. 
2.  The total floor area allocated to the fellowship hall, including related mechanical and support facilities, shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total floor area on the site. 
H.  One (1) residential dwelling unit is allowable to serve as a parsonage, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The minimum lot area devoted to the dwelling unit ("parsonage lot") shall comply with the standards set forth for dwelling units in R-2 in Table 4.01.01. The parsonage lot shall be used exclusively for the dwelling unit, and shall not include any primary or other accessory use allowable on the site. 
2.  Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided within the parsonage lot. 
3.  The parsonage lot may contain children's outdoor play equipment, in a size and quantity typical of a single-family residential use, but shall not contain an accessory recreation facility for the principal religious facility. 
I.  The parsonage lot may contain a residential swimming pool, fully enclosed, and attached to the dwelling. 
J.  A specific parking plan shall be provided. This plan shall identify the principal use and each accessory use proposed on the site. The parking plan shall indicate the hours of operation and peak times of use (parking demand) for the principal use and each accessory use on the site. The parking standards for the primary use and each accessory use shall be identified based upon Section 6.04.02. The parking plan may include reduced or shared parking. If reduced or shared parking is proposed, the parking plan and supporting data shall clearly indicate that differing peak use and associated parking requirements shall not result in a parking deficiency on the site. The parking plan shall indicate areas designated for overflow parking during times of extraordinary use (such as festival or holiday periods). 
K.  The proposal for the religious facility shall demonstrate compliance with street, driveway, and sidewalk standards set forth in Chapter 6. 
5.04.07 - Dry Storage Facilities for Watercraft. 
A.  Dry storage facilities for watercraft may be freestanding or co-located with a permitted marina. 
1.  All exterior lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
2.  Audio amplification systems, including, but not limited to, telephone loudspeakers or paging systems, shall be located to ensure that the sound cannot be heard on adjacent properties. 
B.  Dry storage facilities for watercraft may include minor repair facilities. 
1.  Such minor repair facilities may include an open boat yard for watercraft awaiting repair or engaged in repair. The open boat yard shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the site area for the dry storage facility. 
2.  Open boat yards shall be screened from view from a public right-of-way by means of fencing, a wall, or a landscaped buffer, in compliance with Section 5.04.07.G. 
3.  Minor repair facilities shall be fully enclosed and setback twenty-five feet (25) from the property line. A fully enclosed minor repair facility shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the site area for the dry storage facility. Doors or openings to service bays shall not open toward adjacent properties with a residential use. 
4.  The owner of the vehicle repair establishment shall prepare and provide to the City a plan for the safe storage of flammable or hazardous materials to be stored or used on the property and an inventory of such materials. The plan shall provide for the prevention, containment, recovery, and mitigation of spilled fuel or other hazardous material. The inventory shall be submitted to the City prior to the building permit approval, listing the type, quantity, and location of these materials. The inventory shall be kept current pursuant to direction provided by the City. 
C.  Open lot storage. 
1.  Open lot storage shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the site area for the dry storage facility. Open lot storage excludes any stacking or racks for watercraft. 
2.  Open lot storage shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way by means of fencing, a wall, or a landscaped buffer, in compliance with Section 5.04.07.G. 
D.  Open storage racks. 
1.  Open storage racks are permissible only in conjunction with other onsite enclosed or partially enclosed storage facilities or enclosed buildings. 
2.  Open storage racks shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way by means of fencing, or a wall, or by locating behind onsite buildings. 
3.  Open storage racks shall not exceed three (3) tiers of storage. 
E.  Partially enclosed storage racks. 
1.  Partially enclosed storage racks shall not exceed four (4) tiers of storage. 
2.  Partially enclosed storage racks shall include one (1) or more walls, designed and constructed to ensure that the storage racks are not visible from a public-right-of-way. 
F.  Fully enclosed storage racks shall not exceed four (4) tiers of storage. 
G.  Standards for screening. Where screening of facilities is required in this section, the following standards shall be met: 
1.  A fence or wall used for screening shall be not more than fifty (50) percent open. The finished side shall face outward. 
2.  Where a landscaped buffer is provided, the plants shall include evergreen trees and shrubs. The trees and shrubs shall be planted in double staggered rows to form a continuous screen at least six (6) feet in height. 
3.  The landscaping shall be maintained to ensure continuation of the vegetative screen. Dead or damaged plant materials shall be replaced as soon as possible based on the growing season. 
4.  Where the landscaped buffer is not adequately maintained, the City may require replacement of the landscaped buffer with a solid wall or fence. 
5.04.08 - Vehicle Sales and Rentals-New or Used Vehicles. 
A.  Vehicle sales or rental establishments may sell, rent, or lease vehicles. 
B.  Vehicles offered for sale, rent, or lease shall be operable. In addition, the owner shall have a valid dealer's license. 
C.  All areas established for display or sale shall be provided with a paved, or stabilized, dust free surface. The driveway aisle providing access to the display area shall comply with driveway standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
D.  Areas established for display or sale of vehicles shall not include any parking spaces required to meet the standards of Section 6.04.02. 
E.  Mechanical services, including repairs, body work, and painting are permitted as an accessory use to vehicles sales or rental establishments. 
1.  Such repairs shall be conducted only within an enclosed building which meets all applicable Federal and State requirements, including health, safety, and fire prevention regulations. 
2.  Doors or openings to service bays shall be located a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from property zoned to allow residential use. As an alternative to the minimum setback, the doors or openings to service bays shall not open towards property zoned to allow residential use and shall be screened from view. 
F.  All property lines adjacent to vehicle displays shall have installed a permanent guardrail, fence, or parking block to prevent vehicles from accidentally rolling from the display area. 
G.  The owner of the vehicle sales establishment shall prepare and provide to the City a plan for the safe storage of flammable or hazardous materials to be stored or used on the property and an inventory of such materials. The plan shall provide for the prevention, containment, recovery, and mitigation of spilled fuel or other hazardous material. The inventory shall be submitted to the City prior to the building permit approval, listing the type, quantity, and location of these materials. The inventory shall be kept current pursuant to direction provided by the City. 
H.  Vehicles, signs, banners, tents, or other items used in connection with the operation of the vehicle sales and rental establishment shall not be stored, parked, displayed, or otherwise placed on public rights-of-way at any time. 
I.  All exterior lighting shall be directed or shielded to prevent illumination of adjacent properties. 
J.  Audio amplification systems, including, but not limited to, telephone loudspeakers or paging systems, shall be located to ensure that they cannot be heard on adjacent properties. 
K.  All outside storage and loading areas shall be fully screened from view from adjacent properties zoned for residential use, and from the public right-of-way. 
1.  Screening may be landscaping or enclosure by a wooden, masonry, or solid fence. 
2.  Where landscaping is provided, the plant materials shall include understory trees and shrubs. Plan materials shall meet the specifications set forth in Section 4.08.00. The trees and shrubs shall be planted in double staggered rows. 
3.  Where a fence is provided, the fence shall be a minimum of six (6) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height. The finished side shall face outward. 
5.04.09 - Communication Towers and Antennas. 
    Each applicant requesting a building permit for the location of communication towers and antennas shall meet the following at the time of application: 
A.  Federal approvals. All communication towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal Communication Commission (FCC), and any other agency of the Federal government with the authority to regulate communication towers and antennas. The applicant shall submit copies of all FAA, FCC, Eglin Air Force Base, Hurlburt Field, Okaloosa Regional Airport and FDOT approvals, whichever is/are applicable. 
B.  Design. The applicant shall submit the communication tower design plans which shall be designed by an engineer licensed in the State of Florida in accordance with the building code requirements of the City. The design shall show the access that is provided for inspections. Communication towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. Dish antennas will be of a neutral, non-reflective color with no logos. 
C.  Safety fall zone. Applicants shall submit a report by an engineer licensed in the State of Florida of the safety fall zone of the specified communication tower. The safety fall zone shall be measured from the base of the communication tower to any property line. Communication towers shall be designed to collapse within the lot lines in case of structural failure. 
D.  Co-location. 
1.  The applicant shall submit a certification from an engineer licensed in the State of Florida that the communications tower has been designed to accommodate co-location. If the communication tower cannot accommodate co-location, then the engineer should certify the reason(s) it cannot accommodate additional antennas. 
2.  The applicant shall submit a plan for co-location, providing for at least three (3) other providers, with local government needs considered. If co-location is not possible, the applicant shall provide evidence as to the reason(s) it is not possible to meet this requirement. 
3.  The applicant shall commit to ensuring that each antenna owner will comply with Federal, State, and local regulations. 
4.  Each antenna owner shall have an approved building permit prior to erecting the antenna on the communication tower. The applicant shall show that the antenna will not extend more than ten (10) feet horizontally beyond the vertical plane of the edge of the communications tower and will not project above the existing communication tower structure's approved height. 
E.  Setback. The applicant shall submit a site plan showing a minimum of one-half (1/2) the tower height plus fifty (50) feet between the base of the communication tower and any residential property line, otherwise a distance equal to the safety fall zone between the base of the communication tower and any nonresidential property. 
F.  Buffer. The applicant shall submit a plan showing: 
1.  An eight (8)-foot high fence or wall, with access by a locked gate only, around the base of the communication tower or the property as required by the FCC. The fence or wall shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
2.  A minimum of a five (5)-foot landscaping buffer, consistent with the requirements of Section 4.08.05 installed around the entire perimeter of the fence or wall. Additional landscaping may be required if deemed necessary to provide a buffer between the communication tower and adjacent residentially zoned properties. This requirement may be waived by the Development Administrator if the base of the communication tower is a minimum of 500 feet from all property lines. 
G.  Signage. The applicant shall submit a sign plan showing: 
1.  That no portion of the communication tower will be used for advertising purposes, including a company's name; 
2.  That the party responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility, its address, and telephone number is provided; and 
3.  That all security or safety signs required by Federal, State, or local regulations are provided. 
H.  Lighting. The applicant shall submit a plan that shows the signals, lights, or illumination provided and the Federal, State, or local rule, regulation, or requirement. 
I.  Maintenance and inspections. The applicant shall submit a plan for inspections and maintenance of the communication tower so that it remains in good condition, order, and repair and that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person. 
1.  The City may require FCC inspection reports and/or that the communication tower be inspected if there is reason to believe that the structural or electrical integrity of the communication tower is jeopardized. All certifications and inspections required herein shall be made by and at the sole cost of the provider, and certified and submitted to the City. 
2.  The City and its agents shall have the authority to enter onto the property upon which a communications tower is located, upon reasonable notice to the owner, to inspect the communications tower for purposes of determining whether it complies with all applicable laws and regulations. All expenses relating to such inspections by the City shall be borne by the owner. 
J.  Abandonment. The owner shall submit a plan for abandonment of the communication tower which shall include a copy of the notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations for each user of the communication tower and a plan to remove the communication tower within a minimum of 180 days after abandonment. Any communication tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of twenty-four (24) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of each such communication tower or antenna shall remove same within 180 days of receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner of such removal requirement. Removal includes the removal of the tower, all tower and fence footers, underground cables, and support buildings. If there are two (2) or more users of a single communication tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the communication tower. 
5.04.10 - Arenas, Auditoriums, and Stadiums. 
A.  Arenas, auditoriums, and stadiums include open, partially enclosed, or fully enclosed facilities intended to be used for such activities as spectator sports, entertainment events, expositions, or other public gatherings. 
B.  Arenas, auditoriums, and stadiums may include accessory uses, such as snack shops or food stands, ice cream stands, gift shops, or similar uses, provided that such uses are not open to the general public without entrance to the arena, auditorium, or stadium. 
C.  An arena, auditorium, or stadium shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from property zoned to allow residential uses. The distance shall be measured from the outermost structural component of the arena, auditorium, or stadium to the property line. 
D.  The parking lot or structure serving the arena, auditorium, or stadium shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from property zoned to allow residential uses. 
E.  All access to an arena, auditorium, or stadium shall be directly from an arterial road. The location and design of the primary and secondary access points to the arena, auditorium, or stadium shall minimize traffic impacts on local streets and residential neighborhoods. 
F.  A perimeter landscaped buffer shall be required and shall be twice the minimum standard set forth in Section 4.08.05. 
G.  Exterior lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid illumination of adjacent properties. 
H.  Loudspeakers or paging systems shall be designed, installed, and used to avoid detection on adjacent properties. 
I.  Outside storage and loading areas shall be fully screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties. The design and development of the outdoor storage and loading areas shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 5.01.13. 
J.  Temporary or permanent sanitation facilities that are not located within the principal building shall be fully screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties. 
5.04.11 - Community Residential Homes. 
A.  A community residential home is defined in Chapter 419.001, F.S. 
B.  A community residential home for six (6) or fewer residents is considered a single-family dwelling and is permissible by the City provided that the home is no closer than 1,000 feet from another such facility. 
C.  The sponsoring agency shall notify the City in writing of establishment of the community residential home. 
D.  When a community residential home for six (6) or fewer residents is proposed on a parcel zoned for multifamily residential use, the sponsoring agency shall notify the City in writing as set forth in Chapter 419.001, F.S. The City shall review the notice and approve the home as consistent with this LDC, allow the home to be established without review following a sixty (60) day period, or deny the establishment of the community residential home. Denial shall meet the requirements set forth in Chapter 419.001, F.S. 
E.  All matters pertaining to the establishment of a community residential home shall be governed by the requirements of Chapter 419.001, F.S. 
5.04.12 - Self-Service Storage. 
A.  The following activities or uses are permissible on the grounds or within the buildings of self-service storage facilities: 
1.  Rental of storage bays; 
2.  Sales of boxes or goods related directly to the operation of a self-service storage facility; and 
3.  Sales by the owner or manager of the facility of abandoned items for reclamation of rental costs. 
B.  One (1) caretaker accessory dwelling may be permissible in compliance with the standards set forth in Section 5.01.04. 
C.  The following activities or uses are prohibited on the grounds or within the buildings of self-service storage facilities: 
1.  Wholesale sales; 
2.  Retail sales, including garage sales, or other commercial activities; 
3.  Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, or other industrial activities; 
4.  Service or repair of vehicles, engines, electronic equipment, or similar activities; 
5.  Rehearsal or practice of musical instruments; and 
6.  Residential use. 
D.  Individual storage bays or private postal boxes within a self-service storage facility use shall not be considered premises for the purpose of assigning a legal address. 
E.  Except as specifically provided in this section, all property stored on the site shall be entirely within enclosed buildings. 
F.  Storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals is prohibited. 
G.  Open storage of recreational vehicles and dry storage of pleasure boats shall be permissible within a self-service storage facility, provided that the following standards are met: 
1.  A designated area shall be provided and clearly delineated. 
2.  The storage area together with buildings on the site shall not exceed the buildable area, as defined by the setbacks required for the zoning district. 
3.  The storage area shall be entirely screened from view from adjacent properties zoned to allow residential use and public rights-of-way by buildings, fences, or walls. Landscaping shall be provided on the outside of the fence, according to the standards set forth for perimeter landscaping in Section 4.08.05. 
4.  Dry stacking of boats is prohibited. 
H.  The site shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The minimum site area is one (1) acre. 
2.  Where two (2) or more buildings are provided, buildings shall be separated by a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
3.  Overhead access doors shall not be visible from the public rights-of-way or adjacent properties zoned to allow residential use. 
4.  Outdoor lighting shall be shielded and directed to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
5.  The façade design shall comply with the requirements set forth in Section 4.00.04. 
6.  Loudspeaker or paging equipment is prohibited. 
I.  Traffic circulation requirements. 
1.  Interior parking shall be provided in the form of aisle ways adjacent to the storage bays. 
2.  Aisle ways shall be used both for circulation and temporary customer parking while using storage bays. 
a.  Where lanes are for one-way traffic, the minimum lane width shall be twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Where lanes are for two-way traffic, the minimum lane width shall be twenty-four (24) feet. 
c.  Traffic flow patterns, directional signage, and painted land markings with arrows shall also be clearly marked. 
3.  In order to ensure appropriate access and circulation by emergency vehicles and equipment, the turning radii of the aisle ways shall be approved by the fire marshal at the time of preliminary plan review. 
5.04.13 - Marinas. 
A.  A marina may include the following facilities and uses: 
1.  Wet slips for temporary or permanent dockage; 
2.  Dry storage for boats; 
3.  Rental of watercraft; 
4.  Fuel and oil sales for watercraft; 
5.  Sale of parts and supplies for watercraft; 
6.  Sale of prepared, packaged food and beverages for personal consumption; 
7.  Sale of personal safety equipment for use on watercraft; 
8.  Bait, fresh, frozen, or artificial; and 
9.  Sale or rental of fishing equipment. 
B.  Engine repair and maintenance, fiberglass repair, painting, or other repair services are prohibited. Oil change is a permissible activity. 
C.  A marina shall provide off-street parking in compliance with the standards set forth in Section 6.04.02 and shall include parking for boat trailers or vehicle-boat trailer combinations. Up to fifty (50) percent of the required off-street parking for vehicles may be replaced with parking spaces for vehicle-boat trailer combinations. However, parking for only boat trailers shall not count toward meeting the requirement for off-street parking spaces. 
D.  Stacked dry storage for boats shall be permissible only within an enclosed or partially enclosed building in compliance with the standards set forth in Section 5.04.07. 
E.  Where fuel or other hazardous substances will be stored, handled, or sold, the marina shall provide facilities and procedures for the prevention, containment, recovery, and mitigation of spilled fuel or other hazardous substances. Facilities and procedures shall be designed to prevent such substances from entering the water or soil, and shall include adequate means for prompt and effective cleanup of spills. 
F.  Docks, piers, pilings, ramps, and other marine structures shall be placed to avoid obstruction of navigable waters and alteration of natural water flow and circulation. 
G.  Docks, piers, pilings, ramps, and other marine structures shall be placed to avoid grass beds and wetlands. 
H.  Construction materials and processes shall avoid or minimize environmental impacts and shall implement best practices. 
I.  Outdoor lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
J.  A marina that provides mooring for live-aboard boats shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Only boats with sewage holding facilities shall be permissible. 
2.  The marina shall provide sewage pump-out facilities. 
3.  A dumpster shall be provided and shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 5.01.06. 
5.04.14 - Manufactured Home Communities. 
    Mobile homes, manufactured homes, or modular homes may be located within a manufactured home community. Such homes are not required to comply with the standards set forth in Section 4.01.02. The following standards apply to manufactured home communities: 
A.  The manufactured home community shall be limited to rental of lots. Where lots are intended to be sold, the subdivision standards set forth in Section 4.07.00 shall be met. 
B.  The minimum parcel size shall be three (3) acres. 
C.  The following setbacks shall be provided on the perimeter of the manufactured home community parcel: 
1.  The front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
2.  The side yard setback shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
3.  The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
D.  The impervious surface coverage standard shall be calculated for the manufactured community parcel as a whole. 
E.  Perimeter landscaping shall be provided as set forth in Section 4.08.05. 
F.  Individual lots for manufactured homes within a manufactured home community shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Each lot shall be clearly defined. 
2.  Each lot shall provide an individual utility connection. 
3.  The minimum lot area shall be 4,000 s.f. 
4.  The minimum lot width shall be forty (40) feet. 
5.  Lots shall be located to provide a minimum of twenty (20) feet between adjacent manufactured home units and between a manufactured home unit and any other building within the manufactured home community. The separation shall be measured at the outermost point of each building. 
6.  Where adjacent units have porches, the minimum separation may be reduced to fifteen (15) feet. 
G.  Each individual manufactured home lot shall include two (2) parking spaces, designed and built in compliance with the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
H.  A manufactured home community may include one (1) building which may include administrative offices, social hall/community meeting space, self-service laundry, and equipment storage. Parking shall be provided for the building according to the standards set forth in Section 6.04.02. 
I.  Manufactured home communities with fifty (50) or more units shall provide on-site recreation facilities. 
J.  The entrance drive and internal streets shall comply with the standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
5.04.15 - Bed and Breakfast Lodging Establishments. 
A.  A newly constructed building for a bed and breakfast lodging establishment shall be consistent and compatible with the design, appearance, and character of residential dwellings located within the surrounding block. 
B.  An existing residential building may be converted to a bed and breakfast lodging establishment, provided that the building and the site are conforming to the standards in this LDC. 
C.  The owner/operator of the bed and breakfast establishment shall reside on the premises. 
D.  Density of the bed and breakfast lodging establishment shall be determined as follows: 
1.  Two (2) bedrooms or lodging rooms shall be the equivalent of one (1) residential dwelling unit. 
2.  Where the equivalent number of residential dwellings contains a fraction, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
3.  All bedrooms shall be counted in the determination of density, whether occupied by the owner, the owner's family in residence in the bed and breakfast inn, or lodging guests. 
E.  A private bath shall be provided for each guest room. 
F.  Breakfast, social events, and activities shall be limited to the guests or lodgers in the bed and breakfast lodging, and shall not be offered or available to the general public. 
G.  Parking shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building, provided that the parking lot and spaces are not located in the required setback. The number of required spaces shall be as set forth in Section 6.04.02. The design of the parking lot shall comply with the standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
H.  One (1) sign identifying the bed and breakfast lodging establishment shall be permissible, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet. 
2.  The sign shall have color, design, and materials consistent with the color, design, and materials of the bed and breakfast lodging establishment. 
3.  The sign shall not be illuminated. 
4.  Only a monument sign or wall mounted sign shall be permissible. 
5.04.16 - Car Wash and Detailing Facility, Freestanding. 
    A car wash and detailing facility proposed as an accessory to a principal use shall meet the standards for accessory structures set forth in Section 5.01.02. Where a car wash and detailing facility is an accessory to a fuel/gasoline station, the standards of Section 5.04.05 shall apply. A car wash and detailing facility may be established as a freestanding principal use, and may include both self-service and attendant operations, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the following supplemental standards. 
A.  The car wash and detailing facility shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any parcel zoned to allow residential use, measured as the shortest distance from property line to property line. In addition, the washing bays shall be screened from view in compliance with the following standards: 
1.  A fence or wall a minimum of six (6) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height shall be installed. The fence or wall shall be solid and the finished side shall face outward; OR 
2.  A landscaped buffer may be installed, provided that the plants are evergreen trees and shrubs, planted in double staggered rows to form a continuous screen at least six (6) feet in height. 
B.  The primary access to the car wash facility shall be from a collector or arterial street. 
C.  An off-street stacking lane shall be provided for each car washing bay. Each stacking lane shall be a minimum of sixty (60) feet in length. 
D.  Where an office is included on the site of the car wash facility, off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Section 6.04.02. 
E.  Exterior lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
F.  All car wash and detailing bays shall be designed to minimize and capture airborne particles of water, chemicals, and dust. 
G.  The car wash facility shall provide for treatment and recycling of runoff water. 
H.  No permanent storage of vehicles or equipment shall be permissible outside. 
5.04.17 - Distribution Centers and Freight and Moving Establishments. 
    Distribution centers and freight and moving establishments are permissible within the CTP zoning district, subject to the standards of the district. Distribution centers and freight and moving establishments are permissible within the CG and MB zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
A.  Doors or openings to loading bays and docks shall not open toward adjacent properties zoned to allow residential use. 
B.  Loading bays and docks shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way and properties zoned to allow residential use. 
C.  Goods and materials shall be stored within the principal building or a permissible accessory storage building. Outside storage of goods and materials is prohibited. 
D.  Perimeter landscaping required by Section 4.08.05 shall be doubled. 
E.  Exterior lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
5.04.18 - Ice Vending Kiosks and Buildings. 
A.  Ice vending kiosks and buildings are free-standing kiosks or buildings where ice is dispensed in bags. 
B.  Ice vending kiosks and buildings may be accessory structures on sites where a principal building is located. 
C.  Ice vending kiosks and buildings may be principal structures on a platted lot. 
D.  Where the ice vending kiosk or building is located on a lot with a principal building, the area devoted to the ice vending kiosk or building shall not occupy any required parking, loading area, easement, buffer, landscaped area, or setback. 
1.  The site area for an ice vending kiosk or building shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet wide and thirty (30) feet long. 
2.  The kiosk or building shall be located at least two (2) feet from the side line of the site area designated for the ice vending operation. 
3.  The kiosk or building shall be located at least two (2) feet from the rear line of the site area designated for the ice vending operation. 
4.  A portion of the site measuring nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet long shall be clearly marked as a loading space, or temporary parking space to accommodate a motorist obtaining ice from the vending building. 
5.  The traffic circulation on the site of the principal use shall allow for queuing of two (2) additional vehicles awaiting use of the vending building. 
E.  Where the ice vending kiosk or building is the principal use on the site, the kiosk or building shall comply with the setback and impervious surface standards for the zoning district as set forth in Chapter 4. 
1.  One temporary parking or loading space shall be provided. 
2.  The driveway shall provide off-street space for queuing of two (2) vehicles in addition to the temporary parking/loading space. 
F.  All ice vending kiosk and building sites, whether accessory or principal uses, shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The site shall be adequately lighted; lights shall be directed to provide safety for operators and shall be shielded to avoid glare onto adjacent properties. 

Figure 5.04.18 (F). Screening of ice vending kiosks
2.  Roof-mounted equipment shall be shielded from view on all sides by a material consistent with that of the vending kiosk or building. 
5.04.19 - Golf Course. 
A.  A golf course may be public or private and may include the following buildings and accessory uses: 
1.  Clubhouse, with or without a pro shop; 
2.  Retail sales of golf supplies and accessories; 
3.  Restaurant or snack shop; 
4.  Cart rental; 
5.  Equipment building for maintenance, minor repairs, and storage. Storage may include grounds maintenance equipment, fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides; and 
6.  Driving range. 
B.  The types of golf courses that are permissible include par 3, executive, or regulation. 
C.  The following site development standards are required for all golf course development: 
1.  The minimum setback from any property line for buildings, greens, and fairways shall be sixty (60) feet. 
2.  Safety netting is required for a driving range and shall be located on the perimeter of the playing area where such area abuts a public right-of-way. The safety netting shall be a minimum of thirty-two (32) feet in height. 
3.  Outdoor lights for driving ranges, tees, greens, fairways, or buildings shall be directed and shielded to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
4.  Loudspeaker or paging systems are prohibited. 
5.  Golf cart crossings of pedestrian paths or public rights-of-way shall be plainly marked and located for safety of the cart users, pedestrians, and motorists. 
6.  Outdoor areas for storage of golf carts shall be fully screened from view from adjacent properties and any public right-of-way. 
5.04.20 - Gardens, Freestanding. 
    A garden may be an accessory use, subject to the standards for all accessory uses set forth in Section 5.01.02. A garden may be a freestanding principal use, subject to the standards set forth below. 
A.  The garden plot shall be located as follows: 
1.  The minimum setback from the front property line shall be twenty (20) feet. 
2.  The minimum setback from side and rear property lines shall be five (5) feet. 
B.  A storage building may be placed on site, provided such building is in compliance with the standards for storage buildings set forth in Section 5.01.07. 
C.  A fence may be placed on site, provided that the fence is transparent and complies with the standards for fences set forth in Section 5.01.08. 
D.  Proper City and State licensing and permit/inspections shall be obtained, including approval from the Florida Department of Agricultural and Consumer Services (only for commercial sites). 
E.  In R-1E, R-1, and R-2 zoning districts, no sales shall take place at the garden site. No distribution of goods to or from the site is allowed. 
F.  In commercial and mixed-use districts, landscaping standards do not apply. 
G.  Parking requirements are as follows: 
1.  In R-1E, R-1, and R-2 zoning districts, two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided. Such spaces shall be provided in compliance with the standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
2.  In all other zoning districts, parking shall be provided as set forth in Section 6.04.02 for farmer's markets. 
5.04.21 - Restaurants. 
A.  The drive-up window(s) for restaurants with drive-up or drive-through service shall not be located adjacent to property that is used or zoned for residential use. Where the site configuration does not allow for locating the drive-up or drive-through window on property lines adjacent to nonresidential uses, the drive-up or drive-through window shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the property line abutting property used or zoned for residential development. 
B.  All drive-up or drive-through lanes shall comply with the stacking standards in Section 6.05.02 of this LDC. 
C.  All drive-up or drive-through lanes shall be designed and located to avoid lights from vehicles in the drive-up or drive-through lanes shining toward or onto residential property. This standard may be met through the installation of a solid wall or solid fence. 
D.  Speaker systems shall be located to avoid sound that is audible above daytime ambient noise at the property line. 
E.  Dog-Friendly Dining. Pursuant to section 509.233(2), Florida Statutes, there is hereby created in the City of Fort Walton Beach, Florida, a local exemption procedure to certain provisions of the United States Food and Drug Administration Food Code, as amended from time to time, and as adopted by the State of Florida Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Department of Business and Professional Regulation, in order to allow patrons' dogs within certain designated outdoor portions of public food service establishments, which exemption procedure may be known as the City of Fort Walton Beach Dog Friendly Dining Program. 
1.  To protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, a public food service establishment is prohibited from having any dog on its premises unless it possesses a valid permit issued in accordance with this part, which shall be made to the City on a form provided by the City, and shall include the following: 
a.  The name, mailing address, and telephone contact information of the permit applicant and the subject food service establishment. 
b.  A diagram and description of the outdoor area to be designated as available to patrons' dogs, including dimensions of the designated area; a depiction of the number and placement of tables, chairs, and restaurant equipment, if any; the entryways and exits to the designated outdoor area; the boundaries of the designated area and of any other areas of outdoor dining not available for patrons' dogs; any fences or other barriers; surrounding property lines and public rights-of-way, including sidewalks and common pathways; and such other information reasonably required by the City. The diagram or plan shall be accurate and to scale but need not be prepared by a licensed design professional. 
c.  A description of the days of the week and hours of operation that patron' dogs will be permitted in the designated outdoor area. 
d.  All application materials shall contain the appropriate division issued license number for the subject public food service establishment. 
2.  All permits issued under this section are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  All public food service establishment employees shall wash their hands promptly after touching, petting, or otherwise handling any dog. Employees shall be prohibited from touching, petting, or otherwise handling any dog while serving food or beverages or handling tableware or before entering other parts of the public food service establishment. 
b.  Patrons in a designated outdoor area shall be advised that they should wash their hands before eating. Waterless hand sanitizer shall be provided at all tables in the designated outdoor area. 
c.  Employees and patrons shall be instructed that they shall not allow dogs to come into contact with serving dishes, utensils, tableware, linens, paper products, or any other items involved in food service operations. 
d.  Patrons shall keep their dogs on a leash at all times and shall keep their dogs under reasonable control. 
e.  Dogs shall not be allowed on chairs, tables, or other furnishings. 
f.  All table and chair surfaces shall be cleaned and sanitized with an approved product between seating of patrons. Spilled food and drink shall be removed from the floor or ground between seating of patrons. 
g.  Accidents involving dog waste shall be cleaned immediately and the area sanitized with an approved product. A kit with the appropriate materials for this purpose shall be kept near the designated outdoor area. 
h.  At least one sign reminding employees of the applicable rules, including those contained in this part, and those additional rules and regulations, if any, included as further conditions of the permit by the City, shall be posted in a conspicuous location frequented by employees within the public food service establishment. The mandatory sign shall be not less than eight and one half inches in width and eleven inches in height (8 1/2 × 11) and printed in easily legible typeface of not less than twenty (20) point font size. 
i.  At least one sign reminding patrons of the applicable rules, including those contained in this part, and those additional rules and regulations, if any, included as further conditions of the permit by the City, shall be posted in a conspicuous location within the designated outdoor portion of the public food service establishment. The mandatory sign shall be not less than eight and one half inches in width and eleven inches in height (8 1/2 × 11) and printed in easily legible typeface of not less than twenty (20) point font size. 
j.  At all times while the designated outdoor portion of the public food service establishment is available to patrons and their dogs, at least one sign shall be posted in a conspicuous and public location near the entrance to the designated outdoor portion of the public food service establishment, the purpose of which shall be to place patrons on notice that the designated outdoor portion of the public food service establishment is currently available to patrons accompanied by their dog or dogs. The mandatory sign shall be not less than eight and one-half inches in width and eleven inches in height (8 1/2 × 11) and printed in easily legible typeface of not less than twenty (20) point font size. 
k.  Dogs shall not be permitted to travel through indoor or undesignated outdoor portions of the public food service establishment, and ingress and egress to the designated outdoor portions of the public food service establishment shall not require entrance into or passage through any indoor or undesignated outdoor portion of the public food service establishment. 
3.  A permit issued pursuant to this part shall not be transferred to a subsequent owner upon the sale or transfer of a public food service establishment, but shall expire automatically upon such sale or transfer. The subsequent owner shall be required to reapply for a permit pursuant to this part if such owner wishes to continue to accommodate patrons' dogs. 
4.  In accordance with section 509.233(6), Florida Statutes, the City shall accept and document complaints related to the Dog Friendly Dining Program within the City, and shall timely report to the division all such complaints and the City's enforcement response to such complaint. The City shall also timely provide the division with a copy of all approved applications and permits issued pursuant to this part. 
5.04.22 - Schools, Academic, Charter, Public, or Private. 
    All academic schools, whether charter, public, or private, shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from any establishment where selling alcohol for on-site consumption is a primary use. 
5.04.23 - Tattoo Parlors and Body-Piercing Studios. 
    A tattoo parlor and/or piercing studio may be located in the zoning district subject to the following: 
A.  Within the Downtown Design Overlay District, no tattoo parlor may be located within 1,500 feet of any other such business as measured from the main entrance of one establishment to the main entrance of another establishment. 
B.  This section shall not apply to businesses established on or before May 1, 2012. 
5.04.24 - Non-Chartered Financial Institutions. 
    A non-chartered financial institution may be located in the zoning district subject to the following: 
A.  Within the Downtown Design Overlay District, no non-chartered financial institution may be located within 1,500 feet of any other such business as measured from the main entrance of one establishment to the main entrance of another establishment. 
5.04.25 - Pawnshops. 
    A pawnshop may be located in the zoning district subject to the following: 
A.  Within the Downtown Design Overlay District, no pawnshop may be located within 1,500 feet of any other such business as measured from the main entrance of one establishment to the main entrance of another establishment. 
5.04.26 - Adult-Oriented Uses. 
    An adult-oriented use may be located in the zoning district subject to the following: 
A.  Within the Downtown Design Overlay District, no adult-oriented use may be allowed. 
B.  This section shall not apply to businesses established on or before May 1, 2012. 
5.04.27 - Fortune Tellers and Psychics. 
    A fortune teller or psychic may be located in the zoning district subject to the following: 
A.  Within the Downtown Design Overlay District, no fortune teller or psychic may be located within 1,500 feet of any other such business as measured from the main entrance of one establishment to the main entrance of another establishment. 
5.04.28 - Medical Facility for Recovery or Rehabilitation Services. 
    A medical facility for recovery or rehabilitation services may be located in the zoning district subject to the following: 
A.  Facilities may allow for overnight stay if adequately constructed. Buildings shall meet all Building Code requirements and Fire Safety requirements for facilities that allow overnight stay. 
B.  Facilities that do not meet Building Code and Fire Safety requirements for overnight stay may provide daytime medical services. 
C.  Facilities that abut residential properties may be required to provide additional buffering or make other accommodations to insure compatibility. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 3, 5-19-15) 
5.04.29 - Schools, Business, Commercial, Trade, Vocational. 
    A business, commercial, trade, or vocational school may be located in the zoning district subject to the following: 
A.  Facilities may provide on-site dormitory as an accessory use to the training facility. 
1.  The use of the dormitory shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for training purposes. 
2.  Overnight/short term stays shall be permissible only during the duration of the training courses. 
3.  Overnight stays shall not be permissible during periods that training courses are not in session. 
4.  Long term stays shall not be permissible. 
B.  Facilities may allow for on-site dormitories if adequately constructed. Buildings shall meet Building Code requirements and Fire Safety requirements for mixed use construction. 
(Ord. No. 1956 , § 3, 11-15-16) 
5.04.30 - Boatyards. 
A.  A boatyard may include the following facilities and uses: 
    The servicing, repairing, and maintaining of marine boats and vessels including, but not limited to: hauling vessels out of the water; lifting and blocking of vessels using marine travel lifts and various other equipment; bottom maintenance, including pressure washing, wet farrow blasting, sanding, stripping, and painting; performing mechanical repairs, replacement and maintenance to all marine gas and diesel engine types, marine transmissions, drive gears, and gear case; repairing or replacing running gear and under water parts including drive shafts, propellers, struts, cutlass bearings, thru-hull fittings and valves, transducers, trim tabs and actuators, rudders, stabilizers, bow thrusters, stern thrusters, keel coolers, keel guards, and water scoops; performing minor and major fiberglass repairs, including sanding, filling, structure fabrication, painting, gelcoat application, buffing, waxing, and polishing; performing sailboat rigging repair or replacement, including mast stepping, rig tuning, and keel repair or replacement; repairing or replacing all ship systems, including electronic equipment, windlasses, deck hardware electrical power systems, steering systems, controls systems, navigation systems, grab rails, hatches, ports, decking, canvass repair or fabrication, upholstery fabrication or repair, T-top and tower repair or fabrication, and miscellaneous welding and fabrication; performing plumbing and tank repairs, upgrades and replacement; detailing vessel interiors and exteriors; and vessel loading/unloading onto transport vehicles. 
    These facilities may also incidentally engage in new and used boat sales; storing and selling of vessels; diesel fuel or gasoline fuel storage and sales; outboard, inboard, diesel engine storage and sales; marina wet slip rental and storage; and engine and boat parts and equipment storage and retail sales as an accessory use. 
B.  Boatyard operations, including the collection, storage, or handling of hazardous materials shall comply with the standards for industrial activities set forth in Section 4.03.02 of this Land Development Code and all City, State and Federal standards. 
C.  Where fuel or other hazardous substances will be stored, handled, or sold, the boatyard shall provide facilities and procedures for the prevention, containment, recovery, and mitigation of spilled fuel or other hazardous substances. Facilities and procedures shall be designed to prevent such substances from entering the water or soil, and shall include adequate means for prompt and effective cleanup of spills. 
D.  All stormwater and waste discharge shall comply with all City, State, and Federal standards. 
E.  Exterior lighting shall be directed and shielded to avoid illumination of adjacent properties in accordance with the standards in Section 4.09.01 of the LDC. 
F.  Buildings and Structures: 
1.  All buildings and structures shall include a finished façade in accordance with Section 4.00.04 of the LDC. 
2.  Any buildings used for work on boats and vessels shall be enclosed in a roofed building or structure which is enclosed on at least three (3) sides with the open side facing away from any adjacent properties with a residential or transient lodging use. 
G.  Standards for buffering. There shall be a buffer which is acceptable to the City between it and any residential, multifamily, or transient lodging use. 
1.  The City shall require a solid wall, fence or landscape buffer. A wall or fence shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height and meet the standards of Section 5.01.08 of the LDC. 
2.  The wall or fence shall be solid and the finished side of such wall or fence shall face outward. 
3.  Where a landscaped buffer is provided, the plants shall include evergreen trees and shrubs. The trees and shrubs shall be planted in double staggered rows to form a continuous screen at least six (6) feet in height. 
4.  The landscaping shall be maintained to ensure continuation of the vegetative screen. Dead or damaged plant materials shall be replaced as soon as possible based on the growing season. 
5.  Where the landscaped buffer is not adequately maintained, the City may require replacement of the landscaped buffer with a solid wall or fence. 
6.  There shall be no outside work performed within twenty-five (25) feet of a property line. 
7.  Audio amplification systems, including, but not limited to, telephone loudspeakers or paging systems, shall be located to ensure that the sound cannot be heard on adjacent properties. 
H.  Outdoor boatyard operations. 
1.  All outdoor boatyard operations shall be buffered in accordance with requirements listed in Section 5.04.30.G. Additional buffering may be required based on adjacent property uses in order to ensure compatibility between adjacent uses. 
I.  The emission of noise which is a nuisance to adjacent properties shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. 
J.  No boatyard shall be located within five thousand (5,000) feet of another boatyard. 
K.  There shall be at least one (1) parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of office space, one (1) parking space per employee on the longest shift, and one (1) parking space per service bay. 
(Ord. No. 1971 , § 3, 3-28-17) 
5.04.31 - Medical Marijuana Dispensary. 
A.  Medical Marijuana Dispensary. A retail establishment, licensed by the Florida Department of Health, as a medical marijuana dispensing organization that sells and dispenses medical marijuana. 
B.  A medical marijuana dispensary may be located in the zoning district subject to the following: 
1.  Not located within five hundred (500) feet of the main entrance of a public or private elementary school, middle school, or secondary school, measured over the nearest usually traveled pedestrian route between the school and dispensary. 
2.  Not located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another medical marijuana dispensary, whether it is located in the City or in another jurisdiction, measured over the nearest usually traveled pedestrian route between both dispensaries. 
C.  Parking requirement: 
1.  One (1) space per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area, plus one (1) space per FTE and one (1) space for every two (2) PTE's. 
D.  Medical Marijuana Dispensary Prohibited Activities: 
1.  Shall not engage in any other activity related to preparation, wholesale storage, distribution, transfer, cultivation, or processing of any form of marijuana or marijuana product. 
2.  Shall not allow on-site consumption of marijuana. 
E.  Business Tax Receipt Requirement: 
1.  Owners or ownership entities of medical marijuana dispensary, licensed by the Florida Department of Health, are required to comply with the City's Business Tax Requirements, including Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8.01 Business Tax Requirements. 
2.  The City will issue only one (1) Business Tax Receipt to a business currently licensed by the Florida Department of Health. 
F.  Numerical Limit: 
1.  The City shall consider issuance of Business Tax Receipts for a medical marijuana dispensary based upon the City population. 
2.  The maximum number of Business Tax Receipts for a medical marijuana dispensary approved in the City shall not exceed one (1) for every ten thousand (10,000) residents, as certified in the most recent census or periodic demographic studies recognize by the City, including the Bureau of Economic and Business Research (BEBR) Florida Estimates of Population. For example: 
Residents Indicated Business Tax Receipts 0-10,000 1 10,001-20,000 2 20,001-30,000 3 30,001-40,000 4 40,001-50,000 5 50,001-60,000 6 60,001-70,000 7 70,001-80,000 8  
The City shall evaluate the maximum number of Business Tax Receipts for medical marijuana dispensaries annually (once every twelve (12) months), at a minimum, to determine if the population basis needs adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 1972 , § 3, 3-28-17) 
CHAPTER 5 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
LDC Effective 
1 May 2012 LDC Effective 
9/2008-4/2012 State Law References/Other Historical Notes Authority Chpt. 166.021 F.S., Chpt. 163.3161 F.S., Chpt 163.3202 F.S., City Charter § 2, Ord. 1861 (27 Mar 2012) 5.00.00 5.00.01 5.01.00 5.01.01 5.01.02 Ord. 1872 (23 Oct 2012), 5.01.03 5.01.04 5.01.05 5.01.06 5.01.07 Ord. 1872 (23 Oct 2012), 5.01.08 Ord. 1872 (23 Oct 2012), 5.01.09 5.01.10 5.01.11 Ord. 1872 (23 Oct 2012), 5.01.12 5.01.13 5.01.14 5.01.15 5.01.16 5.01.17 5.02.00 5.02.01 5.02.02 5.02.03 5.02.04 5.03.00 5.03.01 5.03.02 5.03.03 5.03.04 5.03.05 Ord. 1872 (23 Oct 2012), 5.03.06 5.03.07 5.04.00 5.04.01 5.04.02 5.04.03 5.04.04 5.04.05 5.04.06 5.04.07 5.04.08 5.04.09 5.04.10 5.04.11 5.04.12 5.04.13 5.04.14 5.04.15 5.04.16 5.04.17 5.04.18 5.04.19 5.04.20 5.04.21 Ord. 1874 (12-11-12), 5.04.22 Ord. 1887 (3-25-14), 5.04.23 Ord. 1887 (3-25-14), 5.04.24 Ord. 1887 (3-25-14), 5.04.25 Ord. 1887 (3-25-14), 5.04.26 Ord. 1887 (3-25-14), 5.04.27 Ord. 1887 (3-25-14),  
Chapter 6 - STANDARDS FOR TRANSPORTATION, ACCESS, PARKING, AND LOADING 
6.00.00. - GENERALLY 

6.00.01. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is provided to establish standards and requirements for the entire transportation system, including access, streets, bicycle ways, sidewalks, off-street parking, on-street parking, loading areas, stacking lanes for drive-thru situations, and transit. 
6.00.02. - Applicability. 
    All development and redevelopment shall be designed, constructed, and established in compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter. 
6.01.00. - STREETS, ACCESS MANAGEMENT, AND RIGHT-OF-WAY PROTECTION 

6.01.01. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to ensure a safe and efficient traffic circulation system, manage access, establish right-of-way widths for future transportation facilities, and prohibit encroachment of structures into existing rights-of-way. 
6.01.02. - Right-of-Way Requirements. 
    Minimum right-of-way widths for new roadways are provided in Table 6.01.02. 
Table 6.01.02. Required Minimum Right-of-Way Widths. 
Street type Urban section (feet) Transitional section (feet) Local 60 60 2-lane collector, one way 60 60 4-lane undivided arterial 96 96 4-lane divided arterial 112 112 6-lane divided arterial 112 112 4-lane freeway NA 300 6-lane freeway NA 350  
6.01.03. - Use of Rights-of-Way. 
A.  Construction, maintenance, or use of a public right-of-way requires a local development permit issued as set forth in the procedures of Chapter 9. 
B.  Encroachment shall not unreasonably restrict the public use of the right-of-way. 
C.  No person shall willfully obstruct any portion of the right-of-way for a new roadway. 
D.  Roadside stands are prohibited within or on any portion of the right-of-way of any public road. 
E.  The following uses of a public road are specifically permissible and are not a violation of this section: 
1.  Improvement of a public road by the owner of property adjacent to the public road with landscaping, shrubbery, or grass consistent with the use of the public road for road purposes. 
2.  Parking motor vehicles on that portion of the public road not used as traffic lanes if not otherwise prohibited. 
3.  The replacement or maintenance of existing utility facilities, such as telephone poles. 
F.  No person shall remove grass, earth, or sand from, or dig up, any street, or deposit material of any kind on any street or right-of-way, without City authorization. 
6.01.04. - Access Management. 
    Street arrangement and layout shall meet the following standards. 
A.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall be consistent with the existing street network. 
B.  The arrangements of streets shall either: 
1.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing planned or platted streets in surrounding areas; or 
2.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
C.  When a project site abuts two (2) or more City streets, access shall be from the City street with the lower functional classification. Where the City determines that other access standards preclude placement of a drive on the street with the lower functional classification, an alternate design may be approved. 
D.  The separation between access points on State-maintained roads shall be in accordance with Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) rules. On roads that are not maintained by the State, the separation between access points onto arterial and collector roadways, or between an access point and an intersection of an arterial or collector with another road, shall be as shown in Table 6.01.04. 
Table 6.01.04. Separation of Access Points. 
Functional class of road Distance between access points (feet) Major arterial 175 Minor arterial 100 Major collector 50 Minor collector 40  
E.  The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway or roadway to the centerline of the nearest adjacent roadway or driveway. 
6.01.05. - Street Access and Driveway Design Requirements. 
    All ingress and egress driveways onto a City street shall be located to allow the greatest degree of safety to both pedestrian and vehicular traffic on a City street. All proposed development shall meet these standards for vehicular access and circulation: 
A.  Access points shall be able to accommodate all vehicles entering the site, including delivery vehicles. 
B.  Access design shall ensure that an entering standard passenger vehicle will not encroach upon the exit lane of a two-way driveway. 
C.  Access design shall ensure that a right-turning exiting vehicle shall be able to use only the first through traffic lane available without encroaching into the adjacent through lane. 
D.  There shall be sufficient onsite storage to accommodate queued vehicles waiting to park or exit without using any portion of the street right-of-way or in any other way interfering with street traffic. 
E.  Number, location and separation requirements for driveways. Driveways shall be designed to adequately accommodate the volume and normal character of vehicles anticipated to be attracted to the development. 
1.  The number of driveways shall be determined by existing site conditions and ensuring safe and efficient access and use for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the City street. 
2.  Minimum distance of driveway to a street intersection. 

Figure 6.01.05 (E-2). 
Minimum driveway intersection distances 
a.  The edge of a driveway for all uses other than a single-family residential dwelling shall be located a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from the proposed right-of-way line of a street intersection. 
b.  The edge of a driveway for a single-family residential dwelling shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the proposed right-of-way line of a street intersection. 
3.  Where two (2) or more driveways connect a single development site to any one (1) City street, a minimum clear distance of fifty (50) feet, measured along the curb line of the tangents of the proposed driveway curb radii, shall be provided. 
4.  The edge of a driveway for uses other than a single-family residential dwelling shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the proposed property line. Where a property line is the same as the right-of-way line referenced in Section 6.01.05.E(2)(a), the minimum distance shall be the standard in Section 6.01.05.E(2)(a). 
5.  Opposing driveway intersections. 
a.  Opposing driveway intersections for uses other than a single-family dwelling shall be located directly across from each other along City streets. 
b.  If conditions prohibit locating a proposed driveway intersection directly opposite an existing or proposed driveway intersection along a City street, the offsets between the existing and proposed intersections shall be a minimum of 150 feet. 
6.  Driveways shall be located and designed to ensure that vehicles do not back onto the City right-of-way, except for driveways serving a single-family dwelling in single-family developments and residential zoning districts. 
F.  Driveway design. 
1.  Depressed curbing may be required across driveway openings, in order to promote the continual flow of street stormwater runoff. 
2.  Driveways shall intersect the City street at an angle as near 90 degrees as site conditions permit, and in no case shall be less than 75 degrees. 
3.  All driveway aprons shall be paved from the existing or proposed edge of pavement back to the existing or proposed right-of-way line. Paving within this area shall comply with the City's paving specifications as set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual for Fort Walton Beach. Additional paving or a reinforced concrete driveway may be required, depending upon the type and amount of expected vehicular traffic. 
4.  All driveways shall be fully maintained by the property owners served by the driveways. 
6.01.06. - Mobility Requirements for Developments in the Transportation Concurrency Exemption Area (TCEA). 
A.  Development within the TCEA shall mitigate trips generated by the development by providing certain mobility improvements consistent with this section. Table 6.01.05 outlines the number of points which must be obtained based on the number of trips generated by the development. 
Table 6.01.06.A. Trip Generation Performance Criteria in the TCEA . 
Net Average Daily Trip Generation Number of Points Required Less than 25 0 26 to 50 5 51 to 100 10 101 to 250 20 251 to 500 30 500 to 1,000 40 1,001 to 5,000 50 Greater than 5,000 trips 75  
B.  Table 6.01.06.B provides a list of acceptable improvements and their point value. The development shall provide a combination of improvements that have a total point value corresponding to the development's Net Average Daily Trip Generation as provided in Table 6.01.06.A. Acceptable strategies are provided in two categories - Physical Infrastructure Improvements and Transportation Demand Management (TDM) strategies. 
Table 6.01.06.B. Acceptable Trip Generation Mitigation Strategies. 
Physical Infrastructure Improvements Points Attainable Construction of approved Brooks Landing Boardwalk segment along Santa Rosa Sound 10 Construction of bicycle lane segment along approved City bike routes or deeding/construction of proposed new bike lanes 
 Level I 
 Level II 
 Level III 5 
1 
20 Construction of Okaloosa County Transit (OCT) Bus Shelter built to OCT specifications at approved location 20 Construction of an approved segment of new public sidewalks on street frontage where none currently exist 10 Design and installation of awnings and/or canopies over public sidewalk areas to encourage pedestrian traffic and provide protection from the weather 5 Provision for pedestrian access and connectivity to Brooks Landing Boardwalk by construction of approved pedestrian crossing 20 Improvement/widening of existing public sidewalks including replacement/upgrades 10 Approved traffic calming/road diet project such as landscaping or streetscaping 40 Curb cut limitation through shared parking, on-street parking, or other means 5 Installation of approved pedestrian crosswalk signal 10 Installation of covered, secure bicycle parking 5 Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Strategies Implementation of telecommuting and/or 4-day work week for employees 20 Implementation of an approved carpool, vanpool, or other rideshare program 10 Designation of special parking for alternative fueled vehicles, non-motorized vehicles, and high mpg vehicles 20 Implementation of a transit-pass program for employees 20  
6.02.00. - BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN WAYS 

6.02.01. - Generally. 
    Bicycle and pedestrian ways shall be considered during the planning and development of on-site and off-site transportation facilities, including the connection and extension of existing bicycle and pedestrian ways on or serving State, regional, and local transportation systems. 
6.02.02. - Bicycle Way Access and Connectivity. 
A.  Bicycle lanes, paths, and other ways shall connect traffic generators and shall be located along a direct line, convenient for users. 
B.  Bicyclists shall have equal access to all streets whenever possible and feasible. 
C.  Within a neighborhood, links shall be considered through cul-de-sacs, making use of greenways, utility rights-of-way, and other open ways. 
D.  Bicycle ways shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual for Fort Walton Beach. 
6.02.03. - Sidewalks. 
A.  The purpose of this section is to require sidewalks to be constructed in conjunction with all new development and redevelopment. 
B.  Sidewalks are required along the street frontage of all lots where new development, redevelopment, subdivisions, or change of use is proposed. 
C.  Where a sidewalk is already provided, but the sidewalk is in disrepair and/or does not meet current standards for sidewalk location, width, and construction, such sidewalk shall be brought up to current standards as part of the development or redevelopment of the lot. 
D.  Where no sidewalks exist within the block, the developer may be allowed to pay a fee in lieu of construction. The amount of fee shall be equal to the costs of design and construction of the required sidewalk. The City will construct the sidewalk. 
E.  Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual for Fort Walton Beach. 
F.  Sidewalk width requirements are set forth in Table 6.02.03. 
Table 6.02.03. Minimum Sidewalk Widths. 
Location Minimum width (feet) Arterial streets (major or minor) 8 Collector streets 6 All other streets, except where the sidewalk is not abutting the curb 5 All other streets, where the sidewalk is abutting the curb 6  
G.  Location. All sidewalks shall be constructed along the width of yards fronting upon a street right-of-way. Corner lots at street intersections shall have sidewalks constructed to, extended to, and ramped to the street pavement in compliance with Federal and State ADA requirements. Sidewalks shall be constructed in the street right-of-way with the rear edge on the front property line, and shall be constructed in compliance with the standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual for Fort Walton Beach. 
H.  Maintenance of sidewalks. It shall be the duty of all owners of real property in the City that abuts any constructed public sidewalks to keep and maintain those sidewalks in good repair at all times, including the proper maintenance of vegetative materials such as trees, grass, hedges and shrubs, to keep such materials from encroaching on the sidewalks. The City may require reconstruction or implement special assessments to ensure that sidewalks are maintained in good condition. 
6.03.00. - VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS 

6.03.01. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to ensure clear sight areas for driveways and intersections. 
6.03.02 - Clear Visibility for Driveways. 
    On each side of the driveway that intersects with a City street, a minimum of a fifteen (15) foot by 100-foot driveway sight triangle shall be provided. The minimum dimensioning of the driveway sight triangle is shown in Figure 6.03.02. The clear driveway sight area is to be maintained and kept clear by the property owner. 

Figure 6.03.02. Driveway triangle
6.03.03. - Clear Visibility for Intersecting Streets. 
    For intersecting streets, the clear sight triangle shall be determined as required by the AASHTO Green Book and other Federal, State, or local regulations. 
6.04.00 - REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING AND LOADING 

6.04.01. - Generally. 
A.  All development and redevelopment shall provide off-street parking in compliance with the standards set forth in this section. 
1.  Within the MX-1 and MX-2 zoning districts, parking facilities shall be provided and shared by all uses within a mixed-use development site. Standards are set forth in Section 6.04.06.H. 
2.  On-street parking spaces, spaces in municipal parking lots, and spaces in off-site private parking lots may be counted toward meeting the parking requirement for a development site. Standards for counting on-street, municipal, and private parking lot spaces are set forth in Section 6.04.05. 
3.  In situations not addressed by Section 6.04.01.A(1) and (2), developments shall provide off-street parking as set forth in Section 6.04.02. 
B.  Limitations on use of parking facilities. Required off-street parking spaces, access driveways, and aisles shall not be used for any purpose other than vehicular parking. This prohibition applies to: 
1.  Storage of goods and equipment; 
2.  Location of dumpsters and other refuse containers; 
3.  Location of goods and materials offered for sale; 
4.  Storage of inoperable vehicles and equipment; 
5.  Repair activities; 
6.  Special events; and 
7.  Any other activity that occupies the required spaces, drives, and aisles on a temporary or permanent basis. 
C.  Calculating the number of parking spaces 
1.  The gross floor area of a building shall be used to calculate parking requirements. 
2.  When the calculation results in a fraction, the result shall be rounded up to one (1) parking space. 
3.  For places of assembly with open seating, such as benches or pews, the calculation of parking spaces shall be based on the occupancy as rated by the fire marshal. 
4.  When a site is occupied by two (2) or more separate and individual uses, the parking spaces required shall be determined by a parking study according to the requirements for such study set forth in Section 6.04.06. 
6.04.02. - Standards for Parking. 
A.  The minimum number of vehicular parking spaces and bicycle parking spaces are provided in Table 6.04.02. 
B.  The City shall not approve a parking lot with more than 110 percent of the parking spaces required according to Table 6.04.02. 
C.  Parking spaces to meet Federal and State ADA requirements shall be provided in addition to the parking requirements set forth in Table 6.04.02. 
D.  Up to five (5) percent of the required parking spaces may be designed and allocated to accommodate motorcycles. 
Table 6.04.02. Required Parking Spaces for Vehicles and Bicycles. 
Use Vehicle spaces (minimum) Bicycle spaces (minimum) Residential Uses Single-family dwelling 2 per unit None Multifamily structure 2 per unit 1 per 10 parking spaces Nonresidential Uses Barber, beauty salon, nail salon, aesthetician, skin care salon, tattoo and body piercing 2 per chair or station 1 per 10 parking spaces Business support services, such as copying, mailing, printing, private mail 1 per 300 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Car wash or detailing facility 1 per employee on largest shift None Car wash, self service 1 per stall None Community center, club, or lodge 1 per 100 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Cultural facilities, such as library, museum, or gallery 1 per 1,000 s.f. 1 per 4 parking spaces Day-care (child or adult), nursery school, kindergarten, or pre-kindergarten 1 per employee plus 5 spaces 1 per 4 parking spaces Distribution centers, may include warehousing, dispatch offices, vehicle yards 1 per employee on the largest shift 1 per 10 parking spaces Drug stores and pharmacies 1 per 300 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Dry cleaning establishment 1 per 300 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Dry storage for watercraft 1 per 10 dry storage spaces 1 per 20 parking spaces Equipment rental 1 per 400 s.f. 1 per 20 parking spaces Farmer's market 1 per 300 s.f. of the leasable area 1 per 10 parking spaces Financial institutions 1 per 300 s.f. 1 per 20 parking spaces Food stores 1 per 200 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Freight and moving companies 1 per employee on the largest shift 1 per 10 parking spaces Fuel/gasoline station, may include convenience store, restaurant, automotive supplies, but not repair 1 per 2 fuel pumps plus spaces needed for accessory uses 1 per 10 parking spaces Funeral homes, mortuaries, crematoria 1 per 4 seats in largest chapel None Furniture and/or appliance sales 1 per 500 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Golf course 4 per hole 1 per 10 parking spaces Golf driving range 
 Principal use 
 Accessory use   
1 per tee 
1 per 2 tees 1 per 10 parking spaces Group home, congregate living facility and similar uses 1 per 2 beds plus 1 per employee None Health clubs, exercise clubs, spas, gyms 1 per 300 s.f. 1 per 4 parking spaces Hospital 4 per bed 1 per 10 parking spaces Hotels, motels, inns and similar lodging facilities 1.1 per unit plus parking for accessory uses 1 per 10 parking spaces Ice vending machine See supplemental standards See supplemental standards Industrial uses, heavy industry with nuisance factors, such as odor, noise, vibration, electronic interference 1 per employee on the largest shift 1 per 10 parking spaces Junk or salvage yards, recycling facilities 1 per employee on the largest shift 1 per 10 parking spaces Laundry facility, self-service 1 per 300 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Lounge, bar, or nightclub 1 per 60 s.f. of customer service area 1 per 10 parking spaces Lumberyard, nursery yard, similar outdoor sales establishments 1 per 300 s.f. office or indoor sales area plus 1 per 1,000 s.f. of outdoor sales and display area 1 per 20 parking spaces Manufacturing, and intense industrial activities, includes production, fabrication, assembly, may include outdoor storage, includes bottling plant, dry cleaning plant, gas and fuel storage and wholesaling 1 per employee on the largest shift 1 per 10 parking spaces Manufacturing, light assembly, fully enclosed building 1 per employee on the largest shift 1 per 10 parking spaces Marinas, including fuel, supplies, docking, boat ramps 1 per 2 wet slips 1 per 20 parking spaces Medical and dental clinics and offices, outpatient facilities 1 per 200 s.f. 1 per 20 parking spaces Medical facility for recovery or rehabilitation services, includes substance abuse center, physical or mental rehabilitation, overnight stays 1 per 200 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Nursing home or convalescent facility, overnight stay 1 per 4 beds plus 1 per employee on the largest shift 1 per 20 parking spaces Offices, general or government 1 per 400 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Pawn shops 1 per 300 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Personal services, such as jewelry repair, shoe repair, tailoring, dry cleaning pick-up center 1 per 300 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Professional offices, accounting, government operations, legal services, bookkeeping, realtors, brokers, insurance, etc. 1 per 400 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Public service facilities such as fire stations, emergency services, or public works, includes vehicle storage and maintenance 1 per employee on the largest shift 1 per 10 parking spaces Recreation, indoor 
 Arcades 
1 per 300 s.f. 
1 per 4 parking spaces  Pool/billiards 2 per table 1 per 4 parking spaces  Bowling 4 per alley plus accessory uses 1 per 4 parking spaces  Skating rinks 1 per 100 s.f. 1 per 4 parking spaces Recreation, indoor, intense, such as, indoor shooting range, indoor kart tracks, and similar uses 1 per 2 users based on computed capacity plus 1 per employee on the largest shift 1 per 4 parking spaces Recreation, outdoor, active, such as sports fields, courts, playgrounds 2 per court plus 1 per 1,000 s.f. of the active use area 1 per 4 parking spaces Recreation, outdoor, intense 
 Go-karts track 
1 per 2 users based on computed capacity 
1 per 4 parking spaces  Miniature golf 1 per hole plus 1 per employee 1 per 4 parking spaces  Lighted courts and fields 2 per court plus 1 per 1,000 s.f. of the active use area 1 per 4 parking spaces  Water slides 1 per 2 users based on computed capacity 1 per 4 parking spaces Recreation, outdoor, passive, such as picnic areas, trails, open spaces, includes botanical gardens 1 per 2,000 s.f. of the active use area 1 per 4 parking spaces Religious facility See supplemental standards 1 per 10 parking spaces Repair shops, small equipment, small appliances, shoes, etc. 1 per 300 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Restaurants, indoor, enclosed outdoor seating, with or without drive-up windows 1 per 100 s.f. (gross) 1 per 4 parking spaces Retail sales, not otherwise listed 1 per 300 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces RV park or campground See supplemental standards None Schools, academic, charter, public or private 
 Elementary or middle school 1 per classroom plus 1 per employee 5 per parking space  High school or college 1 per classroom plus 1 per employee plus 1 per 10 students 5 per parking space Schools, business, commercial, trade, vocational 1 per classroom plus 1 per employee plus 1 per 10 students 1 per 10 parking spaces Self-storage, mini-storage facilities See supplemental standards None Shopping center, multi-tenant establishment 1 per 250 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Studios for personal instruction, such as music, dancing, art, or photography 1 per 300 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Terminals, bus, transit, includes truck stop 1 per employee on the largest shift 1 per 10 parking spaces Theaters, movie or performing arts 1 per 4 seats 1 per 10 parking spaces Trades, maintenance services, and heavy repair services, including outdoor storage, equipment yards, machine shops, welding shops, towing services 1 per employee on the largest shift plus 1 per service bay 1 per 20 spaces Vehicle repair or body shop 3 per service bay 2 spaces Vehicle sales, showroom, office, and retail space 1 per 400 s.f. 2 spaces Vehicles, storage yards 1 per employee 2 spaces Veterinary clinic 1 per 200 s.f. 1 per 20 parking spaces Video and DVD rentals and sales 1 per 300 s.f. 1 per 10 parking spaces Warehousing, not including self-service storage 1 per employee on the largest shift or 1 per each 1,000 s.f., whichever is less 1 per 10 parking spaces Wholesalers 1 per employee on the largest shift 1 per 10 parking spaces  
6.04.03. - Standards for Parking Lot Design. 
A.  All off-street parking lots, other than single-family and duplex dwellings, shall be designed to meet the following standards: 
1.  Parking and loading areas, access aisles, pedestrian walkways, landscaping, and open space shall be designed as integral parts of an overall development plan and shall properly relate to existing and proposed buildings. 
2.  For uses that involve the sale, repair, rental, or storage of vehicles, required off-street parking spaces shall be identified for customers and distinguished from spaces used for the vehicles that are an integral part of the business activity onsite. 
3.  The parking lot circulation system shall be contained on-site. Access from one section of the parking lot to another section of the parking shall be entirely on-site. 
4.  When dead-end parking bays are included, adequate and safe areas shall be provided for backing and turning around. 
5.  Driveways and access aisles shall be interconnected with all existing driveways and access aisles on abutting commercial properties. Where the abutting commercial property is not developed, driveways and access aisles shall be extended to the common property line, so that future interconnection is possible. Each party to the interconnection shall be entitled to a ten (10) percent reduction in the parking requirement. A cross-access easement agreement shall be provided and determined to be acceptable to the City. Upon approval, the easement agreement shall be recorded. 
6.  A parking lot shall be designed to prevent backing onto a public right-of-way, other than an alley. 
7.  Access to each parking space shall be directly from an access aisle or driveway; all required parking spaces shall be designed to permit entry and exit without moving any other vehicle. No spaces shall be located directly in aisles or driveways. 
8.  All parking and loading spaces shall be striped or otherwise marked to indicate their location and area. 
9.  No parking space shall be located so as to block emergency access. 
10.  Fire lanes shall be posted with appropriate signage, approved by the fire marshal. 
11.  All parking spaces shall be delineated by bumper strips or painted curbs. 
B.  Parking lot design 
1.  The design and construction of a parking lot shall comply with the standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual for Fort Walton Beach. 
2.  The dimensions of parking spaces and access aisles shall comply with the standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual for Fort Walton Beach. 
3.  Required design standards for required bicycle parking spaces and facilities are set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual for Fort Walton Beach. 
6.04.04. - Standards for Loading Spaces. 
    The required number of off-street loading spaces is shown in Table 6.04.04. The design and construction of off-street loading spaces shall comply with the standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual for Fort Walton Beach. 
Table 6.04.04. Required Off-Street Loading Spaces. 
Use Required spaces (minimum) Multifamily residential , 20 to 40 dwelling units 1 Multifamily residential, over 40 dwelling units 2 Offices, up to 75,000 s.f. 1 Offices, each additional 25,000 s.f. over 75,000 s.f. 1 Theaters, auditoriums, stadiums, places of general assembly, up to 20,000 s.f. 1 Theaters, auditoriums, stadiums, places of general assembly, each additional 100,000 s.f. over 20,000 s.f. 1 Commercial uses, up to 30,000 s.f. 1 Commercial uses, each additional 20,000 s.f. over 30,000 s.f. 1 Industrial uses, per 10,000 s.f. 1 Schools, libraries, hospitals, nursing homes, per 100,000 s.f. 1  
6.04.05. - Standards for Parking Off the Development Site. 
A.  Development may count parking spaces located off the development site in the following circumstances: 
1.  The development parcel is located in the CG, MX-1, or MX-2 zoning district. 
a.  On-street parking is available within 300 feet of the principal entrance of the building(s) to be served by parking. Distance shall be measured along the most direct walking route from the entrance to the parking. 
OR 
b.  An available municipal parking lot is located within 400 feet of the principal entrance of the building(s) to be served by parking. Distance shall be measured along the most direct walking route from the building entrance to the nearest entrance to the municipal parking lot. A municipal parking lot is available when it provides parking to the general area and is not intended to provide off-street parking to support a public or civic structure or use. 
OR 
c.  A private off-site parking lot is available within 400 feet of the principal entrance of the building(s) to be served by parking. The parcel containing the private off-site parking lot shall be located on land zoned CG, MX-1, or MX-2. The off-site parking lot shall be provided by the owner of the development parcel to exclusively serve the development parcel. 
OR 
d.  A private off-site parking lot is available within 400 feet of the principal entrance of the building(s) to be served by parking. The parcel containing the private off-site parking lot shall be located on land zoned CG, MX-1, or MX-2. The owner of the development parcel and the owner of the parking lot shall enter into an agreement guaranteeing the availability of the parking spaces to be counted to meet parking needs of the development parcel. The agreement shall be a recordable instrument in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. The City shall be a party to the agreement and shall retain enforcement authority. The agreement shall contain covenants running with the lands of both the development parcel and the parcel containing the parking lot. 
2.  The development parcel is located in the CF or OS zoning district. One (1) of the following situations shall provide parking to meet needs on the development parcel: 
a.  An available municipal parking lot is located within 400 feet of the principal entrance of the building(s) or uses to be served by parking. Distance shall be measured along the most direct walking route from the building entrance to the nearest entrance to the municipal parking lot. 
b.  On-street parking is available within 400 feet of the principal entrance of the building(s) or use to be served by parking. Distance shall be measured along the most direct walking route from the entrance to the parking. 
B.  Valet parking 
1.  A portion of the required off-street parking in CG, MX-1, and MX-2 zoning districts may be provided off of the development site and accessed through a valet service. The property owner shall ensure the availability of the number of spaces required in Table 6.04.02 through provision of a recordable legal instrument acceptable to the City. The agreement shall guarantee the number and location of the off-site parking spaces and the availability of the spaces to the property owner. 
2.  In addition, the property owner shall ensure the availability of a valet service through provision of contractual agreements with a valet service that demonstrates the availability of valets to transfer cars from the business location to the off-site parking. Handicapped parking in compliance with ADA requirements shall be provided on-site and is not subject to the valet agreement. 
6.04.06. - Parking Studies. 
A.  The required number of parking spaces may be reduced based on the results of a parking study prepared in compliance with the standards of this section. The parking study shall be prepared by a traffic engineer, certified transportation planner, or other professional with expertise in parking. 
B.  Parking spaces may be shared by two (2) or more adjacent uses when a parking study prepared in compliance with the standards of this section demonstrates that adequate parking will be available to meet all parking needs. 
C.  Development located in the MX-1 or MX-2 zoning districts shall share parking. A parking study shall be prepared in compliance with the standards of this section to demonstrate the amount of parking required. 
D.  The Development Administrator may require a parking study when the characteristics of the proposed development is believed to require a greater or lesser number of parking and/or loading spaces than established by the standards in Sections 6.04.02 and 6.04.04. 
E.  A parking study shall include estimates of parking requirements based on one (1) of the following sources: 
1.  Urban Land Institute; 
2.  Institute of Traffic Engineers; 
3.  American Planning Association; 
4.  Traffic Institute; or 
5.  A study of parking requirements prepared by a Traffic Engineer based on data collected demonstrating the actual parking needs of comparable uses. Uses shall be considered comparable based on type of use, density, or intensity of development, scale, bulk, and location. The study shall clearly document the location of parking counts, and the time of the counts (week days, weekends, peak use periods, and season). 
F.  The parking study shall also include an analysis of the extent to which a transportation system management program and use of alternative forms of transportation lessen the parking requirement. The following factors shall be considered: 
1.  Public transportation satisfies transportation demands for a portion of the users of the facility that corresponds to the amount of proposed parking reduction. 
2.  The availability and estimated use of private and public ride sharing, such as car pools and van pools. 
3.  The availability of subscription bus service. 
4.  Parking charges. 
5.  The guaranteed provision of annual employee or customer bus passes by the development occupying the development site. 
6.  The implementation of guaranteed flexible work hour scheduling. 
7.  The establishment of a transportation coordinator position to implement a car pool, van pool, and/or other transit programs. 
8.  The reduction in parking spaces corresponds to the percentage of residents, employees, and customers who regularly walk, use bicycles and other non-motorized forms of transportation, or use mass transportation to travel to the facility. Documentation of the source of this data shall be provided. 
G.  The parking study may demonstrate a deferral of the provision of otherwise required parking spaces provided that the following standards are met: 
1.  A parking plan is provided to demonstrate that sufficient space is available to meet the parking requirements set forth in Section 6.04.02. 
2.  A parking plan is provided that illustrates the layout for the required number of spaces, designating the spaces to be deferred. 
3.  Spaces proposed for deferral shall not be used for required landscaping, required buffers, required setbacks, or stormwater management. 
4.  A parking plan shall demonstrate full compliance with all design requirements of this LDC, except for the design and construction of deferred spaces. 
5.  The parking plan shall include a written agreement, in the form of a recordable instrument approved by the City Attorney, guaranteeing conversion of the deferred spaces to paved spaces in full compliance with the standards of this LDC, based upon the City's determination that the deferred spaces are necessary for the safety and welfare of the public. The City shall be a party to the agreement. The agreement shall include a requirement that the property owner shall be responsible for any expenses of a traffic and/or parking study to address the need for the deferred spaces. 
6.  The property owner may at any time request approval of a revised development plan to allow converting the deferred spaces to operable parking spaces. 
H.  A parking study to support shared parking requirements shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The parking spaces for joint use shall be located within 300 feet of the respective uses they are intended to serve. 
2.  The study shall include sufficient data to demonstrate that the hours of maximum demand for parking at the respective uses do not normally overlap. 
3.  The study shall contain sufficient information to demonstrate that the joint use of parking and subsequent reduction in the total number of otherwise required parking spaces will not have a negative impact on adjacent properties. 
4.  The owner of parcels proposing to share parking shall enter into an agreement guaranteeing the joint access and use of the parking spaces to meet parking needs of all properties represented in the agreement. The agreement shall be a recordable instrument in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. The City shall be a party to the agreement and shall retain enforcement authority. The agreement shall contain covenants running with the lands of all parcels relying on the shared parking arrangement. The agreement shall include provisions for maintenance of the shared parking facility. The agreement shall also include provisions that address discontinuance of one (1) or more uses and a change in one (1) or more uses resulting in an increased parking need. The agreement shall contain covenants running with the lands of all development parcels relying on the shared parking arrangement. 
6.05.00. - STANDARDS FOR STACKING LANES AND DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY LANES 

6.05.01. - Stacking Space Requirements. 
    All facilities providing drive-up or drive-through service shall provide on-site stacking lanes in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  The amount of stacking space required is set forth in Table 6.05.01. Where a use that is not listed in this table is proposed to include drive-up or drive-through service, the Development Administrator shall determine the stacking requirement. Determination shall be based on the requirements for a substantially comparable use, considering traffic generation, intensity of development, scale of development, and hours of operation. 
Table 6.05.01. Stacking Space Requirements for Drive-up and Drive-Through Services. 
Use Required spaces (minimum) Automobile repair facility 2 vehicles per service bay Car wash facility, automatic 3 vehicles per lane Drug store or pharmacy 4 vehicles per lane Financial institution 4 vehicles for the first lane and 2 vehicles per lane for each additional lane Food or beverage center 4 vehicles per lane Fast food restaurant 6 vehicles per lane  
6.05.02. - Design Requirements for Stacking Lanes. 
A.  Stacking lane distance shall be measured from the service window to the property line bordering the furthest street providing access to the facility. Stacking distance shall be computed at eighteen (18) feet per vehicle. 
B.  The facilities and stacking lanes shall be located and designed to minimize turning movements in relation to the driveway access to streets and intersections. 
C.  On-site parking lots, pedestrian areas, and drive-through lanes shall be designed to avoid pedestrians crossing drive-through lanes. 
D.  Vehicular traffic from stacking lanes shall not encroach on the public right-of-way. 
E.  A separate bypass lane around the drive-through facility shall be provided. 
F.  Stacking lanes shall not be located within a designated delivery area or area designated for loading spaces. 
6.06.00 - REQUIREMENTS FOR TRANSIT STOPS 
    Reserved 
CHAPTER 8 - VARIATIONS FROM STANDARDS IN THE LDC 
8.00.00 - GENERALLY 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide mechanisms for obtaining relief from the provisions of this LDC where hardship would otherwise occur. There are several ways that potential relief from hardship is addressed: potential relief through requirements regarding the use of and changes to nonconforming development; potential relief through the grant of a variance from the site development standards of this LDC; potential relief when an administrative decision is appealed; and potential relief when an administrative waiver is granted to modify certain site development standards of this LDC. 

8.00.01 - Waiver of Standards Pertaining to Metal Buildings. 
    The Local Planning Agency may approve a waiver of standards pertaining to metal building, provided the following standards are met: 
A.  The proposed metal building shall be consistent with the character of the neighborhood within 500 feet of the site of the metal building. 
B.  The metal building shall be designed to ensure compatibility with development in the zoning district in which it is proposed. 
C.  The metal building and the site on which it is proposed are designed to minimize potential detrimental impacts on properties within 500 feet of the development site. The determination that potential detrimental impacts are minimized shall be based on the following: 
1.  Proposed architectural design of the metal building; 
2.  Proposed placement of the metal building on the site and the relationship to open space on the site; 
3.  Proposed fencing and screening; and 
4.  Proposed landscaping. 
8.01.00 - NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS 

8.01.01 - Generally. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to address the continuation and potential modification of uses, structures, lots, and site features that meet the following conditions: 
1.  A use, structure, lot, or site feature that was lawfully established and in compliance with regulations applicable to the use, structure, lot, or site feature at the time of establishment of such use, structure, lot, or site feature; and 
2.  Such use, structure, lot, or site feature does not comply with the regulations set forth in this LDC. 
    This situation is called a nonconformity. 
B.  It is the intent of the City to: 
1.  Establish two (2) types of nonconformities: benign and detrimental; 
2.  Allow continuation of nonconformities until such nonconformities are abandoned; 
3.  Allow change of use of specified nonconformities; 
4.  Allow modifications to specified nonconformities; and 
5.  Eliminate or reduce detrimental nonconformities. 
C.  It is further the intent of the City that the casual, intermittent, temporary, or illegal use of land, water, buildings, structures, characteristics of use, or any such use in combination shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use to create rights in the continuance of such use. 
D.  Maintenance. Normal and customary maintenance or repair of nonconforming lots, sites, and structures shall be allowed, provided that such maintenance or repair does not otherwise increase the extent of the nonconformity. Maintenance or repair shall be performed only to ensure safety and to prevent a nuisance. 
E.  Relocation of nonconforming buildings or structures. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved, in whole or in part, to another location within the City, unless the lot, site, and resulting structure placement conforms in all respects to the standards and requirements of this LDC. 
8.01.02 - Types of Nonconformities. 
A.  Benign nonconformities. 
1.  A benign nonconformity exists when the degree of nonconformity does not result in a harmful or unsafe condition. A negative impact on public safety or health is not expected to occur due to the continuation or modification of a benign nonconformity. 
2.  Only the following situations shall be considered benign nonconformities: 
a.  An encroachment into a required setback of less than ten (10) percent. 
b.  A lot area which is less than the minimum required by not more than ten (10) percent. 
c.  A lot width which is less than the minimum required by not more than ten (10) percent. 
d.  A building height which is more than the maximum allowed by not more than ten (10) percent. 
e.  A front yard setback that fails to comply with the standards in this LDC due to road widening. 
f.  Provision of off-street parking that contains up to ten (10) percent fewer spaces than required by this LDC. 
g.  Impervious surface coverage in excess of maximum allowed. 
B.  Detrimental nonconformities. 
1.  Any use of land or structure that does not comply with the uses permissible in the applicable zoning district, as set forth in Chapter 2, shall be considered to be a detrimental nonconformity. 
2.  Any nonconformity of a structure or site that is not identified as a benign nonconformity in Section 8.01.02.A shall be considered to be a detrimental nonconformity. 
8.01.03 - Continuation of Nonconformities. 
A.  A benign or detrimental nonconformity shall be allowed to continue except as follows: 
1.  The nonconformity is declared to be unsafe or unlawful. 
2.  The nonconformity is declared to be a public nuisance. 
B.  A detrimental nonconformity which is discontinued for a period of 180 consecutive days shall be considered abandoned. 
1.  Such nonconformity shall not thereafter be reinstated. 
2.  Any subsequent occupancy of such nonconformity shall be permissible only when such nonconformity has been brought into compliance with the requirements of this LDC. 
3.  The removal of buildings, structures, equipment, or other aspects of such nonconforming use; the absence of a water utility service deposit or account; or the absence of a current business tax receipt shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of the discontinuance of a nonconformity. 
4.  If the reason for discontinuance is the documented action by a governmental agency, the time of delay caused by the governmental agency shall not be calculated as part of the period of discontinuance. 
C.  A benign nonconformity may be discontinued for any period of time and shall not be considered abandoned. 
8.01.04 - Change of Use. 
A.  All rights and obligations associated with a nonconformity shall run with the ownership of the land or water, are not personal to the present owner or tenant of the nonconforming use of land or water, and are not affected by a change in ownership or tenancy, except if abandoned. 
B.  Benign nonconformities. A land use carried out in or on a lot, site, or structure that has been identified as a benign nonconformity may be changed to any use permissible in the zoning district in which it is located, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 2.03.04. The nonconformities are not required to be modified for compliance with the standards of this LDC. 
C.  Detrimental nonconformities. The use of a lot, site, or structure identified as a detrimental nonconformity may be changed, provided the following standards are met: 
1.  The new use is less intense than the existing use. Intensity shall be determined by impervious surface coverage and either density for residential uses or the floor area ratio for nonresidential uses; or 
2.  The new use complies with the requirements of this LDC. 
8.01.05 - Damage and Restoration of Nonconforming Buildings or Structures. 
A.  In the event that any nonconforming building or structure is damaged by any means, including fire, flood, wind, explosion, or other act of God, or act of the public enemy, to an extent of less than fifty (50) percent of the total assessed value of the building or structure, such building or structure shall be permitted to be replaced, restored, or reconstructed according to the development standards in effect at the time of original construction. The assessed value shall be determined by an independent appraisal establishing value on the date of the damage event. Where an independent appraisal is not provided, the assessed value shall be the most recent taxable value shown for the structure as determined by the Okaloosa County Property Appraiser on January 1 of the year in which the damage occurred. 
B.  Replacement, restoration, and reconstruction shall be permissible only in compliance with building, plumbing, electrical, gas, mechanical, fire, and other construction and life safety regulations in effect at the time of application for a local development permit to allow such replacement, restoration, or reconstruction. 
C.  Permits for replacement, restoration, or reconstruction shall not be issued after twenty-four (24) months have elapsed since the damage event. 
8.01.06 - Expansion or Modification of Benign Nonconformities. 
A.  A structure which is a benign nonconformity may be modified or expanded, subject to the following standards: 
1.  Any addition or expansion of the structure shall comply with the standards applicable to the zoning district as set forth in this LDC; 
2.  Any addition or expansion of the structure shall not increase the extent of the nonconformity; and 
3.  Any addition or expansion of a structure shall comply with all local development permit requirements as set forth in Chapter 9. 
B.  A lot or site which is a benign nonconformity may be modified, subject to the following standards; 
1.  Any additional structures or site features shall comply with the standards set forth in this LDC; 
2.  The addition of structures or site features shall not increase the extent of the nonconformity; and 
3.  The addition of structures or site features shall comply with all local development permit requirements as set forth in Chapter 9. 
8.01.07 - Expansion or Modification of Detrimental Nonconformities. 
A.  A structure which is a detrimental nonconformity shall not be expanded. 
B.  A structure which is a detrimental nonconformity may be modified, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The proposed modification of the structure shall be reviewed by the Local Planning Agency. 
2.  Any modification of the structure shall not increase the extent of the nonconformity; 
3.  Any modification of the structure shall comply with the standards set forth in this LDC; 
4.  A modification shall not be permissible when off-street parking and loading required for the modification cannot be provided; 
5.  When a modification is to allow or accommodate a change of use, the use shall be in compliance with the use requirements of the zoning district as set forth in Chapter 2; 
6.  The modification of the structure shall maintain or improve compatibility of the structure with the neighborhood in which it is located; and 
7.  Approval of modifications to nonconforming structures shall be conditioned upon the addition or improvement of access, driveways, sidewalks, drainage, and landscaping, in compliance with the requirements of this LDC. 
C.  A lot or site which is a detrimental nonconformity may be modified, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The proposed modification of the lot or site shall be reviewed by the Local Planning Agency. 
2.  Additional or modified structures or other site features shall be permissible only where such additions or modifications improve the degree of conformity or provide for the public safety; 
3.  The addition or modification of structures or other site features shall not increase the extent of the nonconformity; 
4.  The addition or modification of structures or other site features shall maintain or improve compatibility of the site with the neighborhood in which it is located; 
5.  As a condition of approval of applications to add or modify structures or other site features, the applicant may be required to demonstrate that the site is designed in compliance with the requirements of this LDC with regard to access, sidewalks, drainage, and landscaping. 
8.01.08 - Specific Requirements for Lots of Record. 
    When an individual lot or parcel has an area smaller than the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, but was a lot or parcel of record on August 28, 1960, the permitted uses of the zoning district shall be allowed on such lot or parcel, provided all requirements, other than minimum lot area, depth, or width, are maintained. For residentially zoned lots of record, the minimum side yard setback requirement on such lots or parcels can be modified, but shall be not less than ten (10) percent of the lot width and, regardless of lot width, shall not be less than five (5) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1976 , § 2, 8-22-17) 
8.02.00 - VARIANCES 

8.02.01 - Generally. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of a variance is to provide a means to grant permission to depart from the standards of the zoning district where unique characteristics of a parcel together with the imposition of the specific regulations of the zoning district result in a hardship. 
B.  Variances granted prior to adoption of this LDC. 
1.  Any variance granted before the date of adoption of this LDC shall remain in full force and effect, including any conditions of that variance, except as set forth in Section 8.02.01.B(2) and (3). 
2.  Property for which a variance was granted prior to the adoption of this LDC may be developed in accordance with the plans previously approved. Where construction or development does not commence prior to the expiration of the variance, the variance shall have no further force and effect and the provisions of this LDC shall apply to development and use of the property. 
3.  Where a variance does not contain an expiration date, and a building permit application has not been submitted for the development for which the variance was granted, such variance shall expire twelve (12) months after the effective date of the order granting the variance. Upon expiration, the variance shall have no further force and effect and the provisions of this LDC shall apply to development and use of the property. 
8.02.02 - Required Findings for a Grant of Variance. 
A.  In order for an application for a variance to be approved or approved with conditions, the Local Planning Agency (LPA) shall make a positive finding, based on the evidence submitted, for each of the following provisions: 
1.  The need for the proposed variance is due to the unusual or unique physical shape, configuration, or other physical condition of the development site. These special conditions are not generally applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district; 
2.  The literal interpretation and application of the provisions of this LDC would deprive the property owner of property rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district, resulting in an undue hardship; 
3.  The special conditions are not the result of actions of the property owner and are not based solely on a desire to reduce development costs; 
4.  Approval of the proposed variance shall not provide to the property any special privilege that is denied to other development sites within the same zoning district; 
5.  The proposed variance is the minimum variance that results in reasonable use of the land, building, or structure; 
6.  Approval of the proposed variance shall ensure compatibility of the resulting development with the uses of land and character of the adjacent and surrounding neighborhood; 
7.  The proposed variance is consistent with the intents and purposes of the requirements of this LDC; 
8.  The proposed variance is consistent with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan; and 
9.  The proposed variance is not detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
B.  The LPA shall not consider a nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district, or a permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other zoning districts, when determining whether to grant an application for a variance. 
8.02.03 - Procedures for Variances. 
A.  Any person requesting a variance from the provisions of this LDC shall submit an application to the City on forms provided by the City. 
1.  The application shall include the information required for all applications as set forth in Section 9.02.02. 
2.  The application shall include a detailed explanation regarding how the proposed variance complies with each of the requirements of Section 8.02.02. 
3.  An application for a variance for development subject to review of a site development plan shall be processed prior to completion of the site plan review process. 
4.  The appropriate fee as established by the City shall accompany the application. No portion of the fee shall be refunded whether the application is withdrawn by the applicant or is denied by the City. 
B.  The applicant for a variance has the burden of proof of demonstrating that the application for a variance complies with each of the requirements of Section 8.02.02. 
C.  The application shall be reviewed by the Development Administrator for compliance with the required findings set forth in Section 8.02.02. A report shall be prepared and provided to the LPA at least seven (7) business days prior to the scheduled hearing date. 
D.  The LPA shall conduct a quasi-judicial hearing according to the procedures set forth in Section 9.06.00. 
E.  Notice of the hearing shall be provided as set forth in Section 9.04.00. 
F.  The LPA shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for a variance, based upon findings for each of the provisions set forth in Section 8.02.02. The decision of the LPA shall be reduced to a written order, which shall be issued to the applicant and filed with the Okaloosa County Clerk of Court. An order approving or approving with conditions shall expire within one (1) year of the date of such order, unless development subject to the variance is completed. The order may be extended once by the LPA for good cause for a period not to exceed one (1) year. 
G.  Limitations on the grant of a variance. 
1.  A variance shall not be granted which authorizes a use that is not permissible in the zoning district in which the property subject to the variance is located. 
2.  A variance shall not be granted which authorizes any use or standard that is expressly prohibited by this LDC. 
8.02.04 - Appeal of Local Planning Agency Decisions. 
    The decision of the LPA shall be final, and there shall be no further review thereof except by resort to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
8.02.05 - Specific Requirements for Variances Regarding Historic Buildings. 
    Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Florida Master Site File. Such variance shall comply with the standards set forth in Sections 8.02.01, through 8.02.03, except where compliance would result in the structure losing its historical designation. 
8.02.06 - Specific Requirements for Variances in Areas of Flood Hazard. 
A.  An application for a variance in an area of flood hazard identified in Chapter 3 shall comply with the findings and procedures set forth in Sections 8.02.01 through 8.02.03. 
B.  In addition to the required findings set forth in Section 8.02.02, the LPA shall make the following findings when a variance is requested in an area of flood hazard: 
1.  There is no anticipated danger to public safety from materials that may be swept onto other lands thereby causing the injury of others; 
2.  There is no anticipated danger to life and property resulting from flooding or erosion; 
3.  The proposed facility and its contents are not susceptible to flood damage and the potential effects of such damage; 
4.  The proposed facility and services to the public provided by the facility are of such importance to the community that maximum protection from flood waters shall be ensured; 
5.  The facility requires a waterfront location, and is considered a water-dependent facility; 
6.  There are no alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  Safe access to the property can be maintained in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
8.  The proposed variance is the minimum required to avoid undue hardship and is designed to address the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
9.  The proposed variance shall not result in increased costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges; and 
10.  The proposed variance shall not result in an adverse effect on the City's Community Rating System rating. 
C.  Variances shall not be granted within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels would occur during the base flood discharge. 
8.03.00 - APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS 

8.03.01 - Applicability. 
    Administrative decisions include decisions by the Development Administrator and staff members pertaining to the following matters: zoning determinations, certificates of concurrency, minor plats, administrative waivers, change of use, interpretation of permissible uses within zoning districts, and expedited development orders. A person adversely affected by an administrative decision may appeal such decision to the LPA. 
8.03.02 - Notice of Intent to File an Appeal of an Administrative Decision. 
A.  Prior to filing an application for an appeal of an administrative decision, an affected party shall file a Notice of Intent to Appeal within five (5) business days following the administrative decision, determination, or action to be appealed. The City shall provide a form for filing a Notice of Intent to Appeal. No fee shall be required. 
B.  When a Notice of Intent to Appeal is filed, all work that is the subject of the appeal on a site shall be stayed for ten (10) business days. 
8.03.03 - Filing an Appeal of an Administrative Decision. 
A.  Within ten (10) business days following filing of a Notice of Intent to Appeal, the affected party filing the Notice of Intent may file an application to appeal an administrative decision. 
B.  The application shall include a detailed explanation regarding how the applicant is adversely affected by the administrative decision. Where the administrative decision was based on technical standards, the applicant shall provide detailed data and analysis regarding alleged errors in the application of the technical standards. 
C.  The appropriate fee as established by the City shall accompany the application. The application shall not be accepted without the filing fee. No portion of the fee shall be refunded. 
D.  Upon receipt of an application to appeal an administrative decision, the Development Administrator shall schedule the appeal to be heard by the LPA. 
E.  The administrative decision subject to the Notice of Intent shall become final and effective if an application to appeal is not timely filed. 
8.03.04 - Stay of Work. 
    Filing an appeal of an administrative decision stays all work on the premises and all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed that is subject to the appeal. When the Development Administrator determines that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, the Development Administrator shall notify the LPA of the determination. Only the work necessary to avoid imminent peril to life or property shall be permissible; all other work shall be stayed. 
8.03.05 - Procedures for Consideration of an Appeal of an Administrative Decision. 
A.  The consideration of an appeal by the LPA of an administrative decision shall be a de novo quasi-judicial hearing. 
B.  The Development Administrator shall prepare a report following the procedure for preparation of a compliance report set forth in Section 9.01.05. 
C.  Notice of the hearing shall be provided as set forth in Section 9.04.00. 
D.  The applicant has the burden of proof to demonstrate that the administrative decision was in error. 
E.  The LPA shall determine whether the provisions of this LDC have been properly applied and shall take action as follows: 
1.  Affirm the administrative decision that is the subject of the appeal; 
2.  Reverse, wholly or in part, the administrative decision that is the subject of the appeal; or 
3.  Modify the administrative decision that is the subject of the appeal. 
F.  The LPA shall issue a written order containing findings of facts and conclusions of law. 
8.03.06 - Appeal of Local Planning Agency Decisions. 
    The decision of the LPA shall be final, and there shall be no further review thereof except by resort to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
8.04.00 - ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVERS 

8.04.01 - Generally. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of an administrative waiver is to provide a means to grant permission for a de minimis departure from the standards of the zoning district where unique characteristics of a parcel together with the imposition of the specific regulations of the zoning district result in a potential hardship. 
B.  Applicability. The Development Administrator is authorized to waive or reduce site development standards as set forth in Section 8.04.02 where the intent of this LDC can be achieved and compatibility can be maintained. 
8.04.02 - Standards. 
    The Development Administrator may consider a waiver or reduction of one (1) or more of the specified site development standards in the following situations: 
A.  After commencement of development activity, a waiver may be granted subject to all of the following conditions: 
1.  A valid local development permit has been issued; 
2.  An error in a dimensional standard has been identified during construction by the contractor, surveyor, builder, or property owner; 
3.  The dimensional standard on the development site does not deviate from the approved dimensional standard by more than ten (10) percent; and 
4.  Developing according to the incorrect dimensional standard shall not result in an adverse health, safety, or welfare impact on the site or to the public. 
B.  Where the lot area standards and/or lot dimension standards for the zoning district in which the development is proposed do not allow the development to achieve the otherwise permissible density, the Development Administrator may waive up to ten (10) percent of the standard. 
C.  Where two (2) or more lots are proposed for a unified development with a central stormwater management facility, the Development Administrator may waive the requirement for each lot to provide a separate stormwater management facility. 
D.  Where a native tree that is eight (8) inches or more dbh would be removed in order to allow building placement in compliance with all required setbacks, a waiver of up to ten (10) percent of the applicable setback may be granted by the Development Administrator. 
E.  Where a native tree that is eight (8) inches or more dbh would prevent compliance with building separation standards, a waiver of up to ten (10) percent of the required separation may be granted by the Development Administrator. 
F.  As an alternative to a parking study where a permissible change of use is proposed, the Development Administrator may waive up to ten (10) percent of the required parking spaces. 
G.  Where a permissible change of use is proposed, the Development Administrator may waive up to twenty (20) percent of the required landscaping. 
8.04.03 - Procedures for Administrative Waivers. 
A.  Any person requesting a waiver to a provision set forth in Section 8.04.02 shall submit an application to the City on forms provided by the City. 
1.  The application shall include the information required for all applications as set forth in Section 9.02.02. 
2.  The application shall include detailed information to explain how the proposed waiver conforms to the requirements set forth in Section 8.04.02. 
3.  An application for a waiver for development subject to review of a site development plan shall be processed as part of the site development plan review. 
4.  The appropriate fee as established by the City shall accompany the application. No portion of the fee shall be refunded. 
B.  The Development Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the requested administrative waiver, based on compliance with the requirements of Section 8.04.02 and the following findings: 
1.  There are special circumstances applicable to the development site consistent with the situations set forth in Section 8.04.02; 
2.  Approval of the administrative waiver is consistent with the intent of this LDC and the purposes of the zoning district in which the development site is located; 
3.  Approval of the administrative waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 
4.  The administrative waiver is the minimum necessary to ensure that the proposed development is able to achieve reasonable use; 
5.  The administrative waiver shall ensure compatibility of the resulting development with the uses of land and character of the adjacent and surrounding neighborhood; and 
6.  The administrative waiver includes conditions to ensure that the administrative waiver does not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties within the same zoning district. 
C.  The decision regarding the administrative waiver shall be provided in writing to the applicant and shall be recorded with the approved site development plan. The administrative waiver shall expire when the site development plan approval expires. The expiration date for an administrative waiver shall not be extended except upon extension of the expiration date for the site development plan to which the administrative waiver pertains. 
D.  A decision regarding an administrative waiver may be appealed to the LPA in compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 8.03.00. 
CHAPTER 8 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
LDC Effective 
1 May 2012 LDC Effective 
9/2008-4/2012 State Law References/Other Historical Notes Authority Chpt. 166.021 F.S., Chpt. 163.3161 F.S., Chpt 163.3202 F.S., City Charter § 2, Ord. 1861 27 Mar 2012 8.00.00 8.00.01 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13 8.01.00 8.01.01 8.01.02 8.01.03 8.01.04 8.01.05 8.01.06 8.01.07 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13 8.01.08 8.02.00 8.02.01 8.02.02 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13 8.02.03 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13 8.02.04 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13 8.02.05 8.02.06 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13 8.03.00 8.03.01 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13 8.03.02 8.03.03 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13 8.03.04 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13 8.03.05 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13 8.03.06 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13 8.04.00 8.04.01 8.04.02 8.04.03 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13  
CHAPTER 9 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 
9.00.00 - GENERALLY 

9.00.01 - Purpose and Intent. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth responsibilities and procedures for the administration of this Land Development Code. This chapter sets forth the procedures for receiving, reviewing, and rendering decisions on applications for development orders, permits, rezonings, and amendments to this LDC, the Comprehensive Plan, and development orders. 
B.  Intent regarding existing use of land. It is the specific intent of the City that an existing use of land which is lawful on the date of adoption of this LDC, whether a permitted use or a conditional use, shall remain a lawful use. If the use was approved subject to one (1) or more conditions, those conditions shall continue in full force and effect unless a new approval is granted. 
9.00.02 - Applicant; Owner; Owner's Agent; Contract Purchaser. 
    Throughout this LDC the term applicant refers to the person submitting applications and associated materials. The applicant shall be the property owner, a designated representative of the property owner, or a purchaser under contract. The representative may be called the owner's agent; the purchaser under contract may be the designated representative. A notarized statement shall be provided by the owner authorizing the representative to act as an agent of the property owner with regard to the application and associated procedures. Where an action is reserved to the owner of the property, the term owner is used. 
9.00.03 - Development Permits and Development Orders Required; Exemptions; Recording. 
A.  A local development permit, including a building permit, zoning permit, subdivision approval, rezoning, certification, special exception, or variance shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this LDC and where applicable in accordance with the Florida Building Code prior to the commencement of any development activities, as follows: 
1.  Land clearing, excavation, or modification, including dredge and fill; 
2.  Tree removal, except on single-family lots; 
3.  Construction of any principal or accessory building or structure; 
4.  Storage of building materials or erection of a temporary job site office; 
5.  Installation of utilities, streets, driveways and driveway connections, drainage systems and connections, building systems (electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing), or landscaping other than a single-family home; 
6.  Marine construction; 
7.  Moving any structure; 
8.  Alteration, demolition, or repair of any structure according to the requirements of the Florida Building Code; and 
9.  Any other construction, reconstruction, site improvement, or modification to the land or water on a site. 
B.  A development order shall be required prior to issuance of a local development permit for: all new construction, redevelopment, additions, and site modification which provides additional gross building square footage that is 1,000 square feet or more in size, except for the following: 
1.  One or two single family dwellings; 
2.  Applications for independent accessory structures or uses for single family residential sites; 
3.  Applications for independent accessory structures and uses that are 600 square feet or less in size for commercial and mixed use sites. 
C.  Land clearing shall not be construed to include routine landscaping maintenance. 
D.  Projects for which a local development permit has been lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this LDC may continue, provided that: 
1.  The local development permit has not expired prior to the effective date of this LDC; 
2.  The development activity authorized by the local development permit commenced on or before the effective date of this LDC and continues in good faith according to the applicable time limits; and 
3.  The development activity authorized by the local development permit is in accordance with all applicable development permits. 
E.  Recording. 
1.  A development order, and any amendments to a development order, shall be recorded in the office of the City Clerk, at the expense of the applicant. 
2.  Where the development order pertains to a final subdivision plat, a true copy of the approved final plat shall be recorded in the public records of Okaloosa County within sixty (60) days from the date of such approval. When recordation has not been accomplished within sixty (60) days, the City Council shall confirm that the final plat is not valid and provide notice to the applicant. The applicant may reapply for final plat approval. The final plat shall be provided to the City after recording. 
9.00.04 - Commencement of Work and Expiration of Local Development Permits and Development Orders. 
A.  A development order for a site development plan shall expire two (2) years after the date of issuance of the order where an application for a local development permit has not been submitted. One (1) extension of up to one (1) year may be requested in writing prior to the expiration date and shall be granted. 
B.  A development order for phased projects shall include expiration dates for each phase. When an application for a local development permit has not been submitted for a phase of the project by the expiration date for that phase, the development order for that phase and all subsequent phases, if any, shall expire. 
C.  A local development permit shall expire if work does not commence within one (1) year from the date of issuance of the permit. 
1.  Where a permit is issued by a State or Federal agency with jurisdiction over the project, the permit shall expire as set forth by the agency. 
2.  One (1) extension of up to one (1) additional year may be granted, except where there is an enforceable development agreement which establishes an expiration date. 
D.  Where activity toward completion of a project under a local development permit ceases for a period exceeding six (6) months, the local development permit shall be considered void. No further activity shall be undertaken until a new local development permit is issued. 
E.  Where a local development permit has been obtained prior to the expiration of the associated development order according to the timeframes established in Sections 9.00.04.A and 9.00.04.B and the local development permit expires for any reason, the development order on which the development was based may continue, but shall not be valid for more than three (3) years from the original date of issuance of the development order. 
F.  When litigation is filed challenging a development, development order, or local development permit, all timeframes associated with such development, development order, or local development permit shall be tolled during litigation. 
9.00.05 - Fees Required. 
A.  The City may charge a fee for any application, local development permit, processing costs, or provision of requested information or documents in compliance with this chapter to cover the cost incurred by the City. The City shall establish a schedule of fees required by this LDC, hereafter referred to as the Fee Schedule. 
B.  All required fees shall be paid at the time an application for development review is submitted. Multiple fees may be required for proposed development involving multiple applications. 
C.  The City is authorized to enter into a contract with persons who have expertise necessary for the review of an application or a specific technical aspect of an application. The costs of such review shall be paid by the applicant; however, the City shall provide information regarding the basis of fees for such experts when requested by the applicant. 
9.00.06 - Improvement Agreements, Guarantees, and Sureties. 
    Where a guarantee is required to ensure that construction of required infrastructure improvements for any development are provided by the applicant or that funds are provided to the City to pay for such infrastructure improvements, the following methods of guarantee are permissible. 
A.  A surety bond may be provided, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Florida and having a resident agent within the City. The bond shall be for a time period specified by the City Council, not to exceed one (1) year. The City Council may approve extension of the bond provided that the costs of construction are updated. The bond shall be enforceable by or payable to the City in an amount equal to 110 percent of the cost of constructing the infrastructure improvements. The cost of constructing the infrastructure improvements shall be documented by the applicant and approved by the City. The form, surety, and conditions shall be approved by the City Attorney. 
B.  A cashier's check, cash, or certified check may be deposited with the City or placed in escrow. The amount shall equal 110 percent of the cost of constructing the infrastructure improvements. The cost of constructing the infrastructure improvements shall be documented by the applicant and approved by the City. When the applicant satisfactorily completes a portion of the infrastructure improvements, the City may release a commensurate portion of the deposit, provided that the amount remaining on deposit is equal to 110 percent of the amount required to complete the remaining infrastructure improvements. 
9.00.07 - Certificate of Occupancy. 
    A certificate of occupancy is the only demonstration that the use or occupancy of land or buildings is in compliance with the requirements of this LDC and the provisions of an approved development order, development agreement, and / or local development permit. A certificate of occupancy shall be received by the applicant prior to the use or occupancy of land or buildings. This section shall not be construed to apply to the transfer of ownership or the change of occupants. 
9.00.08 - Certificate of Completion. 
    A certificate of completion is the only demonstration that the use or occupancy of land or buildings is in compliance with the requirements of this LDC and the provisions of the approved local development permit for renovations, additions, and alterations. A certificate of completion shall be received by the applicant prior to the use or occupancy of land or buildings. When a change of use occurs, a new certificate of occupancy and a new certificate of completion shall be required. 
9.00.09 - Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
    A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building Official before the completion of the entire work covered by the local development permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The Building Official shall, at the time of issuance, set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid. Failure to complete the project within the time allotted will result in suspension of occupancy until such time as the project is completed and ready for a certificate of occupancy. 
9.00.10 - Zoning Determination. 
A.  A zoning determination is a finding of fact that an existing use complies with the requirements set forth in this LDC and the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  A zoning determination shall be limited to the use standards specified in the written determination and shall not be construed to extend to other matters regarding the use or development on the site when such matters are not specifically written in the zoning determination. 
C.  The zoning determination shall include the condition that the use or development that is the subject of the determination may become nonconforming if this LDC is amended. 
D.  The zoning determination shall expire one (1) year after issuance; however, where this LDC is amended within the one (1) year period, the zoning determination shall expire upon amendment of this LDC. 
9.01.00 - PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING 

9.01.01 - Types of Applications. 
    Table 9.01.01 contains a list of the types of applications and identifies the entities responsible for reviewing and issuing decisions on applications. Development orders are categorized as major developments or expedited developments, as follows: 
A.  Major developments are proposed developments where building heights are proposed to exceed the height limits established on the Eglin AFB Tall Structures Analysis for the City of Fort Walton Beach map, proposed development subject to a development agreement, and proposed development in a PUD. 
B.  Expedited developments include all development orders other than those described in Section 9.01.01.A. 
Table 9.01.01. Types of Applications and Entities Responsible for Recommendation and Final Decision. 
Type of Application Staff 1 LPA City Council Administrative Waivers (See Chapter 8) D Amendment to the Comprehensive Plan R R D Amendment to this LDC R R D Annexations R D Appeal of Administrative Decisions (See Chapter 8) R D Communication Towers R D Development Agreement R D Development Orders Major Development Orders R D Expedited Development Orders D Major Amendments to Major Development Orders R D Minor Amendments to Development Orders D Expansion or Modification of Nonconformities (See Chapter 8) R D Subdivision Plats Preliminary Plats R D Final Plats R D Replats R D Minor Plats D Permits (Buildings, Signs, Docks, Boat Structures, Grading, Lot Clearing, etc.) D PUD R R D Rezoning R R D Vacations (Easements, ROW, Plats) R D Variances (See Chapter 8) R D Zoning Determination D  
1 Staff means the Development Administrator or Building Official where required by the Florida Building Code 
D = Final Decision Authority 
R = Recommendation 
9.01.02 - Pre-Application Conference Required. 
A.  A pre-application conference is a required meeting between a potential applicant and the City staff prior to submittal of an application for a development order, for the purposes of: 
1.  Exchanging information on the potential development of a site; 
2.  Providing information to a potential applicant on permissible uses of a site; 
3.  Providing information to an applicant regarding the design standards set forth in this LDC that are applicable to a potential application; 
4.  Providing information to an applicant regarding standards of regional, State, or Federal agencies that may be applicable to a potential application; 
5.  Determining the need and requirements for supporting plans, documents, and studies; 
6.  Providing information to an applicant regarding infrastructure requirements and the construction of required improvements; and 
7.  Providing information to an applicant regarding the appropriate procedures and schedules for receiving and reviewing applications and rendering decisions regarding a potential application. 
B.  It is the City's intent that all requirements be identified during the pre-application conference. However, no person may rely upon any comment concerning a proposed development, or any expression of any nature about the proposal, made by a participant at the pre-application conference, as a representation or implication that the proposed development will be ultimately approved or rejected in any form. 
C.  Prior to the submission of an application for a development order an applicant shall request for a pre-application conference. 
D.  A pre-application conference shall be held not more than ten (10) business days following the date of request for such conference. 
E.  An application shall only be accepted within six (6) months of the date of the pre-application conference. After six (6) months, the applicant shall request a new pre-application conference. 
F.  The pre-application conference shall include representatives of City departments responsible for reviewing applications and may include independent reviewers hired by the City, as well as representatives of regional, State, or Federal agencies with authority over specific aspects of the proposed development. 
G.  The applicant may bring professionals who will prepare some or all of the application materials to the pre-application conference. 
9.01.03 - Determination of Completeness. 
A.  The first step in the review of an application is a determination that the application is complete, called a determination of completeness. The determination of completeness ensures that all required documents and plans have been submitted in sufficient number and format (digital or print), and that all fees have been paid. A determination of completeness is not an evaluation of compliance with standards and criteria. 
B.  The City staff shall issue a determination of completeness to the applicant, within three (3) business days of receipt of an application. When the application is not complete, the written determination shall specifically identify the missing documents and/or plans. When, due to circumstances beyond the control of the City, the determination cannot be made within three (3) business days, the City shall advise the applicant and provide the date on which the determination will be provided. 
C.  The application shall not be processed until missing documents and/or plans are submitted and the application is determined to be complete. 
D.  The applicant shall have ten (10) business days from the date of the determination of completeness to submit the missing documents or plans. The City shall issue a determination of completeness within three (3) business days following receipt of the additional documentation. 
E.  If the missing information is not provided within ten (10) business days or the application is incomplete after submittal of additional information, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and all materials shall be returned to the applicant. 
F.  When all required submittals have been received within the required time, the application shall be assigned a number and processed for review and action in accordance with the procedures set forth below. 
9.01.04 - Preparation of Compliance Report for Development Orders. 
A.  All applications for development orders shall be reviewed by designated City staff. The review shall document the compliance of an application with the requirements of this LDC, the Comprehensive Plan, the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach, and applicable technical codes and standards. 
B.  When an application is determined complete, City staff shall have twenty (20) business days to prepare a compliance report. The steps in the compliance report process are described further in Sections 9.01.04.C through 9.01.04.G. 
C.  Each application shall have a City staff person designated as case manager. 
D.  The case manager shall prepare a draft compliance report. The case manager shall notify the applicant whether deficiencies have been identified in the application. 
E.  Actions following notification to the applicant: 
1.  The applicant shall have twenty (20) business days to correct deficiencies and submit revised or supplemental application documents. 
2.  Upon receipt of revised or supplemental application documents, the City shall have twenty (20) business days to conduct a review of the revised or supplemental application documents, issue the final compliance report, and take action as outlined in Section 9.01.04.F. 
3.  Where the deficient application is not revised, corrected, or supplemented, the City shall have five (5) days to issue the final compliance report and action shall be taken as outlined in Section 9.01.04.F. 
F.  Actions by the Development Administrator. 
1.  For expedited development orders, the Development Administrator shall render a decision as follows: 
a.  Approve the application and issue a development order; 
b.  Deny the application and issue a written notice of denial; 
c.  Where a potential negative finding that was not in the compliance report is identified by the Development Administrator, the Development Administrator shall remand the application to the case manager for reconsideration. The case manager shall provide the compliance report to the Development Administrator, along with an explanation of modifications, if any, within ten (10) business days. 
2.  For major development orders, the Development Administrator shall prepare a recommendation and forward the application and compliance report to City Council for consideration at the next available public hearing. 
G.  Effective date of development orders. A development order shall have an effective date of five (5) business days following the date of decision to provide for the appeals period established in Section 8.03.02. 
9.01.05 - Preparation of Compliance Reports and Recommendations for Applications Other than Development Orders. 
A.  A compliance report shall be prepared for all applications for which the City Council makes the final decision as set forth in Section 9.01.01. 
B.  The compliance report shall document consistency of the proposed action with this LDC, the Comprehensive Plan, and other ordinances or technical codes. The report shall include a recommendation for approval, denial, or where applicable, assigning conditions to an approval. 
C.  The compliance report shall include information that all required notice has been provided. The application documents and compliance report shall be provided to the applicable decision-making entity. 
9.01.06 - Procedures for Recommendations by the Local Planning Agency (LPA). 
A.  The LPA shall hold a quasi-judicial hearing as set forth in Section 9.06.00 and shall consider and provide recommendations to the City Council on applications for amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, amendments to this LDC, PUDs, rezoning, and such other matters as may be assigned by the City Council. 
B.  The City staff shall provide application documents and the compliance report to members of the LPA according to the City's schedule of public hearings. 
C.  The LPA shall hold a public hearing for each application and prepare a recommendation which shall be forwarded to City Council for consideration at the next available public hearing. 
9.01.07 - Procedures for Actions by the City Council. 
A.  The City Council shall consider all applications as set forth in Section 9.01.01. 
B.  The City staff shall provide application documents, applicable reports from staff, and recommendations from LPA as described in Section 9.01.06 to City Council members. 
C.  Notice shall be provided as set forth in Section 9.04.00 and an agenda prepared and posted at the Fort Walton Beach City Hall. 
D.  Where a quasi-judicial hearing is required, procedures for conduct of the hearing shall be followed as set forth in Section 9.06.00. 
E.  When the application is for rezoning, the City Council shall approve or deny the application. All other applications may have conditions attached to the approval. When approved or approved with conditions, a development order shall be issued. When the application is denied, a written decision shall be provided to the applicant within five (5) days following the hearing describing the reasons for denial. 
F.  When an application for rezoning is denied, a new application for the same rezoning of the same property shall not be considered within twelve (12) months following the date of denial. 
9.01.08 - Requests for Continuation of a Public Hearing. 
A.  An applicant may request, in writing, a continuation of a public hearing regarding his application. 
B.  If the written request for a continuation is received at least five (5) business days prior to the public hearing at which the application is scheduled to be heard, the applicant's request for a continuation will be automatically granted. An applicant shall be limited to one (1) such automatic continuation. Further requests for a continuation shall be considered and granted only upon a demonstration by the applicant of good cause for such continuation. 
C.  If the written request for a continuation is received less than five (5) business days prior to the public hearing at which the application is scheduled to be heard, the entity holding the hearing will consider the request for a continuation and shall only grant such request upon a demonstration by the applicant of good cause for such continuation. 
D.  Where the grant of a continuation results in the provision of additional notice, the costs associated with such notice shall be paid by the applicant prior to rescheduling the public hearing. If a public hearing is continued on the record, at the scheduled public hearing, to a date and time certain, no additional notice shall be required. 
9.01.09 - Withdrawal of Pending Applications. 
    An applicant may withdraw an application at any time prior to issuance of a final decision. The applicant shall provide written notice of the withdrawal to the City at least five (5) business days prior to the public hearing at which the application is scheduled to be heard. When written notice of withdrawal is received less than five (5) business days prior to the public hearing, the application will be considered denied, and the same, or substantially same application, shall not be considered for twelve (12) months following the public hearing at which the application was scheduled to be heard. 
9.01.10 - Review of Applications for Local Development Permits. 
A.  Prior to submission of an application for a local development permit, a pre-application conference shall be held for the purposes set forth in Section 9.01.02.A(1) through (7). The pre-application conference may be waived by the Building Official. 
B.  All applications for local development permits shall be reviewed by designated City staff. The review shall document the compliance of an application with the requirements of this LDC, the Comprehensive Plan, the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach, and applicable technical codes and standards. 
C.  When an application is determined complete, City staff shall have fifteen (15) business days to prepare a compliance report. The steps in the compliance report process are described further in Sections 9.01.04.C through 9.01.04.G. 
D.  Each application shall have a City staff person designated as case manager. 
E.  The case manager shall prepare a draft compliance report. The case manager shall notify the applicant whether deficiencies have been identified in the application. 
F.  Actions following notification to the applicant: 
1.  The applicant shall have twenty (20) business days to correct deficiencies and submit revised or supplemental application documents. 
2.  Upon receipt of revised or supplemental application documents, the City shall have fifteen (15) business days to conduct a review of the revised or supplemental application documents, issue the final compliance report, and take action as outlined in Section 9.01.05.G. 
G.  Actions by the Building Official. 
1.  For local development permits, the Building Official shall render a decision as follows: 
a.  Approve the application and issue a local development permit; 
b.  Approve the application with conditions and issue a local development permit identifying the required conditions; or 
c.  Deny the application and issue a written notice of denial. 
H.  Appeals. Action taken on an application for a local development permit may be appealed as set forth in Section 8.03.02. 
9.02.00 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 

9.02.01 - Generally. 
    This section provides information regarding all types of applications and the submittals required for review of applications. The types of applications are described in Section 9.01.01. The procedures for reviewing applications, holding required public hearings, and rendering decisions are set forth in Sections 9.01.00 and 9.06.00. 
9.02.02 - Submittal Requirements for All Applications. 
    This section is intended to describe the submittal requirements applicable to all applications, except applications to amend this LDC and to amend the Comprehensive Plan. It is specifically the intent of the City to avoid duplication by providing a basic application to be supplemented by additional information for a specific type of application. Such additional information is described in Sections 9.02.03 through 9.02.13. 
A.  Each application shall contain the following information: 
1.  An application form available from the City. 
2.  The name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, email address, and signature of the applicant. If any applicant is a business entity such as a partnership, corporation or joint venture, the names and business addresses of all partners and officers, as appropriate, and telephone numbers. 
3.  A copy of the deed or deeds conveying the subject property to the current owner. 
4.  The recorded ownership interests, including liens, title certification, encumbrances, and the nature of the applicant's interest if the applicant is not the owner. 
5.  A property survey containing the legal description, land area, and existing improvements on the site. The survey shall be signed and sealed by a surveyor licensed in the State, and shall have been performed not more than five (5) years prior to the date of application. For applications limited to permits for accessory structures, a City-approved alternative to the property survey may be submitted. 
6.  Proof of payment of applicable fees. 
7.  Stamped envelopes addressed to the owner of each property within 300 feet of the site proposed for a development order, in compliance with the notice requirements of Section 9.04.00. 
B.  An application regarding development within or affecting environmentally sensitive lands (see Chapter 3) shall include proof of submitting applications for all applicable permits or exemptions from regional, State, or Federal agencies with permitting authority for such lands. 
C.  One (1) electronic copy and one (1) hard copy of all application documents shall be submitted. 
9.02.03 - Submittal Requirements for Development Order Applications Subdivision Plats, and Other Applications Requiring Site Development Plans. 
A.  Site plans shall be submitted for development order applications, subdivisions, and all other applications which require site plans as determined by the case manager. All site development plans, subdivision plats, and drawings for an application shall be prepared at the same scale. 
B.  Digital submissions of site development plans, subdivision plats, and drawings are required. All layers that compose the plan or plat shall be visible (turned on and not frozen). All other layers that are not part of the submittal shall be frozen. 
C.  All site development plans and drawings accompanying an application for development approval shall be prepared and certified by a land surveyor, landscape architect, architect, or engineer licensed by the State of Florida. Subdivision plats shall be prepared and certified by a land surveyor or engineer licensed by the State of Florida. Such plans, plats, and drawings shall contain the following information, unless the applicant justifies that the information is not applicable to the application: 
1.  The name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, and email address of the person preparing the plan, plat, or drawing. 
2.  The date of preparation and date(s) of any modifications. 
3.  A north arrow and a written and graphic scale. 
4.  A vicinity map showing the location of the property. 
5.  The name, plat book, and page number of any recorded subdivision within or adjacent to the site. 
6.  Information regarding existing development on adjacent properties: 
7.  Location of any protected historical or archaeological resources. 
8.  Location of utilities, utility service, connections to existing utility facilities, sewer lines, water mains, culverts, fire hydrants, and easements necessary to provide access for maintenance or other activity. 
9.  Where development is proposed in phases, the plans shall include phase lines, a timeline for the development, and benchmarks for monitoring the progress of construction of each phase regarding land clearing, soil stabilization and erosion control, installation of infrastructure, and installation of landscaping. 
10.  Applications involving clearing of land shall be accompanied by a tree survey. 
11.  The location and size of any proposed common open space or commonly owned facilities and the form of the organization which will own and maintain such open space or facilities. 
12.  A summary block containing the following information: 
a.  Land use category from the Future Land Use Map in the Comprehensive Plan; 
b.  Zoning district; 
c.  Total acreage; 
d.  Total building square footage for residential and non-residential uses; 
e.  Total density and number of units, proposed and permissible, for residential uses; 
f.  Height of all existing and proposed buildings; 
g.  Impervious surface ratio calculation, proposed and permissible; 
h.  Floor area ratio calculation, proposed and permissible; and 
i.  Required and proposed number of parking and loading spaces. 
9.02.04 - Supporting Documentation to Accompany Applications. 
    Applications for development orders, subdivisions, planned unit developments (PUD's), and other applications shall include supporting documentation as determined at the pre-application meeting including the following: 
A.  Concurrency analysis to demonstrate compliance with Section 9.03.00. 
B.  Traffic study, prepared by a traffic engineer licensed by the State of Florida, containing the following information and in compliance with the following: 
1.  The area of impact as identified during the pre-application conference, to include streets, street segments, and intersections, for the traffic analysis, based on accepted traffic planning principles and practices. 
2.  On-site and off-site traffic impacts, including: 
a.  The existing average daily traffic on adjacent streets and streets impacted by the proposed development. Where traffic counts conducted within the previous six (6) months are not available, the applicant shall conduct traffic counts. There shall be no adjustment for internal capture of trips, except for mixed-use development. Volumes shall be adjusted to reflect annual conditions using current FDOT seasonal adjustment factors as approved by the City. 
b.  The total trips generated by the project and the distribution of the trips onto adjacent streets. Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) trip generation rates shall be used as the basis for trip generation calculations, except where an alternative source of data is specifically approved by the City in advance. 
c.  Existing turning movement volumes at the impacted intersections. 
d.  Level of service calculations at each project access point for the p.m. peak hour, both existing and within the proposed development. 
e.  Level of service calculations at impacted intersections for the p.m. peak hour, both existing and within the proposed development. 
f.  Determination of projected volumes for the year of project completion using the annual growth factor provided by the City. 
g.  Analysis of the proposed adjustments in trip generation or projected volumes for mixed use developments. 
h.  Analysis of the need for turning lanes or additional lanes on impacted roadways. 
i.  Analysis of the need for intersection improvements. 
j.  Analysis of the need for traffic signals or other traffic control devices. 
k.  Proposed trip distribution based on professionally accepted methodologies. 
3.  The traffic study shall include a statement of the assumptions used in conducting the analysis, including the following: 
a.  Type and intensity or density of development. 
b.  Projected population of a residential development. 
c.  Proposed timing and phases of development. 
d.  Proposed design of streets, access points, driveways, alleys, sidewalks, and other components of the transportation system. 
C.  Parking study, demonstrating compliance with the standards set forth in Section 6.04.06. 
D.  Stormwater management plan, in compliance with the standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
E.  Identification of natural features and physical conditions in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and Chapter 3, as follows: 
1.  The location of streams, bodies of water, and natural features within the boundaries of the property and within 500 feet of any boundary of the property. 
2.  The location of the mean high water line, if such line is within the boundaries of the property. 
3.  A topographic survey, soils report, grading plan, and an erosion control plan. 
4.  A general floodplain map indicating areas subject to inundation and high groundwater levels up to a 100-year flood classification. 
F.  Landscaping plan, containing sufficient information to demonstrate that the proposed landscape improvements are in conformity with the landscape development standards, design principles, irrigation standards and other requirements set forth in Section 4.08.00, and containing the following information: 
1.  Location and size of all landscaped and buffer areas. 
2.  Designation of the name (botanical and common), size (height and spread), quantity, and location of the plant material to be installed. 
3.  Designation of the name, size, location, and condition of viable existing trees and vegetation and areas to be preserved. 
4.  Designation of existing trees and vegetation to be removed. 
5.  Designation of vegetation required by State or Federal law to be preserved. 
6.  Location of water use zones. 
7.  Details for the location and type of irrigation, when an irrigation system is proposed. 
G.  Signage plan, demonstrating compliance with the standards set forth in Section 5.03.00, and including the following information: 
1.  The type, square footage, height, and location of all signage currently displayed on the site. 
2.  The type, square footage, height, and location of the sign or signs proposed to be erected on the site. If the sign is to be electrically lighted, additional information is to be provided regarding the testing laboratory or the Electrical Testing Lab (ETL) number, and the name and address of the electrical contractor. 
3.  A fully dimensioned site plan showing the lot frontage, building frontage, sign face areas, and location of all existing and proposed signs. For ground signs, the site plan shall show the distance from the property line, right-of-way line, and edge of pavement, and the location of the clear visibility area as established in Section 6.03.00. 
4.  A summary table listing location, type, and area of any existing and proposed signs with fully dimensioned elevation drawing of any proposed sign, showing sign type, height and copy area; and, for facade signs, an elevation of the building, showing placement of any sign. 
H.  Details for the construction of improvements, in compliance with the requirements set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
9.02.05 - Submittal Requirements for Applications Requiring Site Development Plans. 
A.  In addition to the information required in Sections 9.02.02, 9.02.03, and 9.02.04, all applications requiring site development plans shall contain the following information regarding existing and proposed development and supporting infrastructure: 
1.  The location of existing and proposed access points, driveway design, roads and rights-of-way, street intersections, sidewalks and other pedestrian facilities, bicycle facilities, and other paved areas within the boundaries of the property. 
2.  The location and use of any existing and proposed principal or accessory buildings and structures, showing proposed setbacks, building floor area, building heights, and other dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located. 
3.  The existing ground elevations, existing finished floor elevations, and proposed finished floor elevations for all buildings. 
4.  Information to demonstrate compliance with site development standards applicable within the zoning district and applicable to any specific uses subject to supplemental standards. 
5.  Information to demonstrate compliance with site development standards applicable to accessory uses and structures. 
B.  Developments proposed with bonus provisions, as described in Chapter 4, shall provide the Bonus Scorecard with the site development plan application. 
9.02.06 - Additional Submittal Requirements for Subdivision Plats. 
A.  At the discretion of the City, and identified at the pre-application conference, the preliminary and final subdivision plats may be combined. Where the application is for a replat, the preliminary plat may be waived. 
B.  In addition to the information required in Sections 9.02.02, 9.02.03, and 9.02.04, all applications for subdivision plat approval, including proposed townhouse developments and proposed zero lot line developments, shall contain the following information: 
1.  The proposed name of the subdivision. 
2.  Development specifications for the tract: land area and the proposed number and layout of lots and blocks. 
3.  Location of land to be dedicated or reserved for public use for rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks, bike trails, pedestrian trails, easements, schools, parks, open spaces, or other public uses. 
4.  The substance of covenants, grants, easements, or other restrictions which may be imposed upon the use of land, buildings, and structures. 
C.  Receipt of the signed copy of the approved preliminary plat is authorization for the applicant to proceed with the preparation of plans and specifications for minimum improvements and with the preparation of the final plat. 
1.  Prior to the construction of any improvement required, or the submission of a bond in lieu of construction, the applicant shall provide documentation to demonstrate compliance with the site improvement standards set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
2.  All proposed construction shall be compatible with the soil conditions specific to the site. If necessary, the applicant shall provide boring and soils tests that shall be conducted by testing facilities licensed by the State. 
D.  The final plat shall conform substantially to the approved preliminary plat. The applicant may submit a final plat for a portion of the approved preliminary plat proposed to be recorded and developed at the time. 
1.  The applicant shall submit two original mylars after all reviews and revisions or other reproducible drawing of the final plat as prescribed by Chapter 177, F.S., duly signed as required. Review copies of the final plat may be submitted for comment on bond paper. The final plat submitted for recording shall be composed of individual sheets of the size approved by the County for purposes of recording. 
2.  The plat shall be tied to state plane coordinates. State plane coordinate (North American Datum 1983/90 or subsequent NGS adjustments) in U.S. survey feet shall be stated on the final plat mylar submitted for recording. State plane coordinates for at least two boundary corners of the proposed plat shall be shown. These coordinates shall be derived from field measurements in conformity with State law. 
3.  In addition to the information required by Sections 177.041-177.091, F.S., the following shall be shown on the plat: 
a.  A location sketch showing the location of the subdivision with respect to section or City limit lot lines. 
b.  The exact names, locations, and right-of-way widths along the property lines of all existing or recorded streets intersecting or paralleling the boundaries of the tract. 
c.  Lots numbered in numerical order, beginning with number one in each block, and blocks lettered in alphabetical order. 
d.  Common areas or other sites required for stormwater management areas or other shared facilities, adequate to accommodate all subdivision land development activities. 
e.  Acknowledgment of the owners and all lien holders to the plat and restrictions, including dedication to public use of all streets, alleys, parks, or other open spaces shown thereon and the granting of the required easements. 
f.  Space and forms for the following necessary signatures indicating approval, as listed below: 
(1)  City Clerk's recording certificate; 
(2)  City Council approval; 
(3)  Title certification; 
(4)  Certificate of surveyor and mapper; 
(5)  Dedication with certificate of ownership and acknowledgements; 
(6)  Joinder and consent to dedication with acknowledgements; 
(7)  Certificate by tax collector; 
(8)  City engineer; and 
(9)  City surveyor. 
C.  Proposed zero lot line development shall include both a preliminary and final plat, and shall include a site development plan that demonstrates compliance with the site development standards set forth in Section 4.07.05. 
D.  A replat of an existing subdivision shall follow the same process as outlined for a new plat, except that a preliminary plat may not be required. The need for a preliminary plat shall be determined at the pre-application conference. 
9.02.07 - Submittal Requirements for Minor Plats. 
A.  Applications for minor plats shall require the following: 
1.  An application form as specified in Section 9.02.02. 
2.  A survey showing the following: 
a.  The location of all structures, and utilities above and underground (including service lines to the remaining and proposed buildings) that exist on the property. 
b.  Proposed new lot lines with setbacks to any existing buildings that will remain on site. 
c.  Existing easements and any proposed easements that are required for public utilities, storm drainage, and other improvements as a condition of lot line adjustment approval. 
B.  If relocation of existing utility service lines is necessary to remedy an encroachment, a plan shall be provided to show how service will be provided from the existing utility mains without encroaching. Utility service lines to a lot shall not encroach across another lot. Water and sewer lines shall be available to all lots with no main line extensions or upgrades necessary. 
C.  A new legal description for each new lot created. 
D.  Demonstration that the applicant has paid or is obligated to pay any costs of new utility adjustments, extension, relocation, or connections. 
E.  Demonstration that any demolition or removal of structures shall be accomplished prior to approval of the minor plat. 
9.02.08 - Submittal Requirements for Planned Unit Developments. 
    An application for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) is a combined application for site development plan approval and rezoning to PUD. When the PUD is proposed on a lot or parcel that is not platted, a subdivision plat is also required. The submittal shall include all information set forth in Sections 9.02.02, 9.02.03, 9.02.04, 9.02.05, and 9.02.09. When platting is required, the information set forth in Section 9.02.06 shall be provided. The application shall clearly identify all proposed site development standards in compliance with Section 4.06.02. 
9.02.09 - Submittal Requirements for Rezoning Applications. 
A.  In addition to the information required in Section 9.02.02, all applications for amendments to the zoning map (rezoning) shall include the following information: 
1.  A map of the area indicating the existing and proposed zoning district designation for the subject property and the existing zoning district designations for all abutting properties. The map shall show the land use categories from the Future Land Use Map in the Comprehensive Plan for the subject property and all adjacent properties. 
2.  A detailed statement addressing the consistency of the proposed zoning district with the land use category of the subject property. The statement shall address permissible uses within the land use category and the zoning district and shall further address consistency of the proposed zoning with the goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  A detailed justification for the proposed zoning district, including identification of changed conditions, if any, that make the proposed zoning district more appropriate than the existing zoning district. 
4.  A detailed statement regarding the existing land use pattern, the possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent districts, and the potential impacts of the proposed rezoning on the surrounding neighborhood. 
B.  Specific requirements for a proposed rezoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development) are set forth in Section 9.02.08. 
9.02.10 - Submittal Requirements for Vacations. 
    An application to vacate a right-of-way, easement, or subdivision plat shall include the information identified in Section 9.02.02 and the information set forth below. 
A.  A request to vacate a plat, either in whole or in part, shall include an attorney's opinion verifying that the applicant is the owner of the land proposed for vacation. 
B.  A written statement justifying the requested vacation including the following information: 
1.  Demonstration that the access of adjacent property owners will not be impaired; 
2.  Demonstration that access to a public water body will not be negatively impacted; and 
3.  Demonstration that there is no public need for the right-of-way, easement, or plat. 
9.02.11 - Submittal Requirements for Amendments to this Land Development Code. 
A.  An application to amend this Land Development Code shall include the following information: 
1.  An application form, available from the City. The application shall include the name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, email address, and signature of the applicant. 
2.  Proof of payment of applicable fees. 
B.  The following information shall be provided with the application: 
1.  A description of the proposed amendment, with specific citations to the section(s) proposed for amendment. 
2.  A detailed justification for the proposed amendment. 
3.  A detailed statement of consistency of the proposed amendment with the goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
9.02.12 - Submittal Requirements for Local Development Permits. 
A.  An application for a local development permit shall include documentation as required by the Florida Building Code, the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach, and other documents identified during a pre-application conference. 
B.  When an application pertains to a change of use, the requested change of use shall comply with the criteria in Section 2.03.04. 
C.  When an application for a change of use pertains to a nonconforming use, the requested change of use shall comply with the criteria in Sections 2.03.04 and 8.01.04. 
D.  A wetland permit shall include a clearing/grubbing permit; tree removal permit, if needed; and wetlands survey. 
9.03.00 - CONCURRENCY REQUIREMENTS 

9.03.01 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the certificate of concurrency process is to ensure the existence of sufficient infrastructure to maintain the levels of service adopted in the Comprehensive Plan. 
9.03.02 - Certificate of Concurrency Required. 
A.  A certificate of concurrency shall be required prior to or concurrent with the issuance of a development order, including de minimis situations. 
1.  The requirement for a certificate of concurrency shall not apply to properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Florida Master Site File. 
2.  Where multiple development permits are required, the issuance of the certificate of concurrency shall occur prior to the issuance of the initial local development permit. 
B.  A certificate of concurrency shall be issued upon a finding that the determination of concurrency demonstrates the availability of capacity to serve the proposed development. 
1.  The certificate of concurrency shall include the condition that facilities with the required capacity shall be in place and available to serve new development or as otherwise provided in State law. 
2.  For potable water, the certificate of concurrency shall include the condition that prior to approval of a building permit, the City shall determine that adequate water supplies to serve the new development will be available no later than the anticipated date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
C.  A certificate of concurrency shall automatically expire simultaneously with the expiration of the local development permit to which it applies. If a time extension is granted prior to the expiration of a local development permit, then the accompanying certificate of concurrency shall be automatically extended for the length of the time extension. 
D.  A certificate of concurrency shall be issued in writing and signed by the Development Administrator. 
9.03.03 - Determination of Concurrency. 
    A determination of concurrency is a demonstration that the proposed impact on the specified public services and facilities does not exceed the capacity based on the minimum level of service standard. 
A.  Level of Service Standards. 
1.  The minimum level of service standard for potable water is 125 gallons of potable water per person per day. 
2.  The minimum level of service standard for wastewater is 115 gallons of wastewater per person per day. 
3.  The minimum level of service standard for solid waste is six and eight-tenths (6.8) pounds per person per day. 
4.  The minimum level of service standard for recreation is four and thirty-two one-hundredths (4.32) acres of recreation land per 1,000 people. 
5.  The minimum level of service standard for stormwater runoff quantity is to retain the first one (1) inch on site and ensure that the post-development runoff rate does not exceed the predevelopment runoff rate for a twenty-five (25) year, twenty-four (24) hour storm event. The minimum level of service standard for stormwater runoff quality shall be as set forth in Chapter 62-25, F.A.C. 
6.  The minimum level of service standard for arterial and collector roads outside the adopted Transportation Concurrency Exception Area (TCEA) is "D". There is no minimum level of service standard within the TCEA. However, proposed development within the TCEA shall provide facilities that improve mobility, based on the requirements set forth in Section 6.01.06. 
7.  The minimum level of service for public schools is 100 percent of the capacity established by the Department of Education for schools serving the City. 
B.  The concurrency calculation and determination shall compare the available capacity of each required facility or service to the demand of the proposed development. 
1.  The required facilities to meet the level of service standard for stormwater runoff shall be determined by the calculation of stormwater impacts as set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
2.  The available capacity for the transportation system shall be determined by the provision of a transportation or traffic study as set forth in Section 9.02.04.B. 
3.  The available capacity of all remaining facilities and services with an adopted level of service standard shall be calculated as follows: 
a.  Establishing the capacity of the facility or service; 
b.  Subtracting the capacity used by existing development; 
c.  Subtracting the capacity committed to approved developments through issuance of certificates of concurrency; and 
d.  Yielding the amount of capacity remaining and available to serve proposed development. 
C.  The available capacity may be adjusted based on planned expansions to capacity that guarantee an increase in capacity prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the proposed development. 
D.  The required capacity may be established in an approved development agreement, in compliance with the requirements in Section 9.08.00. 
9.03.04 - De Minimis Projects. 
A.  Generally. 
1.  A proposed development may be determined to have a de minimis impact on one (1) or more facilities and services with an adopted level of service standard, as set forth in Section 9.03.02. 
2.  A proposed development with a de minimis impact shall be exempt from any further concurrency determination. 
B.  The following situations are considered de minimis for all facilities and services with an adopted level of service standard. 
1.  A single-family dwelling. 
2.  A nonresidential structure with fewer than 1,500 square feet of total floor area and generating fewer than fifty (50) trips per day. 
3.  A building addition with fewer than 1,500 square feet of total floor area and generating fewer than fifty (50) trips per day. 
C.  Any proposed development or redevelopment with an impact of not more than one (1) percent of the maximum volume at the adopted level of service of the affected transportation facilities as determined by the City, utilizing the most recent table of the generated two-way peak hour volumes in the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) Level of Service Handbook, shall be considered de minimis regarding the transportation level of service. No impact shall be deemed to be de minimis if the sum of existing roadway volumes from approved projects on a transportation facility would exceed 110 percent of the maximum volume at the adopted level of service of the affected transportation facility, or if the impact would exceed the adopted level of service standard for any affected designated hurricane evacuation route. 
9.03.05 - Strategies to Rectify a Lack of Concurrency. 
    Where available capacity cannot be demonstrated and a certificate of concurrency has been denied, the following methods may be used to maintain adopted level of service: 
A.  The applicant may provide the necessary improvements to maintain level of service. In such case the application shall include appropriate plans for improvements, documentation that such improvements are designed to provide the capacity necessary to achieve or maintain the level of service as required in Section 9.03.03, and recordable instruments guaranteeing the construction, consistent with determination of concurrency as set forth in Section 9.03.03. 
B.  The proposed project may be altered such that the projected level of service is no less than the adopted level of service. 
C.  The construction of any development project may be phased or staged so as to coincide with the phased or staged construction of infrastructure facilities so that the levels of service for such facilities are maintained upon completion of each phase or stage of the development project. 
9.04.00 - NOTICE REQUIREMENTS 

9.04.01 - Generally. 
A.  The City Council, Local Planning Agency, and other boards, and staff implementing requirements of this LDC shall provide public notice of meetings and hearings pursuant to the requirements of State law and the provisions of this section. 
B.  Published notice shall be provided for the applications listed below. 
1.  Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Amendments to site development plans; 
3.  Amendments to this LDC; 
4.  Appeals of administrative decisions; 
5.  Development Agreements; 
6.  Expansion or modification of nonconformities; 
7.  Preliminary or final subdivision plats; 
8.  Rezonings; 
9.  Site development plans; 
10.  Vacations; and 
11.  Variances 
C.  In addition to published notice, posted notice shall be provided for applications involving a specific property. However, posted notice shall not be required for building permits. 
D.  A proposal by the City to rezone less than ten (10) contiguous acres of land shall include mailed notice to the property owner of the parcel or parcels proposed for rezoning, in addition to published and posted notices. 
E.  All notices shall include the following information, unless otherwise specified in this LDC: 
a.  The name of the applicant; 
b.  The location of the property for which an application has been submitted; 
c.  The nature of the approval sought by the applicant; 
d.  The date, time, and place of any applicable public hearings on the application; 
e.  The location where the application, supporting documentation, compliance reports, and other information can be inspected or obtained; and 
f.  A statement that interested parties may appear at the hearing and be heard with respect to the application. 
F.  Where a proposed development will be considered at multiple public hearings or require two (2) or more separate applications, required notices may be combined into a single notice, provided that such notice includes all dates of public hearings and all proposed actions. 
G.  Specific additional information regarding a proposal to vacate a right-of-way shall include a general description of the obligations that may accrue to adjacent property owners upon approval of the vacation. 
H.  The City website shall contain information regarding scheduled pre-application conferences, received and pending applications, issuance of development orders, and a calendar of regular meetings and hearings for consideration of applications. All conferences, meetings, and hearings are open to the public. 
9.04.02 - Published Notice Requirements. 
A.  Where an ordinance is required for enactment of the application decision, the published notice shall comply with the requirements of Section 166.041, F.S. 
B.  Where an ordinance is not required for approval or denial of an application, a notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing at which the application will be considered. In addition, the notice shall be posted on the City's website at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. 
C.  The costs of publishing notice shall be paid by the applicant. Payment of such costs shall be made prior to scheduling any required public hearing. 
9.04.03 - Posted Notice Requirements. 
A.  A notice of a public hearing for consideration of an application shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the Fort Walton Beach City Hall at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
B.  The applicant shall post a sign on the property that is the subject of an application. The applicant may elect to pay a fee to the City for City staff to perform the required posted notice. The sign shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  One (1) sign shall be provided for each abutting right-of-way and shall be clearly visibly on each portion of the property that fronts a right-of-way. 
2.  The sign(s) shall be a minimum of two (2) s.f. in area. Lettering on the sign shall be large enough to be legible to motorists. 
3.  The sign(s) shall include only the following information: the action proposed and the date, time, and place of the public hearing for consideration of the application. 
4.  The sign(s) shall be posted at least ten (10) business days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
5.  The applicant shall provide photographic documentation of the sign(s) at least five (5) days prior to the public hearing. 
6.  The sign(s) shall be removed not later than five (5) business days following the public hearing. 
C.  Failure to maintain or replace the sign(s) shall not affect the jurisdiction of the reviewing board or decision-making entity to consider the application or the validity of any resulting decision. 
9.04.04 - Mailed Notice Requirements. 
    When an application has been determined complete, as set forth in Section 9.01.03, mailed notice shall be provided to all property owners within 300 feet of the property that is the subject of the application. Mailed notice is not required for amendments to this LDC or other applications that do not affect a specific property. Notices shall be mailed within five (5) business days following the determination that an application is complete. The applicant shall be responsible for providing proof to the City that mailed notice has been provided in compliance with the requirements in this section. As an alternative, the applicant may pay a fee to the City for City staff to provide the mailed notice. 
9.06.00 - QUASI-JUDICIAL HEARINGS 

9.06.01 - Procedures Regarding Ex Parte Communication. 
A.  A member of a decision-making entity shall not willfully participate in an ex parte communication regarding a pending application. 
B.  All ex parte communications shall be disclosed. 
9.06.02 - Conduct of Hearings. 
A.  The hearing shall be conducted in a manner to protect the due process rights of the applicant and any affected parties. 
B.  All testimony presented by the applicant, any affected party, any witness for any party, or the staff (other than legal advice given by the City Attorney) shall be provided under oath. 
C.  The applicant, any affected party, and the staff may cross-examine any person presenting information at the hearing. 
D.  An electronic record shall be made of the hearing. 
E.  Members of the general public may provide comment during the hearing. If a member of the general public desires his or her testimony to be considered as potential competent substantial evidence, such person shall be placed under oath and subject to cross-examination. 
F.  The decision-making entity may question the applicant, other parties, witnesses, and the City staff at any time during the hearing. 
G.  The decision-making entity shall render a decision which shall be based upon competent substantial evidence presented during the hearing. 
H.  The decision-making entity shall enter a written order which contains findings of fact and conclusions of law in support of its decision. 
I.  The decision-making entity's written order shall be filed with the City Clerk as part of the official records of the City. 
9.06.03 - Order of Presentations. 
    The following order of presentation shall be followed: 
A.  Announcement of the matter for consideration by the chairperson or the Mayor. Evidence that all notice requirements have been met shall be confirmed before continuing with such matter. 
B.  Disclosure by each member of the decision-making entity of any ex parte communications. 
C.  Presentation by the Development Administrator of the Compliance Report regarding the pending application. 
D.  Presentation by the applicant of evidence supporting the application. The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that the application should be granted. 
E.  Presentation by an affected party, if any, of evidence opposing the application. 
F.  Public comment. 
G.  Rebuttal by the Development Administrator, any affected party, and the applicant. 
H.  Conclusion of the evidentiary portion of the hearing. 
I.  Closing arguments by the Development Administrator, any affected party, and the applicant. 
J.  Deliberation by the decision-making entity. 
9.07.00 - AMENDMENTS TO DEVELOPMENT ORDERS FOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND PERMITS 

9.07.01 - Amendments to Expedited Development Orders. 
A.  Proposed amendments to expedited development orders shall be processed in the same manner as the original application. 
B.  One (1) copy of the approved site development plan shall be submitted with the proposed amendments clearly identified. 
C.  If approved, an amended development order shall be issued. 
9.07.02 - Minor Amendments to Major Developments Approved by City Council. 
A.  The following situations shall be considered minor amendments to major development orders issued by City Council: 
1.  A modification to the type and location of landscaping materials, provided that there is no reduction in the required total amount of landscaping material and the landscaping plan continues to comply with the provisions for landscaping set forth in Section 4.08.00. 
2.  A minor adjustment in the location of dumpsters, sidewalks, bicycle facilities, sheds, or other accessory buildings, provided that: 
a.  The adjustment does not deviate from the approved location by more than ten (10) percent of the linear distance from the approved location in any direction; 
b.  Such adjustment does not encroach into any required buffer or stormwater management area; 
c.  Such adjustment does not increase the approved impervious surface ratio for the project; and 
d.  The location continues to comply with all standards of this LDC. 
3.  The addition of a deck, porch, patio, or similar appurtenance, provided that the addition is less than 300 s.f. and the location complies with the requirements for such appurtenances as set forth in Chapters 4 and 5. 
4.  A minor adjustment in the location and design of parking lots and access drives, provided that: 
a.  Such adjustment does not encroach into any required buffer or other landscaped area; 
b.  Such adjustment does not increase the approved impervious surface ratio for the project; 
c.  Such adjustment does not reduce the number of parking spaces; and 
d.  Such adjustment continues to comply with all standards of this LDC and the Engineering Standards Manual of Fort Walton Beach. 
B.  One (1) copy of the approved site development plan shall be submitted with the proposed amendments clearly identified. 
C.  The amendment shall be processed in the same manner as an amendment to an expedited development order. If approved, an amended development order shall be issued by the Development Administrator. 
9.07.03 - Amended Development Orders for Major Developments. 
    Proposed revisions to a site development plan categorized as a major development where the development order was issued by City Council which do not meet the criteria set forth in Section 9.07.02 shall be processed in the same manner as the original application. 
9.07.04 - Amendment after Issuance of a Local Development Permit. 
A.  After a local development permit has been issued, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter, or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of the local development permit without first obtaining an amendment to the permit. The process for amending the permit shall be the same as for review and issuance of the original permit. A written record of the amendment shall be entered upon the original permit. 
B.  A stop work order shall be issued for after-the-fact deviations and no further work shall continue or commence on that part of the development prior to the issuance of an amended permit authorizing the work. 
9.08.00 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
    The City is authorized to consider and enter in a development agreement provided the following requirements are met: 
A.  The parties to the development agreement shall be the City and the owner of real property to be used and developed according to the conditions set forth in the agreement. 
B.  The procedures and requirements for review, adoption, and monitoring of the development agreement shall comply with the requirements of Section 163.3220-.3243, F.S. 
C.  The applicant shall meet the application requirements of Section 9.02.02 of this LDC. 
9.09.00 - VACATIONS 

9.09.01 - Vacation of Subdivision Plats. 
A.  The owner(s) of any land within an existing approved plat may request approval to vacate that portion of the plat which is owned by the applicant(s). If the existing plat includes a plat agreement/amendment, a portion of the original plat cannot be vacated without the consent of all current property owners within the plat. The vacating of public streets/rights-of-way and easements within a plat is subject to State Statutes and local ordinances. Plats, or portions thereof, cannot be vacated without the consent of the appropriate utilities or regulatory agencies. 
B.  An application for vacation of a subdivision plat shall be submitted as set forth in Section 9.02.10. 
C.  The procedures for review and recommendation shall be the same as for the consideration of the original application for approval of a subdivision plat, and shall comply with the requirements set for in Ch. 177, F.S. 
9.09.02 - Vacation of Public Rights-of-Way. 
A.  An application for vacation of all or part of a public right-of-way shall be submitted as set forth in Section 9.02.10. 
B.  The following are required findings for approval of a vacation of all or part of a public right-of-way: 
1.  The area proposed for vacation no longer serves a public purpose; 
2.  The proposed vacation is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 
3.  Approval of the proposed vacation shall not deny access to private property; 
4.  Approval of the proposed vacation shall not result in a loss of public safety, considering vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
5.  Approval of the proposed vacation shall not result in a loss of access by emergency vehicles; and 
6.  Approval of the proposed vacation shall not result in a loss of public services, such as waste collection or maintenance of public facilities. 
C.  The procedure for review and decision-making regarding a proposed vacation shall be as set forth in Section 9.01.00. 
9.09.03 - Vacation of Easements. 
A.  An application for vacation of all or part of an easement shall be submitted as set forth in Section 9.02.10. 
B.  The following are required findings for approval of a vacation of all or part of an easement: 
1.  The area proposed for vacation no longer serves a public purpose; and 
2.  The area is no longer required to provide for access to or maintenance of public facilities. 
C.  The procedure for review and decision-making regarding a proposed vacation shall be as set forth in Section 9.01.00. 
D.  Where an easement is required by a development order, the development order shall be amended prior to or concurrent with approval of vacation of the easement. 
9.10.00 - VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT 

9.10.01 - Violations. 
    Violations are defined in the Fort Walton Beach Code of Ordinances. Further, it is a violation of this LDC to: 
A.  Use or develop property without a development order or local development permit required by this LDC for such use or development; 
B.  Use or develop property for use that is not permissible in the applicable zoning district; 
C.  Use or develop property in violation of the conditions and limitations for such use or development set forth in this LDC; 
D.  Use or develop property in violation of the conditions set forth in the applicable local development order; 
E.  Violate the terms or conditions of any local development permit issued under or pursuant to this LDC; or 
F.  Construct or move any structure in violation of the applicable provisions of this LDC. 
9.10.02 - Penalties. 
    Penalties for violations are set forth in the Fort Walton Beach Code of Ordinances. In addition to other remedies provided by the Code of Ordinances and other applicable laws, regulations, or ordinances, the Development Administrator may take the following actions when a violation has been determined to exist: 
A.  No subsequent development order, local development permit, or certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the violation has been corrected. 
B.  A stop work order shall be issued and shall become effective at the time of delivery to the violator or upon posting at the job site, whichever is earlier. No further work or construction under an existing development order, local development permit, or other approval shall be permissible until the violation is corrected. 
C.  No clearing of land or construction, erection, placement, or commencement of any other form of development shall be permissible. 
D.  An order may be issued to repair, restore, or demolish the work, to vacate the premises, or otherwise to abate the violation. 
9.10.03 - Enforcement. 
    The City Manager shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this LDC. Violations may be considered by the Code Enforcement Board according to the procedures set forth in the Fort Walton Beach Code of Ordinances. 
CHAPTER 9 
TABLE OF HISTORICAL NOTES AND REFERENCES 
LDC Effective 
1 May 2012 LDC Effective 
9/2008-4/2012 State Law References/Other Historical Notes Authority Chpt. 166.021 F.S., Chpt. 163.3161 F.S., Chpt 163.3202 F.S., City Charter § 2, Ord. 1861 27 Mar 2012 9.00.00 9.00.01 9.00.02 9.00.03 Ord. 1880 11 Feb 2014 9.00.04 9.00.05 9.00.06 9.00.07 9.00.08 9.00.09 9.00.10 9.01.00 Ord. 1880 11 Feb 2014 9.01.01 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13, Ord. 1880 11 Feb 2014 9.01.02 9.01.03 9.01.04 9.01.05 9.01.06 9.01.07 9.01.08 9.01.09 9.01.10 Ord. 1880 11 Feb 2014 9.02.00 9.02.01 9.02.02 9.02.03 Ord. 1880 11 Feb 2014 9.02.04 Ord. 1880 11 Feb 2014 9.02.05 Ord. 1880 11 Feb 2014 9.02.06 Ord. 1880 11 Feb 2014 9.02.07 9.02.08 9.02.09 9.02.10 9.02.11 9.02.12 9.03.00 9.03.01 9.03.02 Ord. 1880 11 Feb 2014 9.03.03 9.03.04 9.03.05 9.04.00 Ord. 1880 11 Feb 2014 9.04.01 Ord. 1877 25 Jun 13 9.04.02 9.04.03 9.04.04 9.05.00 9.06.00 9.06.01 9.06.02 9.06.03 9.07.00 9.07.01 9.07.02 9.07.03 9.07.04 9.08.00 9.09.00 9.09.01 9.09.02 9.09.03 9.10.00 9.10.01 9.10.02 9.10.03  
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 1917  5-19-15 2 2.03.02 3 5.04.28 1941  4- 7-16 2 4.08.06.C 1942  4-26-16 2 4.08.05.B 1956 11-15-16 2 2.03.02 3       Added 5.04.29 1968  2-14-17 2 2.03.02 1969  2-14-17 2 3.05.03 3 4.00.02 1970  2-14-17 2       Added 5.03.01.E. 3 5.03.03 1971  3-28-17 2 2.03.02 3       Added 5.04.30 1972  3-28-17 2 2.03.02 3       Added 5.04.31 1974  6-27-2017 2 5.01.08 1976  8-22-2017 2 8.01.08 1990  4-24-18 2 5.01.02 2005  2-26-2019 2(Exh. A) 3.05.01-3.05.15       Rpld 3.05.16 3.05.17  
