CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF GAINESVILLE, FLORIDA 
____________ 
VOLUME I 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Republished in 1994 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
Adopted March 5, 1990 
Effective April 1, 1990 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF GAINESVILLE, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Jean M. Chalmers 
Mayor 
____________ 
David Flagg 
W. E. McEachern 
Gary D. Gordon 
Beverly Hill 
City Commission 
____________ 
J. T. Frankenberger 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Mary Ann B. Frazer 
Clerk of the Commission 
____________ 
W. D. Higginbotham, Jr. 
City Manager 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF GAINESVILLE, FLORIDA 
____________ 
James F. Painter 
Mayor-Commissioner 
____________ 
Edward L. Jennings, Sr. 
Bruce L. Delaney 
Paula M. Delaney 
Thomas B. McKnew 
City Commission 
____________ 
Marion J. Radson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kurt M. Lannon 
Clerk of the Commission 
____________ 
Wayne Bowers 
City Manager 
PREFACE 
This volume is a republication of the Code of Ordinances of Gainesville, Florida, of 1990, including all general and permanent ordinances enacted by the City Commission through Ordinance No. 3963, adopted March 14, 1994. The former volume was supplemented six times through Ordinance No. 3756, adopted February 17, 1992. Notations indicating supplemented pages have been deleted. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this republication is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER LAWS 	CHT:1 
CHARTER LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER LAWS INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
The following paragraphs are reprinted from the original preface of the 1990 Code. 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Gainesville of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1960 Code, as supplemented through August 13, 1984, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1960 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinances included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 3 is numbered 3-1 and the fourth section of Chapter 1 is 1-4. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections are even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of one section that would logically come between Sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he/she is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. J. T. Frankenberger, City Attorney, and Ms. Mary Ann B. Frazer, Clerk of the Commission, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION  
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 3600 
0-90-11 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEWLY CODIFIED CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF GAINESVILLE, FLORIDA; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING THE CODE; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING A REPEALING CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING WHEN THE CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF GAINESVILLE, FLORIDA: 
Section 1. The Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 29, each inclusive, is hereby adopted, and enacted as "The Code of Ordinances, City of Gainesville, Florida, " (hereinafter referred to as "the Code") which Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or before June 12, 1989, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect from and after 12:01 a.m. of April 1, 1990, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City adopted on final passage on or before June 12, 1989, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued to remain in force are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of the Code. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any provision of the Code, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Section 5. Any and all additions and amendments to the Code adopted after June 12, 1989, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6. In case of the amendment of any section of the Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty, as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance and in section 1-9 of the Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7. Nothing in the Code or this ordinance shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, administrative proceeding, or legal action pending on or before the effective date of the Code. 
Section 8. Any ordinance adopted after June 12, 1989, which amends or refers to ordinances which have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code and the codifier is directed to include any ordinance adopted after June 12, 1989 in the Code. The codifier is further authorized to renumber, reletter, or make such other clerical modifications necessary to fully incorporate such ordinances into the Code. 
Section 9. This ordinance and the Code adopted hereby, shall become effective at 12:01 a.m. on April 1, 1990. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED this 5th day of March, 1990. 
	/s/   
      MAYOR-COMMISSIONER 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      CLERK OF THE 
      COMMISSION 	
 	 
This ordinance passed on first reading this 19th day of February, 1990. 
This ordinance passed on second reading this 5th day of March, 1990.  
PART I - CHARTER LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Charter of the City of Gainesville, as created by Chapter 12760, Laws of Florida, 1927, and as amended by Chapter 90-394, Laws of Florida, 1990, is set out herein as enacted. Amendatory legislation will be identified by history notation following a particular amended section. 
 
ARTICLE I. - ESTABLISHMENT, CORPORATE LIMITS, AND POWERS 
 
1.01. - Establishment and general powers. 
The City of Gainesville, created by chapter 12760, Laws of Florida, 1927, as amended, shall continue and is vested with all governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions, render municipal services, and exercise any power for municipal purposes, except as otherwise provided by law.  
1.02. - Territorial limits. 
The territorial limits and boundaries of the municipality existing in Alachua County under the name of the City of Gainesville shall embrace all of the territory described as follows: 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the city, the legal description of the municipal corporate limits of the city, formerly set out in § 1.02, has been placed in Appendix I to the Charter.  
1.03. - Construction. 
(1)  The powers of the city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, limited only by the State Constitution, general law, and specific limitations contained in this act. 
(2)  If any provision of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this act are declared severable. 
(3)  All powers and authority granted by this act are supplemental and additional to all other statutory and constitutional authority. 
(4)  For purposes of this act, the term: 
(a)  "City" means the City of Gainesville. 
(b)  "Commission" means the city commission as established in Article II. 
(c)  "State" means the State of Florida.  
1.04. - Special powers. 
In addition to its general powers, the city may: 
(1)  Acquire by purchase, gift, devise, lease, lease-purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, real or personal property, or any estate or interest in property, within or without the city limits, and for any of the purposes of the city, and to improve, sell, lease, mortgage, pledge, or otherwise dispose of its property or any part of its property. 
(2)  Acquire, purchase, hire, construct, extend, maintain, own, operate, or lease local public utilities, including: cable television, transportation, electric, telephone, and telegraph systems; wastewater and stormwater facilities; works for supplying the city and its inhabitants with water, gas, and electric energy for illuminating, heating, or power purposes; water, electric, and gas production, transmission, and distribution systems; sanitary sewage facilities; wastewater transmission and disposal facilities; and any and all other utilities as the welfare of its residents reasonably demands. 
(3)  Finance local public utilities through the sale of bonds, pledging revenue, general taxation, or otherwise; sell water, electricity, gas, wastewater, or any other service, product, or commodity gathered, provided, produced, or manufactured by the city from the public utilities systems and facilities owned or operated by the city to any consumer within or without the limits of the city; and locate utility plants, distribution facilities, or any appurtenances either within or without Alachua County. 
(4)  Enter into agreements with other municipalities either within or without Alachua County, or with governmental units or private utility companies, for selling or buying utility services or other municipal services of any kind, wherever located; sell any surplus of water or electric energy it may have over and above the amount required to supply its own inhabitants and any other services to persons, firms, and corporations, public or private, on such terms and conditions as the commission considers appropriate; exercise all powers and authority of the city to acquire by purchase, gift, lease, lease-purchase, or otherwise, real or personal property; and exercise the power of eminent domain within Alachua County, and exercise the power of eminent domain anywhere outside the county where permitted by general law. 
(5)  Make reasonable rules and regulations for promoting the purity of its water supply and for protecting it from pollution, and for this purpose may exercise full police powers and sanitary control over all lands comprised within the limits of the watershed tributary to any such supply wherever such lands may be located in this state; impose and enforce any such rules and regulations; and prevent, by injunction, any pollution or threatened pollution of such water supply and any act likely to impair the purity of the water. 
(6)  Acquire, build, construct, erect, extend, enlarge, improve, furnish, equip, and operate as a separate bulk power supply utility or system, electric generating plants, transmission lines, interconnections, and substations for generating, transmitting, distributing, and exchanging electric power and energy both within and without the limits of the city, including specifically all powers and immunities granted by chapter 75-375, Laws of Florida. 
(7)  Fix the maximum rate and establish, impose, and enforce, by ordinance, the rates to be charged for gas, electric, wastewater, and all other public utilities or other services or conveniences whether operated, rendered, furnished, or owned by the city or by any person, firm, or corporation. 
(8)  Require that all electric wires and all telephone and telegraph wires be placed in underground conduits; prescribe rules and regulations for constructing and using the conduits; enforce compliance with such rules and regulations; and, if the public utilities company fails or refuses to comply with such rules and regulations, construct such conduits and place the wires underground and maintain a lien against the franchises and property of such company. 
(9)  Compel the abatement and removal of all nuisances within the city limits, or upon property owned by the city beyond its limits, at the expense of the person causing the nuisance or of the owner or occupant of the ground or premises where the nuisance is found; require all lands, lots, and other premises to be kept clean, sanitary, and free from weeds or make them so at the expense of the owner or occupant; regulate or prevent noisome or offensive businesses; regulate or prohibit the keeping of animals, poultry, or other fowl, or the exercise of any dangerous or unwholesome business, trade, or employment within the city limits; and regulate the transportation of all articles through the streets of the city. 
(10)  Provide and maintain, either within or without the city limits, charitable, recreative, curative, corrective, detention, or penal institutions. 
(11)  Provide and regulate hospitals within and without the city limits; enforce the removal of persons afflicted with contagious or infectious diseases to hospitals provided for them; establish and maintain a quarantine ground within or without the city limits and such quarantine regulations against infectious and contagious diseases as the city sees fit to impose; and protect the health of the public. 
(12)  Acquire by purchase, gift, devise, condemnation, or otherwise, lands, either within or without the city limits, to be used, kept, and improved as a place of interment of the dead; make and enforce all necessary rules and regulations for the protection and use of all cemeteries within the city limits; and generally regulate the burial of the dead. 
(13)  Provide fire protection and other governmental services within and without the city limits and enter into contracts for such purposes. 
(14)  License, tax, cause to be registered, control the drivers of, and fix the rate to be charged for the transportation of persons and property within the city limits and to the public works beyond the city limits; provide for parking spaces on the streets and regulate, vacate, or discontinue the right to use the parking spaces; and require bonds and sureties to be furnished for all vehicles operated for hire upon the streets of the city whether such operation is wholly within the city limits or between the city and places outside the city. 
(15)  Exercise full police powers over the entire width of right-of-ways of all streets and public ways which lie within, adjacent to, or partially within the city limits. 
(16)  Issue any bonds which municipalities are authorized to issue under the State Constitution or laws of the state, subject to the provisions of this act. For purposes of this subsection, the term "bonds" means ad valorem bonds, revenue bonds and certificates, certificates of indebtedness, special assessment bonds and certificates, tax anticipation notes, bond anticipation notes, revenue anticipation notes, and other evidences of indebtedness. The term "revenue bonds" means bonds payable solely from the revenues derived from sources of revenue other than ad valorem taxes. The term "ad valorem bonds" means bonds and the interest thereon which are payable from the proceeds of ad valorem taxes levied on real and personal property situated within the city limits. Ad valorem bonds may be used in combination with other revenue sources. 
(17)  Exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire property located within Alachua County, and exercise the power of eminent domain outside the county where permitted by general law, for the purpose of locating electrical generating, transmission, or distribution facilities; sanitary sewerage or other waste collection, treatment, or disposal facilities; water production, treatment, transmission, and distribution facilities; and for use by the city in the performance of any of its duties, rights, and authority. 
(18)  Levy ad valorem taxes in accordance with the State Constitution and laws of the state and to levy other taxes authorized by general law. 
(19)  Enact ordinances relating to the repair, closing, demolition and removal of dwelling unfit for human habitation, including specifically all powers and immunities granted by chapter 63-1359, Laws of Florida. 
(20)  Adopt urban renewal and community development ordinances. 
(21)  Provide, own, and operate a public transportation system within and without the city limits and on the campuses of the University of Florida and Santa Fe Community College, unless otherwise provided by those institutions, and provide for an adequate public transportation system by contract with other agencies, either public or private, on such terms and conditions as the city commission determines, and including specifically all powers and immunities granted by chapter 67-1413, Laws of Florida.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION 
 
2.01. - Composition. 
(1)  Population under 110,000. 
(a)  As long as the population of persons within the city remains under 110,000, the legislative power of the city is vested in a city commission of five members. Three members shall be elected by the qualified voters of each of three districts and two members shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city at large. 
(b)  For the regular election in 1998, the at large seat then available shall become and remain the mayor's seat. Candidates shall designate at time of qualifying that they are running for mayor. The mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city at large, and shall be considered a member of the commission, except as expressly provided herein. 
(2)  Population of 110,000 and over. At any time the population within the City reaches or exceeds 110,000 persons, as ascertained as of the effective date of any annexation under either: 1) the most recent decennial census of the population produced by the U.S. Bureau of the Census, or 2) the most recent estimates of populations of municipalities produced by the State of Florida, Office of the Governor, or the designated agency thereof, whichever number is greater, then the commission shall adopt a resolution which ratifies the number of persons in the City and authorizing the increase in the number of commissioners as provided in subsection (3). Until such time as the additional commissioners are elected and placed in office, however, the legislative power of the city shall remain vested in a commission of five members. 
(3)  The legislative power of the city shall be vested in a city commission of seven members including the mayor (when the population within the City reaches or exceeds 110,000 persons as provided in Subsection (2) above) elected in accordance with Sec. 2.04 of this Charter. Four members shall be elected by the qualified voters of each of four districts and two members and the mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city at large as provided in Sec. 2.04. 
(Ord. No. 3752, § 1, 12-16-91, referendum of 3-10-92; Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 1-23-95)  
2.02. - Districts. 
(1)  For the purpose of electing three members of the commission (as long as the population within the City remains under 110,000 as provided in Sec. 2.01(1)), the commission shall, by ordinance, apportion the city into three consecutively numbered districts and shall adjust the boundary lines of the districts by subsequently enacted ordinances whenever, in its judgment, the districts are not ratably or equally proportioned in accordance with the State Constitution and the Constitution of the United States, but not less frequently than within the second year following each decennial census. 
(2)  For the purpose of electing four members of the commission (when the population within the City reaches or exceeds 110,000 as provided in Sec. 2.01(2)), the commission shall, by ordinance, apportion the city into four consecutively numbered districts and shall adjust the boundary lines of the districts by subsequently enacted ordinances whenever, in its judgment, the districts are not ratably or equally proportioned in accordance with the State Constitution and the Constitution of the United States, but not less frequently than within the second year following each decennial census. 
(Ord. No. 3752, § 1, 12-16-91; referendum of 3-10-92; Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 1-23-95)  
2.03. - Eligibility. 
Each candidate for a district seat must be a qualified voter who is a resident of the district from which the person seeks to be elected for a period of not less than 6 months prior to the date the person qualifies to run for office. Each commissioner elected from a district shall continuously reside in the district during the commissioner's term of office, except that any commissioner who is removed from a district by redistricting may continue to serve during the remainder of the commissioner's term of office. Each candidate for an at-large seat, including the mayor's seat, must be a qualified voter of the city for at least six (6) months prior to the date the person qualifies to run for office. Each at-large commissioner and the mayor shall continuously reside within the city during their terms of office. Candidates for the commission shall, at the time of qualifying, designate the district seats, the mayor's seat, or at-large seats for which they intend to run. A commissioner may not serve on the commission for more than two (2) consecutive three-year terms. The mayor may not serve as mayor for more than two (2) consecutive three-year terms. For purposes of this section, service as the elected mayor shall not be considered to be service as a commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 1-23-95)  
2.04. - Election and terms. 
(1)  (a)  Candidates for election to the commission shall qualify in the manner prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Except as provided in Subsection (1)(c) herein, each commissioner shall be elected for a term of 3 years. 
(c)  For the purpose of providing more evenly staggered terms of office, in the regular municipal election held in 2003, the district seat added pursuant to Sec. 2.01(3) of this Charter shall be elected for an initial term of office of one year, and the at-large seat added pursuant to Sec. 2.01(3) of this Charter shall be elected for an initial term of two years. Thereafter, the terms of office for said seats shall be 3 years. 
(d)  The regular municipal election shall be held on the date as prescribed by ordinance. 
(e)  Upon the occurrence of a vacancy on the commission, a special election may be held to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(2)  The district candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast in a particular district shall be elected. The at-large candidate and the candidate for mayor receiving a majority of the votes cast within the city at large for such seat shall be elected. If a candidate does not receive a majority of the votes cast for a particular seat, as applicable, a runoff election shall be held between the two (2) candidates for that seat receiving the highest number of votes cast. In the case of a tie, the candidates shall be selected for the runoff election in the same manner as provided for other offices by general law. The candidate receiving more votes in the runoff election shall be elected. 
(3)  The terms of office of commissioners shall be staggered so that the terms of office of all commissioners do not expire the same year. Commissioners hold office from 12 o'clock noon of the Thursday following the first Tuesday in May of the year in which they are elected until their successors in office are elected and qualified or until recalled as provided by law. If a runoff election is necessary, commissioners hold office from 12 o'clock noon of the Thursday following the third Tuesday in May of the year in which they are elected. 
(4)  Vacancies in office shall be filled in one of the following ways: 
(a)  If less than 6 months remain in the unexpired term or until the next regular election, the commission by a majority vote of the remaining members shall choose and appoint a successor, who is otherwise eligible under section 2.03 of this act, to serve until a newly elected commissioner is qualified. 
(b)  If more than 6 months remain in the unexpired term and a general election is not scheduled within 6 months, the commission shall fill the vacancy by a special election to be held not more than 60 days after the occurrence of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 020289, § 1, 8-27-02)  
2.05. - Recall of commissioners. 
Commissioners including the mayor are subject to recall as provided by law.  
2.06. - Commission as judge of qualifications of members; election of mayor-commissioner pro tempore; rules of procedure; punishment of members for misconduct; and quorum. 
The commission shall be the judge of the qualifications of its own members, subject to review by the courts, and shall elect one member as the mayor-commissioner pro tempore. The commission may determine its own rules of procedure and may punish its own members for misconduct. A majority of all the members of the commission constitutes a quorum to do business but a smaller number may adjourn. 
(Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 1-23-95)  
2.07. - Commission actions; majority vote necessary for adoption of ordinances and resolutions. 
The commission shall act by motion, proclamation, resolution, or ordinance. Unless otherwise provided in this act or by law, a motion or a proclamation is adopted when approved by the votes of a majority of the members present, and an ordinance or resolution is adopted when approved by the votes of four or more members of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 020749, § 1, 2-10-03)  
2.08. - Mayor. 
The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the commission and shall exercise such powers conferred and implied by, and perform all duties imposed by, this act, the ordinances of the city, and the laws of the state. The mayor shall have a voice and a vote in the proceedings of the commission, but no veto power. The mayor shall be the official head of the city for receipt of service of legal processes, the purposes of military law, and all ceremonial purposes, but shall have no administrative duties. The mayor-commissioner pro tempore shall perform the functions and duties of the office of mayor in the absence of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 1-23-95)  
2.09. - Commissioner forfeiture of office and interest in contracts. 
Any commissioner including the mayor who ceases to possess any of the qualifications required by this act shall forfeit the office of commissioner. Any contract of the city in which any commissioner has or may have a conflict of interest is voidable by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 1-23-95)  
2.10. - Interference with charter officers. 
Neither the commission nor any commissioner, including the mayor, may dictate the appointment of any person to office or employment by the charter officers nor in any manner interfere with the independence of charter officers in the performance of their duties. Except for the purpose of an inquiry, the commission and its members, including the mayor, must deal with employees of the city solely through their respective charter officers, and neither the commission nor any commissioner, including the mayor, may give orders to any subordinates of the charter officers either publicly or privately. Any commissioner, including the mayor, who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in section 775.082 or section 775.083, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 1-23-95)  
2.11. - Oaths of office. 
Before taking office for any term each commissioner shall swear or affirm: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support, honor, protect, and defend the Constitution and Government of the United States and of the State of Florida; that I am duly qualified to hold office under the Constitution of the State and under the charter of the City of Gainesville; and that I will well and faithfully perform the duties of (title of office) on which I am now about to enter." 
(Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 1-23-95)  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
3.01. - Charter officers. 
The charter officers provided for in this article are vested with authority to administer the assigned duties of their offices including the employment and removal of all subordinate employees of their offices. They must make all appointments based on merit and fitness alone and, except as otherwise provided in this act, may remove nonprobationary personnel only for cause, obsolescence of position, budgetary restriction, or for other legitimate reasons. The charter officers may purchase and contract for supplies, materials, equipment, and services required to perform their assigned duties under procedures and limitations prescribed by the commission.  
3.02. - City manager. 
(1)  Appointment; administrative head of municipal government; qualifications; terms; bond. The commission shall appoint a city manager who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government. The city manager is responsible for the efficient administration of all the departments except for those under the control of other charter officers. The city manager shall be appointed without regard to political beliefs, hold office at the will of the commission, and receive no salary for any portion of a salary period extending beyond termination of office. The city manager shall give bond for the faithful performances of this duty in such sum as the commission requires to protect the finances of the city. 
(2)  Powers and duties generally. The city manager: 
(a)  Shall see that the laws and ordinances are enforced. 
(b)  Shall propose ordinances to designate the job title of subordinates who are directors of departments. 
(c)  Shall appoint and, except as otherwise provided in this act, may remove any director of a department at will. 
(d)  May remove any nonprobationary subordinate officer or employee in a department for cause, obsolescence of position, or to satisfy budgetary restrictions. 
(e)  Shall administer all departments and divisions created by the commission, except as otherwise provided in this act. 
(f)  Shall attend all meetings of the commission, except as excused, with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote. 
(g)  Shall recommend to the commission all measures necessary and expedient for the proper governance and management of the city. 
(h)  Shall keep the commission fully advised as to the management, governance, and needs of the city. 
(i)  Is the purchasing agent for the city subject to rules adopted by the commission. However, the power of purchase and sale granted to the city manager does not include the power to dispose of any public utility owned by the city. 
(j)  Shall recommend an annual budget to the commission. 
(k)  Shall perform all other duties prescribed by law, this act, ordinance, or direction of the commission.  
3.03. - City attorney. 
The city attorney must be admitted to the practice of law in the state, and shall be the legal advisor to and attorney for the city. The city attorney shall serve at the will of the commission. The city attorney shall prosecute and defend all suits, complaints, and controversies for and on behalf of the city, unless otherwise directed by the commission, and shall review all contracts, bonds and other instruments in writing in which the city is to be a party, and shall endorse on each approval as to form and legality.  
3.04. - Clerk of the commission. 
The commission may employ a clerk of the commission who shall keep records and perform such other duties as are prescribed by this act or the commission. The clerk of the commission shall serve at the will of the commission.  
3.05. - City internal auditor. 
(1)  The commission may appoint a city internal auditor who shall serve at the will of the commission. The city internal auditor: 
(a)  Shall perform financial and compliance audits. 
(b)  Shall assist the commission in all its accountability functions. 
(c)  Shall perform compliance audits on the implementation of the city's human relations and equal opportunity ordinances, policies, and programs pertaining to the activities of the city within all departments of the city in accordance with schedules prescribed by the commission. 
(d)  Shall perform all other duties assigned by the commission. 
(2)  All financial and compliance audits and other reports of the city internal auditor shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 020024, § 1, 7-8-02)  
3.06. - General manager for utilities. 
(1)  Appointment; administrative head of municipal utilities; qualifications; terms. The commission shall appoint a general manager for utilities ("general manager") who shall be responsible to the commission. The general manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of the Utility System. The general manager for utilities shall serve at the will of the commission. 
(2)  Powers and duties generally. The general manager: 
(a)  Shall be responsible for and have exclusive management jurisdiction and control over operating and financial affairs of the Utility System including, but not limited to, the planning, development, production, purchase, sale, exchange, interchange, transmission and distribution of all electricity; the planning, development, purchase, sale, exchange, interchange, transmission and distribution of all natural gas; the planning, development, supply, treatment, transmission, distribution and sale of all potable water; and the planning, development, collection, treatment, disposal and billing of all wastewater now or hereafter provided by the city; 
(b)  Shall submit to the commission for its consideration a yearly budget for the operation of the Utility System; 
(c)  Shall be the purchasing agent for all equipment, materials, supplies and services necessary for operating and maintaining the Utility System subject to policies promulgated by the commission; 
(d)  Shall propose ordinances to designate the job titles of subordinates that are to be considered directors of department; 
(e)  Shall appoint and, except as otherwise provided in this charter, remove all directors of departments at will; 
(f)  Shall recommend to the commission all measures necessary and expedient for the proper governance and management of the Utility System; 
(g)  Shall keep the commission fully advised as to the management, governance and needs of the Utility System; 
(h)  Shall perform all other duties prescribed by law, this charter, ordinance, or direction of the commission.  
3.07. - Audits and examinations of administrative departments. 
In the absence of state law requiring the city to conduct an annual financial audit, the commission shall adopt an ordinance requiring an annual financial audit of the accounts and records of the city to be completed by an independent certified public accountant within 12 months after the end of each fiscal year.  
3.08. - Equal opportunity director. 
The commission shall appoint an equal opportunity director who shall serve at the will of the city commission. The equal opportunity director: 
(1)  Shall investigate complaints of discrimination, harassment, retaliation, and other related matters, and propose remedial action, as prescribed by the city's human relations and equal opportunity ordinances. No city employee shall suffer retaliation for filing a complaint or testifying, assisting, or participating in any investigation under these ordinances, and such complaints shall be held confidential to the extent allowed by federal and state law. 
(2)  Shall make reports, including an annual report, to the charter officers and the commission, as appropriate, as to the activities of the year and the need, if any, to revise the city's human relations and equal opportunity ordinances, policies, and programs pertaining to, but not limited to, equal opportunity, affirmative action, local minority business and local small business enterprise procurement program, fair housing, unlawful harassment, and accessibility to the city's programs, services, and activities. 
(3)  Shall propose policies for the implementation of comprehensive equal opportunity and diversity programs and adherence to equal opportunity laws, policies, procedures, and related matters. 
(4)  Shall develop, prepare, and monitor the city's affirmative action plan. 
(5)  Shall develop training, conduct workshops, and propose strategies and initiatives related to diversity and equal opportunity and related matters in employment, purchasing, services, programs, and activities. 
(6)  Shall review all proposed changes to current or proposed new city employment policies, procedures, and guidelines, job descriptions, and purchasing policies, procedures, and guidelines for compliance with equal opportunity laws, policies, procedures, and guidelines, and related matters. 
(7)  Shall monitor all hires, transfers, demotions, promotions, and terminations for compliance with equal opportunity laws, policies, procedures, guidelines, and related matters. 
(8)  Shall develop instruments to monitor adherence to diversity and equal opportunity laws, policies, procedures, guidelines, and related matters for city services, programs, activities, employment, and purchasing. 
(9)  Shall participate in the assessment and review of the city's employment practices, including recruitment, appointment, and promotion, as they pertain to all employees and applicants at all levels of city employment. 
(10)  Shall compile various equal opportunity reports and related reports required of the city by state and federal agencies or that are necessary for compliance purposes. 
(11)  Shall perform all other functions as prescribed by ordinances or as otherwise directed by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 020024, § 2, 7-8-02)  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMITTEES 
 
4.01. - Boards and committees. 
The commission may create advisory boards and committees as it deems necessary. The members of all boards and committees shall serve without compensation, shall consult with and advise the commission and the various departments, and shall perform all duties and powers prescribed by ordinance or resolution.  
4.02. - City plan board. 
(1)  The commission shall create one or more city plan boards which shall: 
(a)  Plan for the proper development and growth of the city. 
(b)  Prepare comprehensive plans or elements or portions of plans to guide future development and growth. 
(c)  Make recommendations pertaining to comprehensive plans or elements or portions of plans. 
(d)  Monitor and oversee the effectiveness and status of the comprehensive plan, and recommend changes in the comprehensive plan as are from time to time required. 
(e)  Review proposed land development regulations and land development codes, or amendments thereto, and make recommendations as to the consistency of each proposal with the adopted comprehensive plan or element or portion of the plan. 
(f)  Perform all other functions, duties, and responsibilities assigned to it by the commission. 
(2)  Each board shall issue reports and hold public hearings as required by law. The commission may not take final action on any matter pending before a board until the board has completed its report in accordance with law. 
(3)  The commission may not declare itself as the city plan board with responsibility under this section.  
4.03. - Building and land development regulatory boards. 
(1)  Creation and composition. The commission may, by ordinance, create one or more building and land development regulatory boards. Each member of a building and land development regulatory board shall be appointed by the commission and may not be an official or an employee of the city. The commission may designate a city plan board to serve as a building and land development regulatory board. 
(2)  Powers and duties. A building and land development regulatory board may: 
(a)  Hear and decide appeals alleging an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official of a department in the enforcement of any building or land development regulation. 
(b)  Hear and decide any special exception under the jurisdiction of the board as prescribed by a building or land development regulation. 
1.  The board may not grant a special exception unless it finds that the grant is in harmony with the purpose and intent of any building or land development regulation and will not adversely affect the public interest. 
2.  The board may qualify any special exception with appropriate conditions and safeguards. 
3.  The board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the special exception is required must be begun or completed, or both, after which the special exception automatically expires if the time limit has not been strictly satisfied. 
(c)  Grant variances to a regulation that are not contrary to the public interest when, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the regulation would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. The board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with any building or land development regulation. The board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required must be begun or completed, or both, after which the variance automatically expires if the time limit has not been strictly satisfied. A variance to a building or land development regulation may not be granted unless the board first finds: 
1.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings similarly situated; 
2.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
3.  That the requested variance will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the regulation to other lands, buildings, or structures in the same land use category; 
4.  That literal interpretation of the regulation would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same land use or zoning category under the terms of the regulation and would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant; 
5.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance required to make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure; and 
6.  That the variance is in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the regulation and that such variance will not be injurious to the abutting lands or to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(3)  The commission may grant, by ordinance, any additional powers and duties to a building and land development regulatory board in accordance with applicable law. 
(4)  The board may not grant any variance, special exception, or appeal which is not consistent with either the comprehensive plan or element or portion of the plan, or with the building or land development regulations, except as permitted under paragraph (2)(c). 
(5)  A violation of conditions and safeguards prescribed under the terms of a granted variance or special exception constitutes a violation of the building or land development regulations.  
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
 
5.01. - Charter amendments. 
This act may be amended pursuant to this section or as otherwise provided by general law. 
(1)  Petition. An amendment may be proposed by a petition signed by 10 percent of the registered voters of the city, or by an ordinance adopted by a four-fifths vote of the membership of the commission. The commission shall place the proposed amendment to a vote of the electors at the next general election or at a special election called for that purpose. 
(2)  City charter review commission. 
(a)  A city charter review commission (CCRC) consisting of eleven (11) registered voters of the city shall be appointed by the city commission at least twelve (12) months but not more than eighteen (18) months before the general election occurring in November 2020 and at least twelve (12) months but not more than eighteen (18) months before the November general election occurring every ten (10) years thereafter, to review the city charter and propose any amendments which may be advisable for placement on the November general election ballot. Members of the CCRC shall receive no compensation. Vacancies shall be filled within thirty (30) days in the same manner as the original appointments. 
(b)  The CCRC shall meet for the purpose of organization within thirty (30) days after the appointments have been made. The CCRC shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from among its membership. Further meetings shall be held upon the call of the chairman or a majority of the members of the CCRC. All meetings shall be held in accordance with Florida's Government-in-the-Sunshine Law. A majority of the members of the CCRC shall constitute a quorum. The CCRC may adopt rules of procedure as it deems necessary, subject to approval by the city attorney as to form and legality. 
(c)  The city commission shall budget funds for the operation of the CCRC. Expenditures of the CCRC shall be approved in advance by a majority vote of the membership of the CCRC and shall be made in accordance with city ordinances, policies and procedures and within the budgeted funds approved by the city commission. 
(d)  The clerk of the commission, or designee, shall serve as the clerk and administrator of the CCRC. The city attorney, or designee, shall serve as legal counsel to the CCRC. The city manager, general manager for utilities, city auditor and equal opportunity director shall provide staff to assist the CCRC in its work, as necessary. 
(e)  The CCRC shall hold at least three (3) public hearings, that are a minimum of seven (7) calendar days apart, on any proposed charter amendment(s). No charter amendment shall be submitted to the city electorate for adoption unless favorably voted upon by a majority of the entire membership of the CCRC. The city charter officers shall review and prepare a written analysis for each charter amendment that the CCRC proposes to the city commission. 
(f)  No later than six (6) months prior to the November general election, the CCRC shall deliver its proposed charter amendments to the city commission. The city commission may veto a proposed charter amendment by a two-thirds vote of the membership of the city commission. For all proposed amendments that are not vetoed, the city commission shall adopt an ordinance requesting the county supervisor of elections place those proposed amendments on the next November general election ballot. The clerk of the commission shall deliver the ordinance to the county supervisor of elections no later than four (4) months prior to the November general election. 
(g)  If it does not submit any proposed charter amendments or revisions to the city commission at least six (6) months prior to the November general election, the CCRC shall be automatically dissolved. Otherwise, the CCRC shall be automatically dissolved on the date of the November general election. Upon dissolution of the CCRC, all city property used by the CCRC shall be turned over to the clerk of the commission. 
(3)  Notice. The full proposed amendment must be published once each week for 4 consecutive weeks prior to the election in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. 
(4)  Effect of election. A proposed amendment receiving an affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast shall be effective as an amendment to this act not later than the 90th calendar day after the day on which the vote was taken unless otherwise provided in the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 170717 , § 1, 8-2-18/Ref. 3-19-19)  
5.02. - Issuance of ad valorem bonds generally. 
The city, in its corporate capacity, may issue ad valorem bonds of the city becoming due at such times and upon such conditions as are prescribed by ordinance. The proceeds from the sales of ad valorem bonds shall be used for such municipal purposes as may be provided by ordinance, and for the payment of ad valorem bonds and the interest thereon. The full faith and credit of the city, the ad valorem taxing power of the city, and the revenues obtained from the public utilities owned by the city may be pledged by ordinance, if, before the ad valorem bonds are issued, the amount and purposes of the proposed issue has been approved by a majority vote of the electors of the city voting on the question. The rate of interest shall be determined at the time of sale of the bonds. The commission may, by ordinance, prescribe provisions not inconsistent with this act for the control and direction of the expenditures of ad valorem bond moneys, and for the control and management of public utilities acquired by the city. The commission may levy ad valorem taxes upon real and tangible personal property within the city limits to raise funds to pay the principal and interest of the general obligation and ad valorem bonded indebtedness of the city and to provide a sinking fund for the payment of these ad valorem bonds.  
5.03. - Retirement and pension plan for city employees. 
The commission shall, by ordinance approved by at least four-fifths of the members of the commission, adopt and implement a retirement and pension plan for the benefits of the employees of the city and shall make appropriations necessary for the plan.  
5.04. - Disposal of utilities. 
The commission may not, in any manner, dispose of or agree to dispose of the city's electrical or water production or distribution facilities or any part thereof so as to materially reduce the capacity of the city to produce or distribute electrical energy or water, unless the commission does so by ordinance with the prior approval of a majority vote of the qualified electors of the city voting at an election for the purpose of approving the ordinance.  
5.05. - Fresh pursuit and arrest by municipal officers. 
Any police officer of the city may make fresh pursuit of any person from within the city to any point in Alachua County and there arrest the person, if the pursued person has violated a municipal ordinance of the city or committed a misdemeanor within the city in the presence of a police officer, or if the police officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the pursued person has committed or is committing a felony.  
5.06. - Funds for construction of paved surfaces in designated areas. 
The City of Gainesville, Florida shall not expend, use, seek, permit or allow the use of any city, county, state, private or federal funds for the construction of any paved surfaces for trails or transportation corridors on City-owned land designated as Conservation, as shown on the map dated May 1998 and on file in the Office of the Clerk of the Commission, within the Hogtown Creek Watershed. This provision is not intended to restrict paving for parking or recreational facilities constructed on land designated as Recreation on the aforementioned map. 
(Ord. No. 041138, § 1, 1-9-06) 
Editor's note— The above provision was a citizen initiative approved by the voters at the city regular election on March 17, 1998. It was included herein as § 5.06 with the city's approval.  
5.07. - Equal opportunity; duties of charter officers. 
The charter officers shall apply the city's human relations and equal opportunity ordinances and implement its human relations and equal opportunity programs within their respective departments and shall coordinate the efforts of the various departments to optimize the effectiveness of their efforts. The charter officers shall, from time to time, make individual and collective recommendations to the commission pertaining to the effectiveness of the city's human relations and equal opportunity ordinances and programs pertaining to the activities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 020024, § 3, 7-8-02)  
5.08. - Reserved.  
5.09. - Sale or conversion of City-owned lands used or acquired for conservation, recreation, or cultural purposes. 
(1)  A registry is hereby created, for the purpose of identifying real properties owned in fee simple by the City of Gainesville that are acquired or used for conservation, recreation, or cultural purposes, and that are deemed by the City Commission of the City of Gainesville to be worthy of the highest level of protection. The registry shall be known as the "City of Gainesville Registry of Protected Public Places." At a public hearing the City Commission may add properties to the Registry by adopting an ordinance by a five-sevenths vote of the membership of the City Commission. The ordinance shall contain the legal description(s) of the site(s) and a description of the value(s) that support their inclusion on the Registry, and shall be recorded in the official public records. 
(2)  Real properties, or portions of real properties, on the City of Gainesville Registry of Protected Public Places may not be sold, or converted to a use that will result in a loss of a value or values, as determined by the City Commission, for which a property was placed on the Registry, except by a majority vote of the electors voting in a city-wide referendum election. 
(3)  The above restrictions on divestiture or change of use of property shall not apply where the property is being taken for a public purpose by the state or federal government by way of eminent domain. 
(Ord. No. 080576, § 1, 12-18-08)  
ARTICLE VI. - TRANSITION SCHEDULE 
 
6.01. - Former charter provisions. 
All provisions of the charter of the City of Gainesville in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this act which are not contained in and are not inconsistent with this act are ordinances of the city subject to modification or repeal in the same manner as other ordinances of the city.  
6.02. - Ordinances and resolutions preserved. 
All ordinances and resolutions in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this act shall remain in full force and effect to the extent not inconsistent or in conflict with this act until repealed or changed in the manner provided by law.  
6.03. - Rights of officers and employees. 
Nothing in this act except as otherwise specifically provided in this act shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who were city officers or employees immediately prior to the effective date of this act.  
6.04. - Pending matters. 
All rights, claims, actions, orders, and legal or administrative proceedings involving the city immediately prior to the effective date of this act shall continue, except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this act.  
APPENDIX I. - LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF MUNICIPAL CORPORATE LIMITS* 
* Editor's Note— At the direction of the city, the legal description of the municipal corporate limits, formerly set out under Charter § 102, has been included herein as Charter Appendix I. These corporate limits were replaced in their entirety by Ord. No. 080085, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 2, 2008. 
The corporate boundaries have been revised by the following ordinances annexing additional areas: 
Ord. No. 	Date 
3744 	10-21-91 
3745 	11- 4-91 
3768 	 4-24-92 
3769 	 4-24-92 
3864 	 6- 7-93 
3865 	 6- 7-93 
3920 	12-20-93 
3959 	 2-28-94 
3979 	 6-27-94 
3980 	 6-27-94 
4035 	10-10-94 
4047 	12-12-94 
4048 	12-12-94 
4060 	 1-30-95 
4061 	 1-30-95 
4062 	 1-30-95 
960938 	10-13-97 
960939 	10-13-97 
960940 	10-13-97 
960941 	10-13-97 
970051 	10-13-97 
970136 	10-27-97 
980987 	 6-14-99 
990947 	 1-10-00 
990866 	 1-24-00 
990898 	 1-24-00 
990898 	 1-24-00 
991230 	 4-10-00 
991231 	 4-10-00 
000130 	 7-24-00 
000738 	12-18-00 
000665 	 1-22-01 
000666 	 1-22-01 
000797 	 1-22-01 
000798 	 1-22-01 
001162 	 4-23-01 
001160 	 5-14-01 
001161 	 5-14-01 
001163 	 5-14-01 
001912 	11-26-01 
002124 	12-10-01 
002393 	 3-11-02 
002394 	 3-11-02 
0202104 	 9- 9-02 
020654 	12- 9-02 
020815 	 2-10-03 
030250 	 8-25-03 
030457 	12- 8-03 
030458 	12- 8-03 
040280b 	12-13-04 
040290 	 9-13-04 
040705 	12-13-04 
040706 	12-13-04 
041230 	 5- 9-05 
050547 	11-14-05 
050662 	12-12-05 
050699 	12-12-05 
050716 	12-19-05 
050881 	 2-27-06 
051124 	 5- 8-06 
060097 	 7-24-06 
060148 	 8-14-06 
060730 	 2-12-07 
060731 	 2-12-07 
060972 	 5-14-07 
061079 	 6-11-07 
061147 	 5-14-07 
070075 	 8-13-07 
070083 	 8-13-07 
070215 	11-26-07 
070457 	11-26-07 
070458 	11-26-07 
070514 	 1-14-08 
070722 	 4-28-08 
070721 	 2-11-08 
080137 	 7-28-08 
080193 	 9- 4-08 
080605 	 2- 5-09 
090809 	 4-15-10 
110505 	 1-19-12 
110680 	 3- 1-12 
130243 	11- 4-13 
130339 	12-19-13 
130340 	12-19-13 
130341 	12-19-13 
130342 	12-19-13 
140124 
10- 2-14 
140618 
 4-16-15 
150818 
 5- 5-16 
150912 
 6-16-16 
160156 
 9-15-16 
160216 
 2-16-17 
160744 
 6- 1-17 
170256 
11- 2-17 
170520 
 4-19-18 
170762 
 4-19-18 
170953 
 9- 6-18 
171006 
10- 4-18 
171037 
10- 4-18 
180311 
 1- 3-19 
 
_____
[The territorial limits and boundaries of the municipality existing in Alachua County under the name of the City of Gainesville shall embrace all of the territory described as follows:] 
Commence at the approximate Northwest corner of the City of Gainesville Deerhaven Power Generating Station and being the Northeast corner of the lands as described in Official Records Book 883, Page 502 of the Public Records of Alachua County, Florida (hereafter abbreviated as ORB, __ Page __ ACR), lying in Section 27, Township 8 South, Range 19 East and the existing City of Gainesville city limit line as per Ordinance #060731, said point being the point of beginning; thence West along the North line of said parcel to the East line of the lands as described in ORB 3283, Page 0470 ACR; thence North along said East line to the South right-of-way line of Alachua County Road N.W. 26 (Northwest 128th lane); thence West along said right-of-way line to the southerly extension of the East line of the lands as described in ORB 807, Page 403 ACR; thence North along said southerly extension and the East line thereof to the Northeast corner of said parcel; thence West along the North line of said parcel to the East right-of-way line of Alachua County Road N.W. 31 (Northwest 59th Drive); thence North along said right-of-way line to the North line of the lands as described in ORB 2579, Page 0005 ACR; thence East along said North line to the Northeast corner thereof; thence South along the East line of said parcel to the North right-of-way line of Alachua County Road N.W. 26 (Northwest 128th Lane); thence South along the southerly extension of said East line to the South right-of-way line of said county road, said point also being the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 2400, Page 1034 ACR; thence South along the East line of said parcel to the North line of the lands as described in 2599, Page 0585 ACR; thence East along said North line to the Northeast corner of said parcel and the Northwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 2400, Page 1034 ACR; thence continue East to the West right-of-way line of State Road 121; thence East along the easterly extension of said North line to the East right-of-way line of said state road; thence southeasterly along said right-of-way line and the southwesterly lines of Seminole Woods Units Number One and Two, subdivisions as recorded in Plat Book "L", Page 7 and Plat Book "L" Page 46, respectively, ACR to the North line of the lands as described in ORB 2916, Page 1126 ACR; thence West along said North line to the Northwest corner of said parcel, said point also being on the East right-of-way line of said state road; thence Southeasterly along said right-of-way line and the West line of said parcel to the South line of said parcel; thence East along said South line to the West right-of-way line of Alachua County Road N.W. 231; thence northeasterly along said right-of-way line and the East line of said parcel to the Northeast corner of said parcel; thence West along the North line of said parcel to the West right-of-way line of said county road, said point also being the Southeast corner of said Seminole Woods Unit Number Two; thence northeasterly along said right-of-way line and the East line of said subdivision to the Northeast corner of said subdivision; thence East along the easterly extension of the North line of said subdivision to the East right-of-way line of said county road; thence along said right-of-way line to the North line of the South ½ of Government Lot 6 Section 30, Township 8 South, Range 20 East; thence East along said North line and the North line of the South ½ of Government Lot 5 Section 30, Township 8 South, Range 20 East to the East line of said Government Lot 5; thence South along said East line and the East line of Government Lot 8 Section 30, Township 8 South, Range 20 East and the East line of Government Lot 5 Section 31, Township 8 South, Range 20 East to the North line of the lands as described in ORB 2356, Page 0156 ACR; thence West along said North line to the East right-of-way line of State Road Number 121; thence North along said right-of-way line to the easterly extension of the North line of the lands as described in ORB 1938, Page 2821 ACR; thence West along said easterly extension and the North line thereof to the Northwest corner of said parcel; thence westerly to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 2131, Page 0189 ACR; thence westerly, southerly, and easterly along the northerly, westerly, and southerly boundaries of said parcel to its Southeast corner; thence southerly to the Northwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 3578, Page 1012 ACR; thence southerly and easterly along the westerly and southerly boundaries of said parcel to its Southeast corner, said point also being on the West right-of-way line of said state road; thence South along said right-of-way line to the westerly extension of the North line of the South ½ of Government Lot 7 Section 31, Township 8 South, Range 20 East; thence East along said westerly extension and the North line thereof and the North line of the South ½ of Government Lot 8 Section 31, Township 8 South, Range 20 East to the Northeast corner of said South ½ of Government Lot 8, said point also being on the West line of a conservation easement as described in Book 2267, Page 2479 and amended in Book 2388, Page 2379 ACR; thence South along said West line to the South line of the lands as described in ORB 2393, Page 1657 ACR and the North line of Section 7, Township 9 South, Range 20 East and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3768; thence East along said North line of Section 7 to the East line of Section 7; thence South along said East line of Section 7 to the North line of Section 17, Township 9 South, Range 20 East; thence East along said North line of said Section 17 to the East line of said Section 17; thence South along said East line of Section 17 to the North line of Section 21, Township 9 South, Range 20 East; thence East along said North line of Section 21 to a point 670 feet West of the Northeast corner of said Section 21, said point also being the Northwest corner of a City of Gainesville transmission station and being a point on the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #2773; thence North along the northerly extension of the West line of said transmission station to the North right-of-way line of Northeast 53rd Avenue; thence East along said North right-of-way line to the West right-of-way line of NE 15th Street; thence North along said West right-of-way line (being a line 50 feet West of and parallel to the East line of the Southeast one-quarter of Section 16, Township 9 South, Range 20 East) to the North line of the South one-half (S ½) of said one-quarter Section; thence East along said North line and along the North line of the South one-half (S ½) of the Southwest one-quarter (SW ¼) Section 15, Township 9 South, Range 20 East to a point on the East line of said one-quarter Section; thence South along said East line to the North right-of-way line of NE 53rd Avenue and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #000738, said point also being the Southeast corner of said Murphy Water Plant; thence East along the North right-of-way line of North East 53rd Avenue to a point on the northerly projection of the East line of the West half of the Northwest quarter of Section 23, Township 9 South, Range 20 East; thence South leaving said North right-of-way line of Northeast 53rd Avenue and along said East line to the Southeast corner of the West half of said Northwest quarter; thence continue South along the East line of the Southwest quarter of said Section 23 a distance of approximately 450 feet to the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 3532, Page 1158 ACR and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3102; thence South 60° East a distance of 431.41 feet to the West right-of-way line of State Highway 24 (NE Waldo Road); thence northeasterly along said West right-of-way line to the westerly extension of the North line of the lands as described in ORB 2446, Page 0565 ACR and being a point on the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #070458; thence leaving said westerly right-of-way line East along said westerly extension and the North line thereof to the Northeast corner of said parcel; thence South along the East line of said parcel to the Southeast corner of said parcel; thence West along the South line of said parcel to the intersection with the West line of Section 13, Township 9 South, Range 20 East; thence South along the West line of said Section to the Northwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1158, Page 824 ACR; thence North 89°19'15? East to the East line of said Section 13; thence South along said East line to the Southeast corner of Section 24, Township 9 South, Range 20 East and being a point on the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3102; thence East to the Northeast corner of the Northwest one-quarter (NW ¼) of Section 30, Township 9 South, Range 21 East and being a point on the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3959; thence continue East along the North line of parcels as described in said Ordinance #3959 to the Northeast corner of Section 29, Township 9 South, Range 21 East; thence South along the East line of said Section 29 to the Southeast corner of said Section; thence West along the South line of said Section 29 to the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1906, Page 0596 ACR; thence Northwest along the Southwesterly line of said parcel to the southerly right-of-way line of State Road 26 (NE 55th Blvd.); thence northeasterly along said southerly right-of-way line to a point on the southerly extension of the North right-of-way line of County Road NE 38C (NE 27th Avenue); thence northwesterly along said southerly extension and the North right-of-way line of said County Road NE 38C to the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1906, Page 0592 ACR and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3980; thence North along the West line of said parcel to the intersection with the South line of the Northeast one-quarter of Section 30, Township 9 South, Range 21 East; thence West along said South line of the Northeast one-quarter of Section 30 to the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 2046, Page 2419 ACR, said point also being the Southwest corner of the Northeast one-quarter of said Section 30 and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #070075; thence North along the West line of said parcel and the West line of the Northeast one-quarter to the intersection with the southerly right-of-way line of State Road S-232 (NE 39th Blvd.); thence continue North along the West line of the Northeast one-quarter to the intersection with the northerly right-of-way line of State Road S-232 and being a point on the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3102; thence South 42°23'34? West along said northerly right-of-way line a distance of 360 feet to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 2319, Page 1544 ACR; thence, leaving said northerly right-of-way line, North 78°18'55? West, a distance of 1094.69 feet to the intersection with the East line of the lands as described in ORB 3376, Page 0904 ACR; thence North 00°20'36? East, along the East line of said parcel, a distance of 177.28 feet to the Northeast corner of said parcel; thence North 89°48'40? West, along the North line of said parcel, a distance 840 feet to the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1142, Page 214 ACR and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #070083; thence continue West along the South line of said parcel to the Southwest corner of said parcel and the intersection with the East line of Section 25, Township 9 South, Range 20 East; thence North along the East line of said Section 25 to the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1088, Page 957 ACR; thence South 89°32'20? West along the South line of said parcel a distance of 500 feet to the intersection of the East line of the lands as described in ORB 1448, Page 0581 ACR; thence North 00°17'40? West along the said East line a distance of 240 feet to the Northeast corner of said parcel; thence North 80°03'58? West a distance of 945.98 feet to the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1088, Page 957 ACR and the intersection of the East line of the lands as described in ORB 607, Page 347 ACR; thence in a South, Southeast, and Southwest direction along the East line of said parcel to the intersection with the East line of the lands as described in ORB 1331, Page 885; ACR thence South 12°32'44? West along the East line of said parcel a distance of 942.41 feet to the intersection with the North line of the lands as described in ORB 2220, Page 1560 ACR; thence South 82°45'04? East along the North line of said parcel a distance of 1006.60 feet to the Northeast corner of said parcel; thence South 00°12'17? East along the East line of said parcel to the intersection with the South right-of-way line of NE 39th Avenue (SR 222); thence westerly along said South right-of-way line of NE 39th Avenue to the intersection with the South line of Section 25, Township 9 South, Range 20 East; thence South 89°47'43? West along the South line of said Section 25 a distance of 1840.65 feet to the Southwest corner of said Section 25 and the Southeast corner of Section 26, Township 9 South, Range 20 East; thence continue West along the South line of said Section 26 to the Southwest corner of Section 26 and the Northwest corner of Section 35, Township 9 South, Range 20 East; thence South along the West line of said Section 35 to a point lying 1323.40 feet North of the South line of said Section and being the North line of the South one-half of the South one-half; thence North 89°05'15? East along said North line a distance of 5295.49 feet to the intersection with the East line of Section 35, Township 9 South, Range 20 East; thence South 00°59'06? East along said East line of Section 35 a distance of 1324.04 feet to the Southeast corner of said Section 35 and the Northeast corner of Section 2, Township 10 South, Range 20 East; thence South 01°22'14? East along the East line of said Section 2 a distance of 2591.57 feet to the North right-of-way line of State Road 26 (East University Avenue); thence South 89°00'15? West along said North right-of-way line of State Road 26 to a point lying 1481.74 East from the West line of Section 2 and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3865; thence southerly along the centerline of a drainage easement according to said Ordinance to the South line of said Section 2; thence westerly along said South line of Section 2 to the Southwest corner of Section 2; thence southerly to the North right-of-way line of State Road 20 (Hawthorne Road); thence southerly along the East line of Section 10 and the East line of Section 11, Township 10 South, Range 20 East to a point on the northwesterly extension of the South right-of-way line of State Road 20 and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #951158; thence Southeasterly along said right-of-way line to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 2187, Page 603 ACR; thence South along the East line of said parcel to the Southeast corner of said parcel; thence West along the South line of said parcel to the East right-of-way line of State Road 329-A (SE 27th Street); thence South along the East right-of-way line of SE 27th Street to the Southeast corner of the Northeast one-quarter (NE ¼) of Section 10, Township 10 South, Range 20 East; thence West along the South line of said Northeast one-quarter to the Southwest corner of said Northeast one-quarter (being also the Northeast corner of the Southwest one-quarter (SW ¼) of Section 10, Township 10 South, Range 20 East) and being the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1994, Page 0279 ACR; thence South 00°25'51? West along the East line of the Southwest one-quarter (SW ¼) and the East line of said parcel a distance of 1360.85 feet; thence continue along said parcel boundary North 87°54'20? West a distance of 636.24 feet; thence South 01°29'09? West a distance of 1305.48 feet to the Southeast corner of said parcel and the intersection with the South line of Section 10, Township 10 South, Range 20 East; thence North 89°33'05? West along said South line of Section 10 a distance of 1755.04; thence leaving said South line of Section 10, North 00°00'40? East a distance of 420.00 feet; thence North 89°33'05? West a distance of 160 feet, more or less, to the East right-of-way line of SE 15th Street (Kincaid Road); thence South along said East right-of-way line to the intersection with the easterly extension of the South line of the lands as described in ORB 2198, Page 562 ACR; thence West along said easterly extension and South line to the Southwest corner of said parcel; thence South 00°13' East along the West line of said parcel to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1701, Page 916 ACR and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3692; thence South 00°13' West a distance of 355.00 feet; thence East a distance of 168.18 feet to the West right-of-way line of County Road 2043 (SE 15 th Street); thence South 00°13' West along said West right-of-way line of County Road 2043 to the Northeast corner of Robinson Heights Unit 2 as recorded in ORB "98", Page 684 ACR; thence West along the North line of said Robinson Heights Unit 2 to the Northeast corner of Robinson Heights Unit 3 as recorded in ORB "98", Page 685 ACR; thence continue West along the North line of said Robinson Heights Unit 3 to the Northwest corner of Unit 3 and the intersection with the East right-of-way line of Atlantic Coastline Railroad; thence northwesterly along said East right-of-way line to the intersection with the easterly extension of the South line of Pine Grove Cemetery as recorded in ORB 80, Page 663 ACR; thence North 89°37'30? West along said easterly extension of Pine Grove Cemetery to the Southeast corner of pine grove cemetery as per ORB 80, Page 663 ACR; thence North 89°37'30? West along the South line of said Pine Grove Cemetery a distance of 1106 feet to the intersection with the East line of Evergreen Cemetery; thence South 04°06'15? West along the East line of said Evergreen Cemetery a distance of 44.85 feet to the Southeast corner of said cemetery; thence North 89°56'00? West along the South line of said Evergreen Cemetery a distance of 722.50 feet; thence North 01°12'22? West a distance of 57.05 feet; thence North 88°43'07? West a distance of 304.50 feet to the Southwest corner of Evergreen Cemetery; thence North 00°17'14? West along the West line of said cemetery a distance of 767.05 feet to the South line of Section 9, Township 10 South, Range 20 East; thence West along said South line of Section 9 a distance of 1252.11 feet to the easterly right-of-way line of State Road 331 (Williston Road); thence Southwesterly along the easterly right-of-way line of State Road 331 to a point lying approximately 60 feet northeasterly of the South line of the D.L. Clinch Grant; thence North 06°31'55? East to the northwesterly right-of-way line of State Road 331; thence South 45°10'07? West along the curve of said northwesterly right-of-way line a distance of 190.00 feet, more or less, to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 815, Page 910 ACR; thence North 82°24'25? West along the North line of said parcel a distance of 97.05 feet to the Northwest corner of said parcel; thence South 30°35'15? West a distance of 100.00 feet to the intersection with the South line of the D.L. Clinch Grant; thence North 82°24'45? West along said South line of the D.L. Clinch Grant to a point lying 572 feet more or less from the Southwest corner of the D.L. Clinch Grant; thence South a distance of 538 feet to the North right-of-way line of State Road 329; thence South 65°17'00? West along said North right-of-way line of State Road 329 (Williston Road) a distance of 185 feet to the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 2040, Page 2981 ACR; thence North 09°10'00? West along the West line of said parcel a distance of 637 feet to the intersection with the South line of the D.L. Clinch Grant; thence North 85°15'00? West along said South line of the D.L. Clinch Grant to the Southwest corner of the D.L. Clinch Grant and being the intersection with the East line of the Thomas Napier Grant; thence South 04°16'11? East along said East line of the Thomas Napier Grant to a point lying 750 North of the Southeast corner of the Thomas Napier Grant in Township 10 South, Range 20 East and being the intersection with the South line of the lands as described in ORB 2040, Page 2981 ACR; thence South 84°54'45? West a distance of 362.24 feet; thence North 08°02'15? East a distance of 144.33 feet; thence North 81°57'45? West a distance of 150 feet to the East right-of-way line of State Road 25 (SW 13th Street and US 441); thence North 07°44'15? East along said East right-of-way line of State Road 25 a distance of 649.20 feet to the Northwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 2933, Page 0386 ACR; thence North 84°48'15? East along the North line of said parcel a distance of 334.06 feet to the intersection with the East line of the Thomas Napier Grant; thence northwesterly along said East line to a point approximately 173 feet South of the Southwest corner of Lot 3 of Millers Survey as per Deed Book "I", Page 591; thence northwesterly to a point lying 141.46 feet South of a westerly extension of the South line of said Lot 3 of Millers Survey, also lying on the East right-of-way line of State Road 25; thence South 07°56'32? West along said easterly right-of-way line a distance of 550.13 feet more or less; thence North 82°03'28? West a distance of 136.00 feet to the westerly right-of-way line of said State Road 25; thence North 82°03'28? West a distance of 229.97 feet; thence North 08°50'42? East a distance of 278.91 feet; thence North 85°29'42? East a distance of 231.29 feet to the westerly right-of-way line of said State Road 25; thence North 07°56'32? East along said right-of-way line of State Road 25 a distance of 221.05 feet; thence North 82°04'13? West a distance of 36 feet more or less to the waters edge of Bivens Arm; thence northerly along the waters edge of Bivens Arm to the intersection of the North line of the Thomas Napier Grant and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #4048; thence South 83°55'05? West along said North line of the Thomas Napier Grant a distance of 2478.96 feet to the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1647, Page 139 ACR; thence South 84°40'25? West a distance of 796.84 feet to the Southwest corner of said parcel; thence South 83°55'05? West along said North line of Napier Grant a distance of 453.37 feet; thence South 27°54'03? East a distance of 213.05 feet to a point on the line between lots 18 and 19 of a subdivision of the Thomas Napier Grant as per said deed Book "I", Page 591; thence South 50°26'03? East a distance of 1070.70 feet to a point on the line between lots 19 and 20 of said subdivision of the Thomas Napier Grant; thence South 61°55'04? East a distance of 893.12 feet to a point on the East line of Lot 20 of said subdivision; thence South 05°47'32? East a distance of 825.00 feet to the Southeast corner of said Lot 20 and the intersection with the North line of Dales Court as recorded in Plat Book "E", Page 55; thence West along the North line of said Dales Court to the West right-of-way line of SW 20 th Street; thence South along said West right-of-way line to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1279, Page 977 ACR; thence West along the North line of said parcel to the Northeast corner of Madera Cluster Development Phase 2 as recorded in plat Book "26", Page 20 also being Northwest corner of the lands described in ORB 1279, Page 977 ACR and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #991231; thence South 04°35'42? East a distance of 206.91 feet to the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1279, Page 977 ACR; thence North 86°18'33? East a distance of 140.07 feet to intersection of the West right-of-way line of SW 20 th street; thence South 04°25'59? East along said West right-of-way line and along the East line of said Madera Cluster Development Phase 2 a distance of 689.05 feet to the Northeast corner of the lift station parcel as described in ORB 2428, Page 240 ACR; thence continue South 04°25'59? East to the Southeast corner of said lift station parcel; thence continue South 04°25'59? East a distance of 405.35 feet to the Northeast corner of the lands described in ORB 2014, Page 1438 ACR; thence South 84°50'03? West along the North line of said parcel a distance of 200.02 feet to the Northwest corner of said parcel; thence South 04°25'59? East along the West line of said parcel a distance of 95.46 feet to the Southeast corner of said Madera Cluster Development Phase 2; thence South 86°08'10? West along the South line of said Madera Cluster Development Phase 2 a distance of 208.80 feet; thence South 04°33'17? East a distance of 9.40 feet to the Northeast corner of Napier Estates as recorded in Plat Book "E", Page 16; thence South 86°51'26? West along the North line of said Napier Estates a distance of 123.86 feet to the East line of Madera Cluster Development Phase 1 as recorded in Plat Book "23", Page 72; thence South 86°51'26? West a distance of 176.32 feet to Northwest corner of said Napier Estates; thence South 04°53'02? East along the West line of said Napier Estates and the East line of said Madera Cluster Development Phase 1 a distance of 834.90 feet to the intersection with the North right-of-way line of State Road 331 (Williston Road) and the Southeast corner of said Madera Cluster Development Phase 1; thence westerly along said North right-of-way line and said South line of Madera Cluster Development Phase 1 to the Southwest corner of said Madera Cluster Development Phase 1 and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #4048 said point being the point of curvature of a curve concave to the Southeast, having a radius of 5741.63 feet, a delta of 06°24'53? and a chord bearing and distance of South 77°17'42? West, 642.49 feet; thence continue along the North right-of-way line of State Road 331 and the arc of said curve a distance of 642.82 feet to the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #001912; thence along the existing city limits line crossing S.W. Williston Road along a radial line of South 15°52'56? East a distance of 100.00 feet to a point on the South right-of-way line of S.W. Williston Road as shown on Florida Department of Transportation Right-of-Way Highway Plans, Section 26220-2501, said point also being a point on a curve concave to the Southwest having a radius of 5,641.63 feet; thence Southwesterly along the arc of said South right-of-way line a distance of 587.76 feet, more or less, marking the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 2541, Page 38 ACR and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #030250; thence South 00°03'11? West a distance of 2217.56 feet; thence South 04°53'13? East a distance of 1088.53 feet to a point lying South 83°46'31? West 374.15 feet from a concrete monument found at the Northeast corner of the lands described in ORB 1908, Page 1714 ACR; thence South 83°46'31? West a distance of 2045.42 feet to a ½? iron pipe found at the Northwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1086, Page 395 ACR; thence South 05°12'23? East a distance of 508.90 feet to a ¾" iron pipe found at the Northwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1926, Page 2992 ACR also being the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1086, Page 395 ACR; thence South 84°06'56? West parallel with the South line of Serenola Plantation, as recorded in Deed Book "L", Pages 480 and 481, a distance of 1023.15; thence North 05°56'18? West parallel with the West line of said Serenola Plantation, a distance of 879.95 feet to a point lying 300 feet perpendicular to a point on the West line of said Serenola Plantation, which lies North 05°56'18? West 1543.40 feet from the concrete monument found at the Southwest corner of said Serenola Plantation, and South 05°56'18? East, 3059.13 feet from a rebar & cap (JW Myers, PLS 3447) found at the Northwest corner of said Serenola Plantation; thence North 49°05'14? East parallel with and 80 feet Southeasterly of the Southeast boundary of the parcel of lands as described in ORB 1997, Page 232 ACR, a distance of 330.77 feet to the beginning of a curve concave northwesterly and having a radius of 540.00 feet; thence northeasterly, along the arc of said curve, said arc being subtended by a chord having a bearing and distance of North 39°57'45? East, 171.27 feet; thence North 30°50'15? East, a distance of 94.84 feet to the beginning of a curve concave Southeasterly and having a radius of 460.00 feet; thence northeasterly along the arc of said curve, through a central angle of 18°14'59?, an arc distance of 146.52 feet to the end of said curve, being subtended by a chord having a bearing and distance of North 39°57'45? East, 145.90 feet; thence North 49°05'14? East, parallel with the southerly right-of-way line of State Road No. 331 (Williston Road, 100' r/w), a distance of 751.08 feet to a point lying South 40°54'00? East, 725.14 feet from a rebar and cap (LS 4948) found at the Northwest corner of the parcel of lands as described in ORB 2028, Page 254 ACR; thence South 40°54'00? East along the West boundary of said parcel a distance of 144.98 feet to a concrete monument found at the Southwest corner of said parcel; thence North 49°05'43? East a distance of 250.26 feet to a concrete monument at the Southeasterly corner of said parcel, also known as the Southwest corner of Parcel "I", described in ORB 803, Page 289 ACR; thence North 40°54'00? West a distance of 871.06 feet to the Northeast corner of the parcel of lands as described in ORB 2028, Page 254 ACR and being the intersection with the southerly right-of-way line of State Road No. 331 and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #001912; thence South 49°03'23? West along said right-of-way line of State Road No. 331 a distance of 2359.05 feet; thence South 40°56'37? East a distance of 20.00 feet; thence South 49°03'23? West a distance of 649.34 feet; thence South 21°39'26? West a distance of 65.19 feet to the East line of Rocky Point Road; thence crossing Rocky Point Road South 49°03'23? West a distance of 100.00 feet to the West line of Rocky Point Road; thence South 49°03'23? West a distance of 996.28 feet to the intersection of the westerly projection of said South right-of-way with the West limited access right-of-way line for Interstate 75 as shown on Florida Department of Transportation Right-of-Way Highway Plans, Section 26260-2420 being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance No. 070721; thence continue Southwesterly along said southerly right-of-way line of State Road No. 331 (Williston Road) to a point opposite from the point marking the intersection of the East line of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 3367 Page 145 ACR and the North right-of-way line of said S.W. Williston Road, said point also being on a line perpendicular to said North right-of-way line; thence run northwesterly along said perpendicular line to said intersection of the South line of said tract and the North right-of-way line of said S.W. Williston Road; thence run North and northwesterly along the East line of said tract to the northmost corner of said tract; thence run Southwesterly along the northerly line of said tract to the West corner of said tract; thence run Southeasterly along the westerly line of said tract to the South corner of said tract, said corner being on the North right-of-way line of State Road 331 (Williston Road); thence run Southwesterly along said North right-of-way line to the eastmost corner of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 2821 Page 70 ACR; thence leaving said North right-of-way line run northwesterly along the easterly line of said tract to the southmost corner of certain tract of land as described in ORB 1736 Page 2672 ACR; thence run northeasterly along the southerly line of said tract to the Southeast corner of said tract; thence run to the Southwest corner of lands as described in ORB 2208 Page 2895 ACR; thence run northeasterly along the southerly line of said tract and the southerly line of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 2827 Page 1388 ACR to the westerly right-of-way line of Southwest 41 st Boulevard; thence run northwesterly along said westerly right-of-way line to the Southwesterly projection of the southerly line of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 2264 Page 43 ACR; thence run northeasterly along said projection and the southerly line thereof to the Southeast corner of said tract; thence run northwesterly along the northeasterly line of said tract to a point at the intersection of the easterly line of said tract and the West limited access right-of-way line of Interstate 75 (US 93) as shown on Florida Department of Transportation Right-of-Way Highway Plans, Section 26260-2420, said point being the existing City of Gainesville limit line as per Ordinance No. 001912; thence along said West right-of-way line, northwesterly to the Northeast corner of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 3242 Page 404 ACR; thence leaving said city limit line run Southwesterly and northwesterly along the northerly line of said tract to the North corner of said tract, said corner being on the northeasterly right-of-way line of Southwest 41 st Boulevard; thence run westerly, perpendicular to said right-of-way line, to a point on the Southwesterly right-of-way line of said Southwest 41 st Boulevard; thence run Southeasterly along said right-of-way line to the Northeast corner of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 2267 Page 1441 ACR; thence run Southwesterly along the North line of said tract and the North lines of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 2246 Page 1343 ACR and that certain tract of land as described in ORB 1736 Page 2672 ACR to a point on the East line of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 3051 Page 1418 ACR; thence run North along the East line of said tract to the Northeast corner of said tract; thence run Southwesterly along the North lines of the 6 tracts of land as described in the following official records: 1) ORB 3051 Page 1418 ACR; 2) ORB 3051 Page 1419 ACR; 3) ORB 2537 Page 389 ACR; 4) ORB 3051 Page 1420 ACR; 5) ORB 3051 Page 1422 ACR; 6) ORB 3051 Page 1421 ACR to the Northwest corner of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 3051 Page 1421 ACR, said corner being on the West line of the Gary Grant; thence run Northwest along the West line of said Gary Grant to the Southeast corner of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 1821 Page 2875 ACR; thence run Northeast along the North line of said Gary Grant to the West corner of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 2507 Page 1285 ACR; thence leaving said North line of the Gary Grant run East along the South line of said tract to the Southeast corner of said tract; thence run North along the East line of said tract to the North corner of said tract, said corner being on the North line of the Gary Grant; thence run Northeast along said North line of the Gary Grant to a point lying on a northwesterly extension of the westerly line of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 3478 Page 798 ACR, said point also being on the North line of a 150' wide City of Gainesville power line easement; thence leaving the North line of the Gary Grant and said power line easement run Southeasterly along said extension to the West most corner of said tract described in ORB 3478 Page 798 ACR; thence run Southeasterly along the westerly line of said tract to the South corner of said tract also being the existing city limit line as per Ordinance #061079; thence along said city limit line and the Southeasterly boundary of said parcel the following 3 courses: North 51°10'52? East, a distance of approximately 641.51 feet; North 82°08'57? East, a distance of approximately 308.65 feet; North 53°14'32? East, a distance of 188.13 feet; thence leaving said southerly boundary continue North 53°14'32? East, a distance of approximately 90 feet to a point on the West right-of-way line of Interstate 75 and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #001912; thence northwesterly along said West right-of-way line of Interstate 75 to the point of intersection with the westerly projection of the North right-of-way line for S.W. Archer Road; thence along the North line of S.W. Archer Road, North 57°58'54? East along the northerly right-of-way line of said S.W. Archer Road to the Southwest corner of the lands known as Exhibit "A", parcel 25 as described in official records Book 3048, Page 502 ACR, said corner also being the intersection of the northerly right-of-way line of Southwest Archer Road and the easterly right-of-way line of Southwest 40 th Boulevard and the existing city limit line as per Ordinance #070722; thence run northerly along said city limit line and said easterly right-of-way line to the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1805, Page 1000 ACR; thence run northeasterly along the South line of said tract to the Southeast corner of said tract; thence run in a general northwesterly direction along the easterly perimeter of said tract to the Northmost corner of said tract; thence run Southwesterly along the North line of said tract and the South line of the lands known as Exhibit "A", Parcel 4 as described in 3048, Page 502 ACR to the Southwest corner of said tract, said corner also being a point on the easterly right-of-way line of aforementioned Southwest 40 th Boulevard; thence run northwesterly along the West line of said tract and said easterly right-of-way line to the Northwest corner of said tract; thence run northeasterly along the North line of said tract to the Southeasterly corner of the lands as described in ORB 3546, Page 464 ACR; thence run North along the East lines of said tract and the lands as described in ORB 3366, Page 1040 ACR to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 3366, Page 1040 ACR, said corner being on the southerly right-of-way line of Southwest 33 rd Place; thence run West along said southerly right-of-way line to a point on the southerly projection of the West line of the lands known as Parcel IV as described in ORB 3601, Page 1361 ACR; thence run North along said projection and the West line thereof and the West line of the lands known as parcel i as described in ORB 3601, Page 1361 ACR to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 2437, Page 35 ACR; thence run West along the North line of said tract to the Southwest corner of the lands known as Parcel II as described in ORB 3601, Page 1361 ACR, said corner also being the Northwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 2437, Page 35 ACR; thence run North along the West line of the lands known as Parcels II and III as described in ORB 3601, Page 1361 ACR and the West line of the lands as described in ORB 3578, Page 501 ACR to the Northwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 3578, Page 501 ACR, said corner also being the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 2340, Page 849 ACR; thence run West along the North line of said tract to the Northwest corner of said tract, said corner being on the East right-of-way line of Southwest 43 rd Street; thence run South along said East right-of-way line to the easterly projection of the South line of the lands as described in ORB 2051, Page 1590 ACR; thence run West along said easterly projection to the West right-of-way line of Southwest 43 rd Street; thence run West along the South line of said tract to the Southwest corner of said tract, said corner being on the East right-of-way line of Southwest 42 nd Way; thence run West along the westerly projection of said South line to the West right-of-way line of said Southwest 42 nd Way; thence run North along said West right-of-way line to the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 3072, Page 1443 ACR; thence run West along the South line of said tract to the Southwest corner of said tract; thence run North along the West line of said tract to the Northwest corner of said tract; thence run East along the North line of said tract to the Northeast corner of said tract, said corner being on the West right-of-way line of Southwest 42 nd Way; thence run North along said West right-of-way line to the beginning of a curve concave Southwest; thence run northwesterly along the arc of said curve to the point of reverse curvature of a curve concave Southeast; thence run along the arc of said curve and said West right-of-way line of Southwest 42 nd Way to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 2987, Page 1245 ACR, said corner being on the South line of the lands as described in ORB 2195, Page 1994 and ORB 2181, Page 1006 ACR; thence run West along the South line of said tract to the Southwest corner of said tract; thence run North along the West line of said tract to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1123, Page 352 ACR; thence run West along the North line of said tract to the Northwest corner of said tract, said corner also being on the northeasterly right-of-way line of Southwest 40 th Boulevard; thence run northwesterly along said northeasterly right-of-way line to the Northwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 2685, Page 1319 ACR also known as Exhibit "A", Parcel 8 of the lands as described in ORB 3048, Page 502 ACR, said corner also being the Southwest corner of Lot 11 of I-75 service park, a subdivision as recorded in plat Book "L", Page 53 of the official records of Alachua County, Florida; thence run East along the South line of said I-75 service park to the Southeast corner of Lot 16 of said I-75 service park, said corner being on the East line of Section 15, Township 10 South, Range 19 East; thence run North along the East line of said I-75 service park and said Section to the Northeast corner of said Section, also being the Southwest corner of Section 11, Township 10 South, Range 19 East and being on the westerly right-of-way line of Southwest 43 rd Street; thence run East along the South line of said Section 11 and the westerly projection of the North right-of-way line of Southwest 24 th Ave and the North right-of-way line thereof to the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1814, Page 1200 ACR, said corner also being the Southeast corner of Hailey Gardens Condominium, a condominium as described in ORB 3026, Page 652 ACR; thence run North along the West line of said tract to the Northwest corner of said tract; thence run East along the North line of said tract and the North line of the lands as described in ORB 818, Page 15 and ORB 1814, Page 1211 ACR to the Northeast corner of said tract; thence run South along the East line of said tract and the East line of the lands as described in ORB 1814, Page 1200 ACR to the Southeast corner of said tract also being on the North right-of-way line of Southwest 24 th Avenue; thence run East along said North right-of-way line to the Southeast corner of Mill Run, a planned unit development as recorded in plat Book "L", Page 3 of the official records of Alachua County, Florida; thence run North along the East line of Mill Run to the Southwest corner of Old Mill Condos, a condominium as described in ORB 1423, Page 261 ACR; thence run East along the South line of said Old Mill Condos to the Southeast corner of said condominium, said corner being on the West line of the lands as described in deed Book 33, Page 328 ACR; thence run South along said West line to the Southwest corner of said tract, said corner being on the North right-of-way line of Southwest 24 th Avenue; thence run East along said North right-of-way line to the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 3331, Page 503 ACR; thence run North along the West line of said tract to the Northwest corner of said tract; thence run East along the North line of said tract to the Northeast corner of said tract; thence run South along the East line of said tract to the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 3321, Page 812 ACR; thence run East, North, East, South and Southwesterly along the southerly boundary of said tract to a point on the North right-of-way line of Southwest 24 th Avenue; thence run East along said North right-of-way line to the northerly projection of the West line of the lands as described in ORB 1902, Page 1978 ACR; thence run South along said northerly projection and the West line thereof to the Southwest corner of said tract, said corner being on the northeasterly line of that part of the lands as described in ORB 2189, Page 2457 ACR also known as Windmeadows Road and as Exhibit "A", parcel 28 as described in ORB 3048, Page 502 ACR; thence run easterly along the North line of said tract and northerly line of said Windmeadows Road to the West right-of-way line of Southwest 34 th Street (State Road 121); thence run North along said West right-of-way line to its intersection with the northerly right-of-way line of Southwest 19 th place also being the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 3678, Page 287 ACR; thence West along the North right-of-way line of Southwest 19th place and the South line of said parcel to the Southwest corner of said parcel; thence North along the West line of said parcel to the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 299, Page 492 ACR; thence West along the South line of said parcel to the Southwest corner of said parcel and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #041230; thence South along the East line of said Ordinance line to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 2950, Page 0288 ACR and being the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #060148; thence South along said East line to the Southeast corner of said parcel; thence West along the South line of said parcel to the Southwest corner of said parcel; thence North along the West line of said parcel to the Northwest corner of lands described in ORB 2950, Page 288 ACR; thence run West along the centerline of Southwest 17 th place to a point on the southerly extension of the East line of Lot 35 of Shady Forest A Subdivision as recorded in ORB 95, Page 255 ACR and the existing city limit line as per Ordinance #050881; thence South along said southerly extension to the South right-of-way line of Southwest 17th place; thence West along said South right-of-way line of Southwest 17th place to the Northeast corner of Lot 45 of said Shady Forest and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #060730; thence South along the East line of said Lot 45 to the Southeast corner of said Lot 45; thence West along the South line of said Lot 45 and the South line of Lot 44 to the Southwest corner of Lot 44 of said Shady Forest; thence North along the West line of said Lot 44 to the Northwest corner of said Lot 44 and the South right-of-way line of Southwest 17th Place and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #050881; thence West along said right-of-way line to the intersection with the East right-of-way line of Southwest 38th Terrace; thence West along the westerly projection of said South right-of-way line of Southwest 17th place to the West right-of-way line of said Southwest 38th Terrace; thence North along said West right-of-way line of Southwest 38th terrace to the intersection with the westerly projection of the North right-of-way line of Southwest 17th avenue; thence East along said westerly projection line to the East right-of-way line of Southwest 38th Terrace; thence continue East along the North right-of-way line of Southwest 17th Avenue to the Southwest corner of Lot 18 of said Shady Forest and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #050699; thence North along the West line of said Lot 18 to the Northwest corner of said Lot 18, also being the Southeast corner of Lot 14 of said Shady Forest; thence West along the South line of said Lot 14 and its westerly extension of Lots 9 through 14 of said shady forest a distance of approximately 630 feet to a point on the West line of said shady forest and the West line of Lot 4 of Section 11, Township 10 South, Range 19 East; thence North along the West line of said Shady Forest and the West line of said Lot 4 a distance of approximately 2145 feet to the Southwest corner of the North 660 feet of the West 250 feet of said Lot 4, also being the Southwest corner of that parcel described in ORB 2363, Page 1149 ACR; thence East along the South line of said parcel a distance of approximately 250 feet to the Southeast corner of said parcel and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #051124; thence North along the East line of said parcel to the Northeast corner of said parcel and the intersection with the North line of Section 11, Township 10 South, Range 19 East; thence West along said North line of Section 11 to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1660, Page 782 ACR and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3616; thence South along the East line of said parcel to the Southeast corner of said parcel; thence West along the South line of said parcel to the Southwest corner of said parcel; thence North along the West line and the northerly projection of the West line of said parcel to the intersection with the North line of said Section 11; thence West along the North line of said Section 11 to the Northwest corner of said Section 11, Township 10 South, Range 19 East also being the Northeast corner of Section 10, Township 10 South, Range 19 East, and a point on the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3769; thence South along the East line of said Section 10 to the centerline of Hogtown Creek, and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #060080; thence South 00°06'12? East along said East line of Section 10 a distance of 532.03 feet to the northerly line of a power line easement; thence South 89°24'22? East, along the northerly line of said power line easement, a distance of 662.00 feet to the East line of Lot 8 of the subdivision of Section 11, Township 10 South, Range 19 East and the East right-of-way line of Southwest 42 nd Street; thence South 00°05'58? East, along the East line of said Lot 8, a distance of 1636.41 feet to the northerly right-of-way line of County Road SW-30 (Southwest 20th Avenue); thence northwesterly along the northerly right-of-way line of said county road with a curve concave northeasterly to the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 720, Page 167; thence North, West and South along the boundary of said parcel to the Southwest corner of said parcel being on the northerly right-of-way line of said County Road SW-30; thence northwesterly along the northerly right-of-way line of said county road with a curve concave northeasterly to the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1743, Page 1153 ACR; thence North and northwesterly along the East and North boundary lines of said lands to the Northwest corner of said lands; thence continue northwesterly along the North boundary lines of the lands as described in ORB 1997, Page 1843 ACR and of the lands as described in ORB 2187, Page 1514 ACR to the Northwest corner of said lands; thence Southwesterly along the West boundary line of said lands to the northerly right-of-way line of said county road; thence Northwest along the northerly right-of-way line of said county road to the centerline of Hogtown Creek, and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3769; thence southerly along said centerline of Hogtown Creek to the North line of the lands as described in ORB 3610, Page 0219 ACR and being a point on the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #070215; thence East along the North line of said lands to the Northwest corner of Marchwood, a subdivision as recorded in Plat Book "M", Page 47 of the official records of Alachua County, Florida; thence South along the West line of said subdivision to the Southwest corner of said subdivision, said point also being the Northwest corner of Southfork Oaks Condominium Phase I, according to the declaration of condominium thereof recorded in ORB 1568, Page 1065 ACR; thence South along the West line of said condominium to the Southwest corner of said condominium, thence South along the East line of parcel 2 of the lands as described in ORB 3370, Page 1419 ACR to the Southeast corner of said parcel; thence West along the South line of said parcel 2 to the Southwest corner of said parcel; thence North to the Northwest corner of said parcel 2 and being the Southeast corner of parcel 1 of the lands as described in ORB 3370, Page 1419 ACR; thence West along the South line of said parcel 1 to the Southwest corner of said parcel; thence North along the West line of said parcel 1 also being the East line of the lands as described in ORB 1628, Page 1107 ACR to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1628, Page 1107 ACR; thence West along the North line of said lands to the Northwest corner of said lands and a point on the East boundary line of the lands as described in ORB 2301, Page 0194 ACR; thence North along said East line to the Northeast corner of said lands, and being the South line of Lot 6 of "Map of Sections 9 and 10, Township 10 South, Range 19 East" as recorded in Plat Book A, Page 10 of the public records of Alachua County, Florida; thence westerly along the South line of said Lot 6 to the West right-of-way of Interstate 75 and a point on the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #001160; thence continue West along said South line of Lot 6 to the intersection with the West line of said Section 10; thence South to the Southwest corner of said Section 10 and the Southeast corner of Section 9; thence South 88°57'51? West along the South line of said Section 9 a distance of 2630.04 feet to an intersection with the East line of a 15 foot by 15 foot easement to J.C. Dickenson III and Sarah L. Bingham Dickenson as recorded in ORB 1093, Page 0740 ACR; thence following the boundary of said easement, North 01°04'12? West, a distance of 15 feet; thence South 88°57'51? West, a distance of 15 feet to an intersection with the East line of that property described in ORB 1589, Pages 201-202 ACR; thence departing said easement, along said East line North 01°04'12? West, a distance of 632.54 feet to the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #040280b; thence continue along the boundary of said lands North 01°04'12? West, a distance of 87.46 feet; thence continue along the boundary of said lands North 64°37'41? West, a distance of 360.69 feet to a point of intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of County Road SW 30 (a.k.a. SW 24 th Avenue, right-of-way width varies), said point being on a non-tangent curve to the left, concave northwesterly, having a radius of 1959.86 feet, and being subtended by a chord bearing and distance North 27°49'20? East, 166.86 feet; thence northeasterly along the arc of said curve and along said easterly right-of-way line through a central angle of 04°52'46", an arc distance of 166.91 feet to the point of tangency; thence continue along said easterly right-of-way line North 25°23'02? East, a distance of 1465.38 feet to the point of curvature of a curve to the right, concave Southeasterly, having a radius of 1859.86 feet, and being subtended by a chord bearing and distance of North 42°26'55? East, 1091.56 feet; thence northeasterly along the arc of said curve and along said easterly right-of-way line through a central angle of 34°07'37", an arc distance of 1107.86 feet to the end of said curve; thence departing said easterly right-of-way line South 30°29'37? East, a distance of 130.00 feet to an intersection with a curve being concave to the Southeast, and having a radius of 1729.86 feet, a tangent of 311.84 feet, a central angle of 20°26'16", and a chord bearing and distance of North 69°43'36? East, 613.78 feet and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #001160; thence along said curve an arc distance of 617.05 feet; thence leaving said curve, South 00°37'49? East, a distance of 230.00 feet; thence South 60°37'49? East, a distance of 431.27 feet; thence North 89°21'36? East, a distance of 809.87 feet; thence North 59°21'36? East, a distance of 480.00 feet; thence North 00°38'24? West, a distance of 220.00 feet; thence North 89°21'36? East, a distance of 349.69 feet to a point of intersection with the westerly right-of-way of Interstate 75 (State Road 93) and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3769; thence Northwest along said westerly right-of-way to the North right-of-way line of State Road 26; thence East along said North right-of-way line to the West line of the lands as described in ORB 0798, Page 0534 ACR and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3979; thence northerly along said West line to the North line of the lands as described in ORB 1123, Page 0353 ACR; thence westerly along said North line to the Northwest corner of said lands and the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1636, Page 0787 ACR; thence North along the West line of said lands to the Northwest corner of said lands and a point on the South line of Lot 21 of North Florida Regional Doctors Office Park, a subdivision as recorded in plat Book "H", Page 81 ACR, also identified as the point of beginning of said plat; thence westerly along the South line of said plat to the West line of Lot 20 of said plat; thence northerly along the said West line to the South right-of-way line of N.W. 9 th Boulevard; thence easterly along said South right-of-way line to the East line of Lot 21 and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #030457; thence northeasterly and southerly along said South right-of-way line of N.W. 9 th Boulevard and the North and East boundaries of lots 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26 to the South line of said plat; thence crossing N.W. 64th terrace, easterly to the East right-of-way line of N.W. 64th terrace and the Southwest corner of Lot 1 of said plat; thence northerly along said East right-of-way line to the Northwest corner of said Lot 1 and the Southwest corner of Lot 2 and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #020104; thence northwesterly along said East right-of-way line to the Northwest corner of Lot 2 and the Southern most corner of Lot 3 and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #002124; thence northwesterly along said East right-of-way line to the Southwest corner of Lot 3 and the South East corner of Lot 4; thence northeasterly along the West line of Lot 3 to the North line of said North Florida Regional Doctors Office Park plat and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3979; thence westerly along said North line of plat to the Northeast corner of Lot 10 of said plat and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #030458; thence Southwesterly along the East line of Lot 10 and a southerly extension thereof to the South right-of-way line of N.W. 11 th Place; thence westerly along said South right-of-way line to the Northeast corner of Lot 16 of said plat; thence Southwesterly along the East line of Lot 16 to the Southeast corner of Lot 16; thence westerly along the South line of said Lot 16 to the Southwest corner of said lot; thence northeasterly along the West line of Lot 16 to the Northwest corner of said Lot 16 and the intersection with the South right-of-way line of NW 11th Place; thence northwesterly along said South right-of-way line to the southerly projection of the West line of Lot 11 of said plat; thence northeasterly along said projection to the Southwest corner of Lot 11; thence continue northeasterly along the West line of Lot 11 to the North line of North Florida regional doctors office park plat and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3979; thence westerly to the Northwest corner of said plat; thence southerly to the intersection of the West line of said plat with the East right-of-way line of N.W. 69 th Terrace; thence northwesterly along said East right-of-way line to the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 2434, Page 0241 ACR; thence easterly along the South line of said lands to the Southwest corner of University ACRes Unit No. 2, a subdivision as recorded in Plat Book "H", Page 10 ACR; thence easterly along the South line of said University ACRes Unit No. 2 and the South line of University ACRes Unit No. 1, a subdivision as recorded in Plat Book "F", Page 88 ACR, to the Southeast corner of said subdivision and a point on the Southwest line of the lands as described in ORB 1315, Page 0726 ACR; thence Southeasterly along the Southwest line of said lands to the Southeast corner of said lands and the Northwest corner of Lot 24 of West Hills, a subdivision as recorded in Plat Book "E", Page 11 ACR; thence southerly along the West line of said West Hills to intersection with the North right-of-way line of State Road 26 and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3769; thence easterly along said North right-of-way line to the West right-of-way line of N.W. 55 th Street; thence northerly along said West right-of-way line through Section 34, Township 9 South, Range 19 East to its intersection with the North right-of-way line of NW 23 rd Avenue; thence East along said North right-of-way line to its intersection with the West right-of-way line of N.W. 43 rd Street; thence, northerly along said West right-of-way line to the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 3700, Page 0529 ACR; thence North 89°55'11? West, a distance of approximately 613.12 feet to a point on the East line of Lot 63 of the "subdivision of Section 27, Township 9 South, Range 19 East, Arredondo Grant" as per the plat thereof as recorded in Plat Book "A" at Page 55 ACR; thence North, a distance of approximately 165.07 feet to the Northeast corner of said Lot 63; thence West, along the North line of said Lot 63 also being the South line of Lot 50 of said "Arredondo Grant" a distance of approximately 663 feet to the Southwest corner of said Lot 50; thence West along the South line of Lot 51 of said "Arredondo Grant" a distance of approximately 663 feet to the Southwest corner of said Lot 51; thence North along the West line of said Lot 51, a distance of approximately 663 feet to the Northwest corner of said Lot 51 said corner also being the Southwest corner of "Buck Ridge Unit-2" a subdivision as recorded in Plat Book "R", at Page 31 ACR; thence along the West line of said "Buck Ridge Unit-2", North 00°15'19? East a distance of 663.36 feet to the Northwest corner of said "Buck Ridge Unit-2"; thence along the North line of said "Buck Ridge Unit-2", South 89°42'46? East, a distance of 662.41 feet to the Northeast corner of said "Buck Ridge Unit-2", said corner also being the Northwest corner of Lot 47 of said "Arredondo Grant"; thence East along the North line of said Lot 47 and along the North line of Lot 48 of said "Arredondo Grant" a distance of approximately 1276 feet to the West right-of-way line of State Road S-329 (N.W. 43 rd Street); thence northerly along said West right-of-way line to the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1453, Page 0076 ACR and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #040706; thence westerly along the South line of said lands to the Southwest corner of said lands; thence northerly to along the West line of said lands to the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1747, Page 1636 ACR; thence South 89°04'10? West a distance of 262.01 feet to a set iron pin (#3524), marking the intersection with the East line of Chula Vista Park as recorded in Plat Book "G", Page 67, and Plat Book "G", Page 75 ACR; thence North 00°49'08? West along said East line a distance of 213.37 feet to a set iron pin (#3524), marking the intersection with the South right-of-way line of State Road No. 222 (NW 39th Avenue); thence South 87°02'50? East along said line a distance of 53.02 feet to a set iron pin (#3524); thence North 89°04'10? East along said line a distance of 208.54 feet to the Northwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1453, Page 0076 ACR; thence easterly along the North line of said lands to the intersection with the West right-of-way line of N.W. 43 rd Street; thence northerly along said West right-of-way line to the South line of Bellamy Forge Condominium, as recorded in declaration of condominium in ORB 876, Page 219 ACR, and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3578; thence North 89°37'37? West along the South line of said Bellamy Forge Condominium to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 2212, Page 1500 ACR, and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #990947; thence South 00°06'22? West, parallel to the West line of the East half (E ½) of the Southeast quarter (se ¼) of Section 22, Township 9 South, Range 19 East, a distance of 645.86 feet along the East line of said lands to the North right-of-way line of N.W. 39 th Avenue; thence North 89°49'38? West, along said North right-of-way line 250.00 feet to the Southwest corner of said lands and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3645; thence westerly along said North right-of-way line to the intersection with the East line of the West ½ of the Southwest ¼ of the Southwest ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of said Section 22, and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3646; thence continue westerly along said North right-of-way line to the West line of the Southeast ¼ of said Section 22; thence northerly along said West line to the North line of the Southwest ¼ of the Southwest ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of said Section 22, and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3645; thence continue northerly along said West line to the South line of the North 1029.87 feet of the Northwest ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of said Section 22; thence easterly along said South line to the East line of the Southeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of said Section 22; thence southerly along said East line to the Northwest corner of said Bellamy Forge Condominiums and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3578; thence North 89°59'03? East along the North line of said Bellamy Forge Condominiums a distance of 1091.89 feet to the West right-of-way line of N.W. 43 rd Street; thence northerly along said West right-of-way line to the North line of a drainage right-of-way as described in ORB 1741, Page 2148 ACR, and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3614; thence South 89°35'40? West along the North line of said lands and parallel to the South line of the Northeast ¼ of said Section 22, 499.89 feet; thence South 00°24'20? East a distance of 103.77 feet; thence South 89°31'35? West to the Northwest corner of said drainage right-of-way; thence South 00°27'55? East a distance of 40 feet to the Southwest corner of said drainage right-of-way; thence South 89°18'14? West to an iron pipe found at the Southwest corner of the Northeast one-quarter of said Section 22; thence North 00°25'51? West along the West boundary of said Northeast ¼ to the Southeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1658, Page 2502 ACR and the existing city limits as per Ordinance #020815; thence South 89°35'16? West and parallel with the North line of the Northwest ¼ of said Section 22, a distance of 565.00 feet to the Southwest corner of said lands; thence North 00°24'40? West and parallel with the East line of said Northwest ¼, a distance of 590.00 feet to the Northwest corner of said lands; thence North 89°35'16? East and parallel with said North line of the Northwest ¼, a distance of 565.00 feet to the Northeast corner of said lands and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #980467; thence North to the North right-of-way line of County Road 232 (NW 53rd Avenue and Millhopper Road); thence West along said right-of-way line to the Southeast corner of Lot 34 of Deer Run Unit I, as recorded in Plat Book "J", Page 33 ACR; thence North along the East line of said Deer Run Unit I and the East line of Deer Run Unit II as recorded in Plat Book "J", Page 86 ACR, to a point on the southerly line of Lot 14, of said Deer Run Unit II; thence East along the southerly lines of lots 14 through 17 of said Deer Run Unit II to the Southeast corner of said Lot 17; thence North along the East line of said Deer Run Unit II to the Southwest corner of Lot 129 of Deer Run Unit III as recorded in Plat Book "L", Page 34 ACR; thence East to the Southeast corner of said Lot 129; thence North along the East line of said Deer Run Unit III and a northerly projection of said East line to a point on the South line of Section 10, Township 9 South, Range 19 East, said point also being on the South line of Sterling Place Unit - 2 as recorded in Plat Book "R", Page 81 ACR; thence East along said South line of Section 10 and said Sterling Place Unit - 2 to the Southeast corner of said Sterling Place Unit - 2, said point also being the Southwest corner of the East half of the Southeast quarter of said Section 10; thence North along the East line of said Sterling Place Unit - 2 also being the West line of said East half of the Southeast quarter of said Section 10, and the East line of Sterling Place Unit - 1, a subdivision as recorded in Plat Book "R", Page 39 ACR, to the Northeast corner of said Sterling Place Unit - 1 and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #002393; thence South 89°37'45? West along the North line of said Sterling Place Unit - 1, a distance of 1318.93 feet to the Northwest corner of said Sterling Place Unit - 1 also the Northeast corner of blues creek unit 1 as per the plat thereof recorded in plat Book "M", Page 95 ACR said point also being on the East right of way line of Northwest 52 nd Terrace and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #040290; thence along the East line of said 52 nd Terrace the following 10 courses; S 00°27'43? E, a distance of 100.00 feet; thence S 89°32'17? W, a distance of 12.53 feet to a point on a curve concave to the Northwest having a radius of 405 feet; thence along the arc of said curve a distance of 300.42 feet through a central angle of 42°30'02? and being subtended by a chord bearing and distance of S 35°04'59? W, 293.58 feet; thence S 56°20'00? W, a distance of 166.60 feet to the beginning of a curve concave to the Southeast having a radius of 345 feet; thence along the arc of said curve a distance of 341.91 feet through a central angle of 56°46'54? and being subtended by a chord bearing and distance of S 27°56'33? W, 328.08 feet; thence S 00°26'54? E, a distance of 54.17 feet to the beginning of a curve concave to the East having a radius of 344.97 feet; thence along the arc of said curve a distance of 102.36 feet through a central angle of 17°00'03? and being subtended by a chord bearing and distance of S 08°56'56? E, 101.98 feet; thence S 17°26'57? E a distance of 91.83 feet to the beginning of a curve concave to the West having a radius of 405 feet; thence along the arc of said curve a distance of 282.74 feet through a central angle of 40°00'00? and being subtended by a chord bearing and distance of S 02°33'03? W, 277.04 feet to the beginning of a curve concave to the Southeast having a radius of 345 feet; thence along the arc of said curve a distance of 88.43 feet through a central angle of 14°41'09? and being subtended by a chord bearing and distance of S 15°12'28? W, 88.19 feet to a point on the South line of said Blues Creek Unit 1; thence leaving the East right of way line of Northwest 52 nd Terrace, s 89°39'06? W along the South line of said Blues Creek Unit 1, a distance of 60.53 feet to the Southeast corner of Blues Creek Unit-2 as per the plat thereof recorded in Plat Book "O", Page 34 ACR also being a point on the West right of way line of said Northwest 52 nd Terrace and being on a curve concave to the Southeast having a radius of 405 feet; thence along the arc of said curve also being the easterly boundary of said Blues Creek Unit-2 and the West right of way line of said NW 52 nd Terrace, a distance of 61.99 feet through a central angle of 08°46'10? and being subtended by a chord bearing and distance of N 11°01'51? E, 61.93 feet to a point on a curve concave to the Northwest having a radius of 25 feet; thence leaving said West right of way line of NW 52 nd Terrace, continuing along the northeasterly boundary of said Blues Creek Unit-2 and along the arc of said curve a distance of 33.88 feet through a central angle of 77°38'29? and being subtended by a chord bearing and distance of S 54°14'10? W, 31.34 feet; thence continuing along said northeasterly boundary of Blues Creek Unit-2, N 72°41'04? W, a distance of 168.00 feet; thence N 34°15'00? W, a distance of 840.00 feet to the North most corner of Lot 6 of said Blues Creek Unit-2 and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #001162; thence along the North line of said Blues Creek Unit-2 the following courses: South 32°25'00? West, 240.00 feet; South 70°45'00? West, 530.00 feet; South 42°10'00? West, 140.00 feet; South 61°40'00? West, 140.37 feet; South 85°37'35? West, 415.29 feet to the point of curvature of a curve concave to the Southeast having a radius of 50.00 feet; thence Southwesterly along the arc of said curve, through a central angle of 36°52'11", an arc length of 32.17 feet and a chord bearing and distance of South 67°11'29? West, 31.62 feet; thence South 85°37'35? West, a distance of 170.00 feet to the Northwest corner of said Blues Creek Unit-2 also being a point on the West line of Section 10, Township 9 South, Range 19 East, Alachua County, Florida; thence North 00°23'44? West along the West line of said Section a distance of 3550.34 feet to the Northwest corner of Blues Creek Unit 5 Phase 1 as recorded in Plat Book 24, Page 73 and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3864; thence North 00°23'44? West along the West line of said Section 10 a distance of 1558.81 feet to the Northwest corner of said Section 10; thence North 89°37'43? East along the North line of said Section 10, a distance of 3947.81 feet to the West line of the East ¼ (E ¼) of said Section 10; thence easterly along said North line of Section 10 to the West line of a 150-foot City of Gainesville transmission line right-of-way; thence North along said West transmission line right-of-way to the northwesterly right-of-way line of the Seaboard Coastline Railroad and being a point on the southerly line of the City of Gainesville Deerhaven Power Generating Station; thence northwesterly along said southerly line and said Seaboard Coastline Railroad right-of-way to a point lying 1800 feet more or less from the West line of Section 27, Township 8 South, Range 19 East (being also on a southerly extension of the East property line of the Alachua County Road Department And Engineering Compound); thence North to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 883, Page 502 ACR lying in Section 27, Township 8 South, Range 19 East and the existing City of Gainesville city limit line as per Ordinance #060731, said point being approximate Northwest most corner of the City of Gainesville Power Generating Station and the point of beginning. 
Also: parcel 1 
A tract of land situated in the Northwest ¼ of Section 4, Township 10 South, Range 19 East, Alachua County, Florida, said tract of land being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the Northwest corner of Section 4, Township 10 South, Range 19 East, and thence South 00°50'48? East, along the West line of said Section 4, a distance of 801.31 feet; thence North 89°26'12? East, 39.53 feet to the East right-of-way line of County Road No. S.W. 29 (N.W. 75 th Street); thence South 00°50'48? East, along the East right-of-way line of said County Road No. S.W. 29 (N.W. 75 th Street), 868.40 feet; thence South 89°57'23? East, 204.22 feet; thence South 00°02'37? West, 300.00 feet; thence South 89°57'23? East, a distance of 660.35 feet to the true point of beginning and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #991230; thence continue South 89°57'23? East, a distance of 129.67 feet to the Southwest corner of the "Home Depot Parcel" as recorded in ORB 1726, Page 2386 ACR; thence along said "Home Depot Parcel" the following four courses: South 89°57'23? East, 456.00 feet; North 00°02'37? East, 809.51 feet; North 89°57'23? West, 426.00 feet; South 00°02'37? West, 103.82 feet; thence leaving said "Home Depot Parcel", thence South 89°54'28? West, a distance of 90.51 feet; thence North 83°05'52? West, a distance of 61.62 feet; thence South 00°05'46? West, a distance of 377.82 feet; thence North 89°41'31? West, a distance of 8.21 feet; thence South 00°03'18? East, a distance of 335.06 feet to the true point of beginning. 
Also: parcel 2 
A tract of land situated in Section 16, Township 10 South, Range 19 East, Alachua County, Florida, being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the intersection of the East line of S.W. 63 rd Boulevard and the South line of Section 16, Township 10 South, Range 19 East for a point of beginning and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #061147; thence West along the southerly line of said Section 16 to the Northeast corner of Green Leaf Unit No. 1, a subdivision as recorded in Plat Book "K", Page 81 ACR; thence West along the North line of said subdivision and the North line of Section 21, Township 10 South, Range 19 East to the Northwest corner of Green Leaf Unit No. 1 and the Northeast corner of Tower Village, a subdivision as recorded in Plat Book "J", Page 96 ACR; thence West along the North line of said Tower Village Subdivision to the Northwest corner of said subdivision, said point also being on the East right-of-way line of S.W. 75 th Street (Tower Road), also known as Alachua County Road SW 29; thence North along said right-of-way line to the Southwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1816, Page 2063 ACR; thence East along the South line of said lands to the Southeast corner of said lands; thence North along the East line of said lands to the Northeast corner of said lands; thence North along the northerly extension of said East line and the West line of the lands as described in ORB 0379, Page 0304 ACR to the Northwest corner of said lands, said point also being on the South line of Garison Way Phase 1, a subdivision as recorded in Plat Book 25, Page 75 ACR; thence East along the South line of said subdivision and the North line of said lands and the North line of the lands as described in ORB 0335, Page 0398 ACR and the South line of lands described in ORB 1268, Page 495 to the Southeast corner of said lands described in ORB 1268, Page 495; thence northwesterly along the East line of said lands to the Northeast corner of said lands, said corner also being on the South line of the lands as described in ORB 2330, Page 1860, parcel 5, ACR; thence East along said South line to the Northwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 935, Page 279 ACR; thence in a southerly and Southwesterly direction along the westerly line of said lands to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1750, Page 1897 ACR; thence West and South along the northerly and westerly lines of said lands to the Southwest corner of said lands; thence southerly along the easterly right-of-way line of Old Stagecoach Road to a point on the southerly line of Section 16, Township 10 South, Range 19 East and its intersection with the East right-of-way line of S.W. 63 rd Boulevard and the point of beginning. 
Also: parcel 3 
A portion of Section 22, Township 10 South, Range 19 East, Alachua County, Florida, being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the Southwest corner of Section 22, Township 10 South, Range 19 East, Alachua County, Florida, and thence North 00°05'11? East along the West boundary of said Section 2951.24 feet to a 5/8 " iron rod (no ID.) Found on the northerly boundary of that certain parcel of land as described in ORB 0363, Page 0309 ACR, said iron rod being a corner on the westerly line of that certain tract of land as described in ORB 1702, Page 1085 et seq. ACR; thence continue North 00°05'11? East along said West boundary and said westerly line 1113.37 feet to the point of beginning and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #060980; thence continue North 00°05'11? East along said West boundary and said westerly line 495.53 feet to a concrete monument (stamped 'PLS 509') found at the Northwest corner of said certain tract of land; thence North 89°56'16? East, 651.35 feet to a rebar and cap (stamped 'Eng, Denman & Assoc.') set at the Northeast corner of said certain tract of land; thence South 00°05'11? West along the East line of said certain tract of land 717.50 feet to a rebar and cap (stamped 'Eng, Denman & Assoc.') set on the North boundary of 'Broken Arrow Bluff', a subdivision as per the plat thereof, recorded in Plat Book "H", Page 16 ACR; thence North 89°46'11? West along said North boundary of 'Broken Arrow Bluff', 9.19 feet to a concrete monument (not identifiable) found at the Northwest corner of Lot 1 of 'Oaks of Kanapaha Unit 1', a planned unit development, as per the plat thereof recorded in Plat Book "M", Page 34 of said public records and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #070457; thence South and West along the easterly and southerly lines of said Lot 1 to the Southeast corner of Lot 2 of 'Oaks of Kanapaha Unit 1'; thence West and Northwest along the southerly lines of said Lot 2 and lots 3, 4, 5 and 6 of 'Oaks of Kanapaha Unit 1' to the Southwest corner of said Lot 6; thence North along the West line of said Lot 6 to the Northwest corner of said Lot 6 and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #060980; thence North 66°54'49? West, 350.32 feet to the point of beginning. 
Less and except: parcel 1 
A tract of land located in fractional Section 2, Township 9 South, Range 19 East and Section 35, Township 8 South, Range 19 East, Alachua County, Florida, according to City of Alachua Ordinances 0-91-19, 0-82-1, 0-91-18, 0-91-4, 0-91-15, 0-08-20, 0-93-8, being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the Northwest corner of Turkey Creek Forest Unit No. 3D, as recorded in Plat Book "M", Page 98 ACR for a point of beginning and the existing city limits line as per Ordinance #3768; thence East along the North line of said subdivision, along the North line of Turkey Creek Forest Unit No. 1 as recorded in Plat Book "J", Page 7, along the North line of Turkey Creek Forest Unit No. 2 as recorded in Plat Book "K", Page 11, and along the North line of Turkey Creek Forest Unit No. 4, as recorded in Plat Book "M", Page 99, to the West right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 441; thence Northwest along said West right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 441 to the South line of that parcel located in Section 2, Township 9 South, Range 19 East outside the Arredondo Grant and described in ORB 1228, Page 417 ACR; thence Southwest along said South line of parcel to the West line of said parcel; thence Northwest along said West line to the North line of said parcel; thence Northeast along said North line to the West right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 441; thence Northwest along said right-of-way line to the North line of fractional Section 2, Township 9 South, Range 19 East outside the Arredondo Grant; thence East along the North line of said Section 2 to the East right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 441 at its intersection with the South line of the City of Gainesville Deerhaven Power Generating Station; thence Northwest along said East right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 441 to the intersection with the East line of the 150-foot wide power transmission line right-of-way; thence South along said East line to the Northwest corner of Turkey Creek Forest Unit No. 3D and the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 080085, § 1(Exh. A), 10-2-08)  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LAWS OF FLORIDA 
Chapter 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
90-394 	1 	Art. I, §§ 1.01—1.04 
Art. II, §§ 2.01—2.11 
Art. III, §§ 3.01—3.07 
Art. IV, §§ 4.01—4.03 
Art. V, §§ 5.01—5.05 
Art. VI, §§ 6.01—6.04 
  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
Ordinance 
Number 	Adoption 
 Date 	Referendum 
  Date 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
3744 	10-21-91 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
3745 	11- 4-91 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
3752 	12-16-91 	 3-10-92 	1 	2.01, 2.02 
3979 	 6-27-94 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
3980 	 6-27-94 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
4035 	10-10-94 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
4047 	12-12-94 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
4048 	12-12-94 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
4053 	 1-23-95 	 3-14-95 	1 	2.01—2.11 
4060 	 1-30-95 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
4061 	 1-30-95 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
4062 	 1-30-95 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
960938 	10-13-97 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
960939 	10-13-97 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
960940 	10-13-97 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
960941 	10-13-97 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
970051 	10-13-97 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
970136 	10-27-97 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
  — 	  — 	 3-17-98 		5.06 
980987 	 6-14-99 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
990947 	 1-10-00 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
990866 	 1-24-00 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
990898 	 1-24-00 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
991230 	 4-10-00 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
991231 	 4-10-00 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
000130 	 7-24-00 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
000738 	12-18-00 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
000665 	 1-22-01 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
000666 	 1-22-01 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
000797 	 1-22-01 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
000798 	 1-22-01 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
001162 	 4-23-01 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
001160 	 5-14-01 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
001161 	 5-14-01 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
001163 	 5-14-01 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
001912 	11-26-01 	 2-26-02 	2 	App. I (note) 
002124 	12-10-01 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
002393 	 3-11-02 	 6-25-02 		App. I (note) 
002394 	 3-11-02 	 6-25-02 		App. I (note) 
0202104 	 9- 9-02 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
020024 	 7- 8-02 	11- 5-02 	1 	3.05 
			2       Added 	3.08 
			3       Added 	5.07 
020289 	 8-27-02 	11- 5-02 	1 	2.04 
020654 	12- 9-02 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
020749 	 2-10-03 	 4- 8-03 	1 	2.07 
020815 	 2-10-03 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
030250 	 8-25-03 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
030457 	12- 8-03 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
030458 	12- 8-03 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
040280b 	12-13-04 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
040290 	 9-13-04 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
040705 	12-13-04 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
040706 	12-13-04 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
041230 	 5- 9-05 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
050547 	11-14-05 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
050662 	12-12-05 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
050699 	12-12-05 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
050716 	12-19-05 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
041138 	 1- 9-06 	 3- 7-06 	1 	5.06 
050881 	 2-27-06 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
051124 	 5- 8-06 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
060097 	 7-24-06 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
060148 	 8-14-06 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
060730 	 2-12-07 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
060731 	 2-12-07 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
060972 	 5-14-07 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
060980 	 5-14-07 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
061079 	 6-11-07 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
061147 	 5-14-07 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
070075 	 8-13-07 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
070083 	 8-13-07 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
070215 	11-26-07 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
070457 	11-26-07 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
070458 	11-26-07 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
070514 	 1-14-08 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
070721 	 2-11-08 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
080137 	 7-28-08 	11- 4-08 	2 	App. I (note) 
080193 	 9- 4-08 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
080085 	10- 2-08 	  — 	1(Exh. A) 	App. I 
080576 	12-18-08 	 3-24-09 	1       Added 	5.09 
080605 	 2- 5-09 	  — 		App. I (note) 
090809 	 4-15-10 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
110505 	 1-19-12 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
110680 	 3- 1-12 	  — 	1 	App. I (note) 
130243 	11- 4-13 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
130339 	12-19-13 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
130340 	12-19-13 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
130341 	12-19-13 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
130342 	12-19-13 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
140124 
10- 2-14 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
140618 
 4-16-15 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
150818 
 5- 5-16 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
150912 
 6-16-16 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
160156 
 9-15-16 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
160216 
 2-16-17 	  — 	2 	App. I (note) 
160744 
 6- 1-17 	— 	2 	App. I(note) 
170256 
11- 2-17 	— 	2(Exh. A) 	App. I(note) 
170520 
 4-19-18 	— 	2 	App. I(note) 
170717 
 8- 2-18 	 3-19-19 	1 	5.01 
170762 
 4-19-18 	— 	2 	App. I(note) 
170953 
 9- 6-18 	— 	2(Exh. A) 	App. I(note) 
171006 
10- 4-18 	— 	2(Exh. A) 	App. I(note) 
171037 
10- 4-18 	— 	2(Exh. A) 	App. I(note) 
180311 
 1- 3-19 	— 	2(Exh. A) 	App. I(note) 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Gainesville, Florida," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1960, § 1-1)  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances the following rules shall be observed and the following definitions shall apply unless the content clearly indicates otherwise: 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter Laws of the city as printed in Part I of this volume. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Gainesville, Florida," followed them. 
Code. The words "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean "The Code of Ordinances, City of Gainesville, Florida," as cited in section 1-1. 
Commission. The words "the commission" shall be construed to mean the city commission of the City of Gainesville. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, by order of court or by any applicable ordinance, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Alachua. 
State Law reference— Boundaries of Alachua County, F.S. § 7.01. 
F.S., Fla. Stats. or Florida Statutes. The terms "F.S.", "Fla. Stats." or "Florida Statutes" shall mean the official statutes of the State of Florida as adopted and amended by the Florida Legislature. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such person or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent or employee. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. 
Officer, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, department, board, commission or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Gainesville, Florida." Such reference shall include any authorized subordinate or designee. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
State law or general law. The term "state law" and "general law" shall refer to the Florida Statutes and Session Laws of the State of Florida. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Street line. The words "street line" shall mean that line which delineates the right-of-way of any street and is identical to the property line of persons owning property fronting on a street. 
Tenant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
(Code 1960, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, F.S. § 1.01 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Headings, catchlines, history notes and references. 
The chapter, article and division headings, the section catchlines and history notes, and all references and notes in small type, shall not be considered as part of the text of the sections and are used in this Code only to assist in the usage of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city commission; 
(4)  Any right of franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the city commission or any preceding governing body to any person, firm or corporation; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  The annual budget or appropriation ordinance or resolution; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance levying taxes; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance designating or naming public buildings, athletic fields, airports or playgrounds; 
(12)  Any ordinance amending the zoning map of the city; the Charter or any special act which was converted to an ordinance by F.S. § 166.021(5), or any ordinance relating to or describing the corporate limits; 
(13)  Any ordinance authorizing any encroachment on any city or public property; 
(14)  Any ordinance or code or parts thereof adopted by reference by any section of such Code and not included herein; 
(15)  Nor shall such repeal be constructed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this Code.  
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city commission. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances of Gainesville, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows: _______." The new provisions should then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added the following language should be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of Gainesville, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows: _______." The new section should then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1960, § 1-4) 
Cross reference— For explanation of numbering system for adding new sections, see Preface.  
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in the catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1960, § 1-5) 
State Law reference— "No bill of attainder, ex post facto law, nor any law impairing the obligation of contracts, shall ever be passed." Fla. Const. 1968, Art. I, § 10.  
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty; abatement. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city or in any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this Code, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, misdemeanor or public nuisance, or whenever in such Code, ordinance, rule or regulation the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty, is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (a), any condition which has been declared a nuisance may be abated as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Fines and forfeitures in county court payable to municipality, F.S. § 34.191; punishment for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Construction trades advisory board, § 6-211 et seq.; human relations advisory board, § 8-21 et seq.; elections, Ch. 9; fire prevention bureau, § 10-1; smoking in government-owned or government-operated buildings, § 11.5-20; administration and enforcement of housing code, § 13-36 et seq.; board of adjustment as appeals board for housing code, § 13-56 et seq.; affordable housing advisory committee, § 14-6; public recreation board, § 18-36 et seq.; nature centers commission, § 18-56 et seq.; police, Ch. 21; taxation, Ch. 25; utilities, Ch. 27; administration of land development code, § 30-348 et seq.; schedule of fees, rates and charges, App. A. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. Ch. 166. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
The corporate seal of the city shall be an impression showing a locomotive with the year 1869 enclosed by the words "City of Gainesville, State of Florida" in a circle as shown by the following impress, and such impress shall be the corporate seal of the city:  
City Seal 
(Code 1960, § 1-10) 
Editor's note— The corporate seal of the City of Gainesville is the same as that of the Town of Gainesville, incorporated in 1869. 
Cross reference— Clerk of the commission as custodian to city seal and records, § 2-164.  
Secs. 2-2—2-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City commission, § 2.01 et seq. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; public records, F.S. Ch. 119; minimum procedural requirements for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041; public meetings and records, F.S. § 286.011. 
 
Sec. 2-66. - Salaries. 
(a)  On June 1, 2000, the then current salary of the mayor and each member of the city commission shall be increased by 1½ percent. Commencing on October 1, 2000, the mayor shall receive the annual salary of $35,868.00. Commencing on October 1, 2000, each other member of the city commission shall receive the annual salary of $28,182.00. Except as provided in (c) below on October 1, 2001, the then current annual salary shall be adjusted by the August 2000 to August 2001 percent change in the Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index (1982-84 = 100) all urban consumers, Southern region, All Items (CPI). Each fiscal year thereafter the salary shall be similarly adjusted, utilizing the following August to August change. Effective the first payroll period after March 1, 2002, the then current salaries of the mayor and city commissioners shall be reduced by 13.14 percent, which reduced salary shall thereafter be subject to adjustment as provided for herein. 
(b)  The salaries shall be paid on a biweekly pay cycle from the general fund of the city in equal amounts for each biweekly period of service, except for the first and last payment that shall be made on a prorata basis. Such salary shall be calculated from the date the commissioner or mayor respectively, takes office and shall continue until the mayor or commissioner no longer holds such office. 
(c)  If employees in the city's professional pay plan do not receive a general increase in any particular fiscal year, then the salaries of the mayor and city commissioners shall not be increased that fiscal year. If payment of a general increase for employees in the city's professional pay plan is delayed in any fiscal year, then the mayor and city commissioners CPI adjustment shall be treated similarly. 
(Code 1960, § 2-7.1; Ord. No. 3257, § 1, 9-22-86; Ord. No. 3584, § 1, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 961118, § 1, 7-14-97; Ord. No. 991293, § 1, 5-15-00; Ord. No. 002300, § 1, 2-25-02)  
Sec. 2-67. - Mayor may declare state of emergency, water emergency. 
(a)  State of emergency. The mayor, or mayor pro-tem if the mayor is unavailable, may declare a state of emergency pursuant to authority granted in section 2.08 of the Charter Laws of the City of Gainesville, F.S. § 870.042 and F.S. § 252.38, and exercise the powers granted therein. 
(b)  Water emergency. 
(1)  Declaration of water emergency. Upon the recommendation of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, the mayor may declare a water emergency, and in consultation with the general manager, impose water use restrictions up to and including water rationing by the city's water utility and the prohibition of any and all uses as may be nonessential and make such other orders relating to the potable water supply as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  Definition of nonessential water use. For purposes of this section, nonessential water uses include those uses that are deemed by the mayor as not essential for the preservation of public health and safety. The term "nonessential uses" may include but is not limited to water used for the irrigation of vegetation. 
(3)  Special relief. Any order issued under authority of this section shall include a provision whereunder consumers who believe they will suffer undue hardship or believe their health and/or safety is jeopardized under the provisions of the order may request that the general manager for utilities or his/her designee grant special, administrative relief from the water use restrictions and be afforded an opportunity to be heard on such request. 
(4)  Enforcement. Enforcement of the provisions of orders issued under the authority of this section shall be as provided under sections 2-336 through 2-339 of this Code. In addition to the foregoing, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee is authorized to discontinue water service to any consumer as necessary to enforce such orders. The general manager shall adopt rules regarding such discontinuance to afford the consumer notice and an opportunity to be heard. 
(5)  Penalties. Penalties for violation of orders issued under the authority of this section shall be as provided under chapter 2, article V, division 6 of this Code. 
(c)  Penalties. Except as provided in subsection (b)(5) above: 
(1)  Any violation of a provision of any emergency measure established pursuant to F.S. § 870.043 shall be misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
(2)  Any violation of a provision of any emergency measure established pursuant to F.S. § 252.38 shall be a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
(Code 1960, §§ 10A-1—10A-5; Ord. No. 980128, § 1, 7-27-98; Ord. No. 000866, § 1, 2-26-01; Ord. No. 040459, § 1, 10-25-04) 
State Law reference— State Disaster Preparedness Act, F.S. Ch. 252; emergency continuity of government, F.S. Ch. 22; enabling authority for local officers, F.S. § 22.05; Florida Mutual Aid Act, F.S. § 23-12 et seq.; emergency measures by local authorities, F.S. § 870.041 et seq.  
Sec. 2-68. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 960107, § 1, adopted Aug. 12, 1996, repealed the provisions of former § 2-68, which pertained to granting or extending of franchises by majority vote of city commission, as derived from Ord. No. 3544, § 2(2-5.3), adopted July 10, 1989.  
Secs. 2-69—2-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical inspector, § 6-71 et seq.; plumbing inspector, § 6-94; director of public recreation, § 18-1; chief of police, § 21-1. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Residence requirements for city manager, general manager for utilities, city attorney, clerk of the commission. 
Except as provided below, the city manager, the general manager for utilities, the city attorney and the clerk of the commission shall be and remain bona fide residents of the City of Gainesville. If at any time the city manager, the general manager for utilities, the city attorney, or the clerk of the commission fail to be and remain a resident of the city, such person shall be automatically disqualified and removed from such office or board. A person may be appointed as city manager, the general manager for utilities, the city attorney and the clerk of the commission even though he/she is not a resident of the city at the time of appointment provided, however, that such person shall have six months after his/her appointment as city manager, the general manager for utilities, the city attorney and the clerk of the commission to become a bona fide resident of the city, unless upon good cause shown he/she is granted additional extensions by the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 2-4.1; Ord. No. 3543, § 1, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 3709, § 1, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 2-142. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 070833, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 2008, repealed § 2-142 which pertained to terms of city manager, city attorney, clerk of the commission and the internal auditor, and derived from § 2-5 of the 1960 Code.  
Sec. 2-143. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-144. - Physical examinations for employees. 
(a)  No applicants for the employee classifications of police officer and firefighter shall be employed by the city until they have successfully met the physical and mental requirements prescribed by the state and the city manager. 
(b)  All applicants for full-time employment with the city, other than those specified above in subsection (a) shall be required to complete a health history and physical assessment as part of the screening for employment to be prescribed and approved by the administrative department head. However, such applicant shall not have to submit himself/herself to a preemployment physical or mental examination unless the administrative department head, in his/her discretion, determines that there is a health irregularity of the applicant which requires same. 
(c)  All permanent full-time employees shall be offered a physical and/or mental examination as prescribed and made by the administrative department head at: 
(1)  Age 30; 
(2)  Age 40; and 
(3)  Every five years thereafter. 
(d)  Annual physical and/or mental examinations may be required of employees in the fire and police departments at the discretion of the city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 2-8; Ord. No. 3197, § 1, 3-17-86)  
Sec. 2-145. - Standards of fitness; special examinations; discharge of physically unfit. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the administrative department head to establish such standards of fitness as shall, in his/her opinion, be necessary for the different occupations of city employees, and his/her opinion upon such standards shall be final. The administrative department head may require the employee to submit himself/herself to the administrative department head for a physical or mental examination, should the administrative department head, with his/her discretion, feel that the employee might be mentally or physically unable to perform his/her required duties satisfactorily. The administrative department head shall be furnished a copy of each examination made. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every city employee to submit to a physical or mental examination when required to do so by the administrative department head. The failure or refusal of any city employee to submit to a physical or mental examination shall be cause for dismissal. If the administrative department head finds any such employee to be mentally or physically unfit to perform his/her duties, it shall be the duty of the administrative department head to report same to the department head in the department in which the employee is employed. Upon receiving the report, the department head under whom the employee works shall, with the approval of the administrative department head, investigate a disability retirement for the employee, or if the employee does not qualify for disability retirement under the ordinances of the city, the department head shall preemptorily discharge the person for such cause. The discharge shall be subject to the city's grievance procedures. 
(Code 1960, § 2-9)  
Sec. 2-146. - Personal interest prohibited. 
Except for negotiated compensation package, salary, or wage, no officers, or employees shall have any personal interest in the profits of, nor derive any benefit from any contract, job, work, or service for the municipality. All terms of a negotiated compensation package shall be reduced to writing and executed by the employee and manager. 
(Ord. No. 3635, § 1, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 4-10-95)  
Secs. 2-147—2-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CLERK OF THE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-161. - Duty to attend meetings of commission and record proceedings; minute book. 
It shall be the duty of the clerk of the commission to attend all meetings of the city commission and to take and keep correct minutes of the proceedings of the commission. The proceedings shall be recorded as soon as practicable in a book to be known as the minute book. 
(Code 1960, § 2-1)  
Sec. 2-162. - Authority to appoint and remove subordinate employees. 
In order to fulfill and discharge the duties of the clerk of the commission as required by the Charter, this Code and by the city commission, the clerk of the commission shall appoint and remove all subordinate employees in the office of the clerk of the commission. 
(Code 1960, § 2-1.1)  
Sec. 2-163. - Duty as to ordinances. 
The clerk of the commission shall record all ordinances passed by the commission and shall make the following certificate on the original: "I hereby certify that a true record of this ordinance was made by me in Ordinance Book No. _______ on this _____ day of ________, 19___." The clerk shall also certify that the title of the ordinance was published, giving the date and length of time. The original ordinances shall be filed, noting date of filing. 
(Code 1960, § 2-2) 
State Law reference— Minimum procedural requirements for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 2-164. - Custodian of city seal and certain city records; duty to give copies of records; fee. 
The clerk of the commission is hereby made the custodian of the city seal; records of the city commission, including but not limited to resolutions, ordinances, proclamations, minutes, agendas, meeting notices, digital/audio recordings of city commission meetings, and correspondence; lobbyist registration records; domestic partnership registration records; the records of any board or committee for which the clerk is appointed secretary; and any other records designated by the city commission. The clerk of the commission shall at any time give certified copies of any of the records to any persons desiring the same, for which there shall be charged the same fees as are allowed the clerk of the circuit court under the then current Florida Statutes. The clerk of the commission upon request shall also make and furnish uncertified copies or duplicates of any public records in the clerk's office without charge; provided however, no one person is entitled to receive more than ten copies per week without charge; and provided further, that all further copies shall be at the rates allowable by Florida law. 
(Code 1960, § 2-3; Ord. No. 3586, § 1, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 080939, § 1, 5-7-09) 
Cross reference— City seal, § 2-1. 
State Law reference— Service charges by clerk of the circuit court, F.S. § 28.24.  
Secs. 2-165—2-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY INTERNAL AUDITOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of Div. 3 by Ord. No. 150284 , § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 2016, said Div. 3, §§ 2-176—2-179, was repealed by Ord. No. 3974, § 1, adopted May 9, 1994. The former division pertained to the power planning and external power affairs officer and derived from § 2-5.2(a)—(c) of the 1960 Code. 
 
Sec. 2-176. - Duties. 
In addition to the duties stated in Section 3.05 of the City Charter, the city internal auditor shall: 
(a)  Perform financial and performance audits as well as attestation engagements in accordance with Generally Accepted Governmental Auditing Standards (GAGAS). 
(b)  Perform or cause to be performed investigations of fraud, waste, and abuse allegations. 
(c)  Perform all other duties, including GAGAS defined "nonaudit services" or "professional services other than audits or attestation engagements" assigned by the city commission. 
(d)  Assist the audit and finance committee in establishing factors to use for the evaluation of external auditors, issuing request for qualifications, evaluating and ranking external auditor candidates. 
(e)  Perform the duties of inspector general. 
(Ord. No. 150284 , § 1, 2-18-16)  
Sec. 2-177. - Authority to appoint and remove subordinate employees. 
The internal auditor shall appoint and remove all subordinate employees in the internal auditor's office. 
(Ord. No. 150284 , § 1, 2-18-16)  
Sec. 2-178. - Audit committee; selection of external auditor. 
Pursuant to F.S. § 218.391, the city commission shall appoint a committee who shall establish factors to use to evaluate external auditor candidates, cause a notice of issuance of request for proposals to be issued when the city seeks to contract with an external auditor, evaluate and rank the external auditor proposals and make recommendations to the city commission on the ranking of proposals. 
(Ord. No. 150284 , § 1, 2-18-16)  
Secs. 2-179—2-195. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-196. - Directors of departments. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 3.02 of the Charter of the City of Gainesville, and Chapter 90-394, Laws of Florida, as amended, the following job titles are designated as directors of departments, who the city manager may appoint and remove at will: 
(1)  Assistant city manager. 
(2)  Recreation, parks and culture director. 
(3)  General services director. 
(4)  Public works director. 
(5)  Communications and marketing manager. 
(6)  Fire chief. 
(7)  Regional transit system director. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Planning and development services director. 
(10)  Police chief. 
(11)  Administrative services director. 
(12)  Building official. 
(13)  Reserved. 
(14)  Community redevelopment manager. 
(15)  Code enforcement manager. 
(16)  Housing and community development manager. 
(17)  Planning manager. 
(18)  Computer services director. 
(19)  Finance director. 
(20)  Human resources director. 
(21)  Management and budget director. 
(22)  Risk management director. 
(23)  Legislative and grants coordinator. 
(b)  Pursuant to Section 3.06 of the Charter of the City of Gainesville, and Chapter 90-394, Laws of Florida, as amended, the following job titles are designated as directors of departments, who the general manager may appoint and remove at will: 
(1)  Assistant general manager, customer and administrative services. 
(2)  Assistant general manager, energy delivery. 
(3)  Assistant general manager, energy supply. 
(4)  Assistant general manager, water/wastewater systems. 
(5)  Chief financial officer, utilities. 
(6)  Community relations director. 
(7)  Human resources director. 
(Ord. No. 050567, §§ 1, 2, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 080762, § 1, 11-5-09; Ord. No. 120585, § 1, 1-3-13)  
Secs. 2-197—2-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 080762, § 2, adopted Nov. 5, 2009, changed the title of Div. 2 from "Department of Community Development" to "Department of Planning and Development Services." 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; housing, Ch. 13; land development code, Ch. 30. 
 
Sec. 2-211. - Created; appointment of director. 
(a)  There is hereby created a department of planning and development services to be headed by a director appointed by the city manager. The department shall be under the immediate direction and control of the city manager, and the director shall report to and function directly under the city manager. 
(b)  The department of planning and development services shall be the administrative arm of city government combining all functions related to zoning, planning, building, inspections and such other duties and responsibilities as may be from time to time determined by the city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 2-91; Ord. No. 080762, § 2, 11-5-09)  
Sec. 2-212. - Organization. 
(a)  The department of planning and development services shall be divided into three separate areas as follows: 
(1)  A planning division under a planning manager, which division shall be responsible for comprehensive and current planning and concurrency management throughout the city. 
(2)  A building division under a building official which will enforce all provisions of the building code, issue building permits, conduct required inspections, and shall be the enforcing arm and official of the zoning and building codes. 
(3)  A planning and development services division which will consist of overall administrative functions as well as economic development functions including the following: management of the Technology Enterprise Center, administration of the enterprise zone program, development activities associated with Airport Industrial Park, small business development activities, and all other duties as the city manager may assign from time to time. 
(b)  Additional divisions of the department of planning and development services may be created from time to time by ordinance and the several responsibilities of each division may be added to, amended, transferred to another division or reorganized in such fashion as from time to time may be determined necessary by the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 2-92; Ord. No. 080762, § 3, 11-5-09)  
Sec. 2-213. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The department of planning and development services shall be the administrative department of the city government charged with the responsibility of performing the several clerical, investigative, inspection and other administrative duties for the city plan board, board of adjustment, development review board, historic preservation board, Gainesville Enterprise Zone Development Agency and such other boards or committees as the city manager may from time to time designate and shall relate their activities to making studies and recommendations on matters that are under the supervision of the department of planning and development services. 
(Code 1960, § 2-93; Ord. No. 080762, § 4, 11-5-09)  
Secs. 2-214—2-225. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Finances generally, § 2-431 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 25. 
 
Sec. 2-226. - Created; appointment of director. 
There is hereby created a department of finance to be headed by a director of such department to be appointed by the city manager. The department of finance shall be under the immediate direction and control of the city manager, and the head of this department shall report to, and function directly under, the city manager. 
(Code 1960, §§ 2-17, 2-17(b); Ord. No. 160951 , § 1, 6-1-17)  
Sec. 2-227. - Functions. 
The department of finance shall be the administrative arm of city government, combining functions relating to purchasing, management information and reports, assessment and collection of taxes, billings, accounting, and all matters relating to finance, and such other duties and responsibilities as may be from time to time determined by the city manager. The director of finance shall be responsible for the investment of all funds of the city, and may delegate authority to conduct investment transactions and manage investments to one or more subordinates. 
(Code 1960, § 2-17(a); Ord. No. 160951 , § 1, 6-1-17)  
Sec. 2-228. - Bond required for director. 
Before entering upon his/her duties as the head of the department of finance, the director shall enter into a good and sufficient bond to be approved by the city commission in a sum to be set by the city commission, but in no event less than $100,000.00, to be written by a surety company authorized to do business in the state for the faithful performance of the duties of the director. The premium on the bond is to be paid by the city. 
(Code 1960, § 2-17(e))  
Sec. 2-229. - Director to be tax collector. 
In addition to the other duties and responsibilities required in this division of the department of finance, the director of that department shall be the city tax collector. The director of the department may appoint an assistant or assistants in the performance of his/her duties as tax collector, or in any other of his/her duties and responsibilities created by this division. 
(Code 1960, § 2-17(b))  
Secs. 2-230—2-244. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Construction trades board, § 6-211 et seq.; human relations advisory board, § 8-21 et seq.; board of adjustment as appeals board for housing code, § 13-56 et seq.; affordable housing advisory committee, § 14-6; public recreation board, § 18-36 et seq.; nature centers commission, § 18-56 et seq.; boards and committees relating to administration of land development code, § 30-252 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-245. - Boards and commissions to report to city commission. 
All boards, committees and commissions appointed by the city commission shall be advisory to and shall report to the city commission, unless a charter provision or ordinance of the city shall otherwise provide. 
(Code 1960, § 1-14)  
Sec. 2-246. - Members to remain in office until successors appointed; exceptions. 
The members of all boards, committees and commissions appointed by the city commission shall remain in office until their successors are appointed, unless a charter provision or ordinance of the city shall otherwise provide. 
(Code 1960, § 1-15; Ord. No. 3164, § 1, 9-23-85)  
Sec. 2-247. - Removal from office. 
(a)  For purposes of this section: 
Advisory board means any board, commission, committee, or council whose powers, jurisdiction, and authority are solely advisory and do not include the final determination or adjudication of any personal or property rights, duties, or obligations. 
Attend or attendance means presence at a meeting for a duration of at least 50 percent of the entire meeting time as verified by the board secretary on the attendance record. 
Quasi-judicial or administrative board means any board, commission, committee, or council whose powers, jurisdiction, and authority include the final determination, or adjudication of any personal or property rights, duties, or obligations. 
(b)  The city commission may remove from office any appointee of the city commission as provided by law. 
(c)  Any appointee of the city commission to any board, commission, committee, authority, or council except the community redevelopment agency, the Gainesville-Alachua County Regional Airport Authority, the board of trustees for the City of Gainesville Police Officers and Firefighters Consolidated Retirement Plan, the governing board of the Alachua County Library District, the Gainesville Housing Authority, and the Gainesville Enterprise Zone Development Agency, shall be automatically removed from office under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Quasi-judicial and administrative boards. The board member has failed to attend four or more consecutive meetings or the board member's overall attendance record is less than 66 2/3 percent for the six most recent board meetings at which voting occurred. Board members may be granted one excused absence per calendar year for a medical reason or professional/educational obligation. Board members shall notify the board secretary of an excused absence prior to the meeting, if practicable. 
(2)  Advisory boards. The board member's overall attendance record is less than 50 percent for the six most recent board meetings at which voting occurred. Board members may be granted two excused absences per calendar year for a medical reason or professional/educational obligation. Board members shall notify the board secretary of an excused absence prior to the meeting, if practicable. 
(d)  The city commission shall consider the attendance record of any current or former board member being considered for appointment or reappointment. 
(e)  Any resident member appointed by the city commission to the board of trustees for the City of Gainesville Police Officers and Firefighters Consolidated Retirement Plan may be removed from office by the city commission without cause and without prior notice. 
(Code 1960, § 2-5.1; Ord. No. 3300, § 1, 11-17-86; Ord. No. 3367, § 1, 8-24-87; Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 3988, § 1, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 4049, § 1, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 960373, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 110658, § 1, 9-5-13)  
Sec. 2-248. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 080041, § 1, adopted Sept. 2, 2008, repealed § 2-248 which pertained to appointment of student adjunct members and derived from Ord. No. 3427, § 1, adopted March 28, 1988; Ord. No. 3501, § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 1988; Ord. No. 3551, § 1, adopted Aug. 14, 1989; Ord. No. 3690, § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 1991; Ord. No. 3734, § 1, adopted Aug. 5, 1991; Ord. No. 3843, § 4, adopted March 15, 1993; Ord. No. 951053, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 1996; Ord. No. 950946, § 1, adopted June 10, 1996; Ord. No. 960113, § 1, adopted July 22, 1996; Ord. No. 970647, § 1, adopted March 9, 1998; and Ord. No. 981268, § 1, adopted May 10, 1999.  
Sec. 2-249. - Board secretary. 
All boards, committees, commissions, authorities, and councils created by the city commission shall elect a board secretary unless a special rule or law provides otherwise. It is the duty of the secretary to provide notice of each meeting to the clerk of the commission at least 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays) prior to the meeting. The secretary shall make, or cause to be made, the minutes of each meeting, and shall verify the attendance of board members at each meeting, and shall verify the attendance of board members at each meeting. The secretary shall file the attendance record with the clerk of the commission as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 3988, § 2, 7-11-94)  
Secs. 2-250—2-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY BEAUTIFICATION BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Land development code, Ch. 30. 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Created. 
A city beautification board is hereby created. 
(Code 1960, § 2-71)  
Sec. 2-262. - Membership. 
(a)  The city beautification board shall consist of 15 members. The members shall be appointed by the city commission, one of whom shall be annually elected chair by the board. Each member shall be appointed for a term of three years that shall begin on the first day of November of the year the member is appointed, except that four of the members appointed in 1996 shall be appointed for an 11-month term to begin on December 1, 1996 and end on October 31, 1997. A board member may not serve on the board for more than two consecutive three-year terms. 
(b)  Vacancies on said board shall be filled by the city commission for the unexpired term of the member whose vacancy is being filled. 
(c)  All members of the board shall be residents of the county. 
(Code 1960, § 2-72; Ord. No. 3195, § 1, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 3222, § 1, 6-2-86; Ord. No. 950289, § 1, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 960368, § 1, 11-25-96)  
Sec. 2-263. - Authority to adopt bylaws. 
The board shall adopt such bylaws as may be necessary to provide for the organization and transaction of the business of the board, which bylaws shall become effective upon their being submitted in writing to and approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 2-73; Ord. No. 950289, § 2, 7-24-95)  
Sec. 2-264. - Function and duties. 
The city beautification board shall study, investigate, develop, assist, advise and recommend to the city commission any and all matters pertaining to beautification, sanitation, environment and citizens' participation relating to same. In carrying out its function and duties, the board shall advise and recommend plans to organizations and groups in the city and promote public interest in the general improvement of the appearance of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 2-74)  
Sec. 2-265. - Reports required. 
On or before the first day of November of each year, the city beautification board shall cause to be filed with the clerk of the commission a written report of the work performed and the results accomplished by the board, including the receipt and disbursement of all funds handled by the board. 
(Code 1960, § 2-75)  
Secs. 2-266—2-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GAINESVILLE CULTURAL AFFAIRS BOARD[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 170526 , § 1, adopted March 1, 2018, amended division 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 3, §§ 2-281—2-285, pertained to Gainesville-Alachua County Cultural Affairs Board. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Art in public places, Ch. 5.5. 
 
Sec. 2-281. - Created. 
The Gainesville Cultural Affairs Board is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 170526 , § 1, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 2-282. - Composition; appointment, term of members; filling of vacancies. 
The Gainesville Cultural Affairs Board shall be composed of ten persons appointed for three-year terms by the city commission. Members should have a strong interest in the arts and should represent a broad spectrum of society; including, but not limited to, practicing artists, recreation specialists, business persons, educators, art historians, tourism professionals and citizens interested in arts advocacy. 
No member may be the owner or operator of, or consultant for, a for-profit enterprise engaged in the appraisal, sale, leasing or showing of art to the public on a retail or wholesale basis. The city commission shall fill vacancies for the unexpired terms of members. 
(Ord. No. 170526 , § 1, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 2-283. - Duties generally. 
The duties of the Gainesville Cultural Affairs Board shall be to advise the city commission in regard to interest in and promotion of the arts and eco-heritage tourism, to develop local cultural resources and to assist the cultural affairs manager in the planning and implementation of community cultural involvement. 
(Ord. No. 170526 , § 1, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 2-284. - Committees. 
The Gainesville Cultural Affairs Board may create, alter and abolish committees, which bodies shall advise the board on matters concerning the cultural activities or programs desired by the citizens of the area. The board shall determine the committees' composition, structure and duties. 
(Ord. No. 170526 , § 1, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 2-285. - Selection of officers; meetings. 
(a)  The Gainesville Cultural Affairs Board and its committees shall select one of their members as chairperson and such other officers as they may determine. 
(b)  The board and its committees shall meet at such time and place as provided in their rules or procedures which rules shall also provide for the transaction of the business. Such rules and procedures shall become effective after approval by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 170526 , § 1, 3-1-18)  
Secs. 2-286—2-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 170580 , § 1, adopted January 4, 2018, repealed §§ 2-301—2-306, which pertained to Gainesville Enterprise Zone Development Agency. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. Subsequently, Ord. No. 170722 , § 1, adopted February 1, 2018, restated Ord. No. 170580 to correct scrivener's error related to economic development. 
 
Secs. 2-301—2-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - REGIONAL TRANSIT SYSTEM ADVISORY BOARD[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 960051, § 1, adopted March 3, 1997, enacted §§ 2-321—2-323, as set out herein. Ord. No. 951464, § 2, adopted May 13, 1996, deleted the provisions of former §§ 2-321—2-324, which pertained to similar subject matter, as derived from Ord. No. 3111, § 2(2-160—2-162), adopted Feb. 25, 1985; Ord. No. 3256, § 1, adopted Sept. 22, 1986; Ord. No. 3537, § 1, adopted May 8, 1989; Ord. No. 3987, § 1, adopted July 11, 1994. 
 
Sec. 2-321. - Created, composition, appointment, terms. 
There is hereby created the Regional Transit System Advisory Board composed of nine persons. Members shall serve three-year terms, except that the initial term of three members shall be for two years and three members for one year. All subsequent terms shall be for three years. 
The membership board shall consist of: 
(a)  Six residents of the city appointed by the city commission from among the following individual groups: 
1.  Regular user of the transit system. 
2.  Senior citizen 
3.  Person with a disability 
4.  University of Florida student nominated from a list of at least three names submitted by the University of Florida Student Senate 
5.  Chamber of Commerce representative 
6.  Major employer in the local area 
7.  Environmental community 
8.  Neighborhood/homeowners associations 
9.  Student oriented housing developments 
10.  Santa Fe Community College student 
11.  Metropolitan Transportation Planning Organization Citizen Advisory Committee. 
(b)  City manager or designee will request the county to appoint three residents of Alachua County from among the groups listed in subsection (a). 
Each appointing authority shall make appointments and fill vacancies which occur by motion or by other appropriate action of the appointing authority. 
(Ord. No. 960051, § 1, 3-10-97)  
Sec. 2-322. - Duties of the board generally. 
The duties of the Regional Transit System Advisory Board shall be as follows: 
(a)  To advise the city commission on all matters relating to public transit development in the city and the county including: 
1.  To develop and analyze policies concerning the operation of the regional transit system. 
2.  To develop approaches for financing the regional transit system on a long-term basis. 
3.  To review ridership, routes, rates and other related matters. 
4.  To consider questions referred to it by the city commission, from other sources and to self-initiate recommendations for consideration by the city commission. All recommendations must include city manager or designee comments. 
(b)  To review all matters relating to the Regional Transit System that must be approved by the city commission. The issues will then be sent to the commission with the recommendations of both the board, and city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 960051, § 1, 3-10-97)  
Sec. 2-323. - Meetings, rules. 
There shall be a chair elected by the membership of the board. The board shall adopt rules as approved by the city commission for the transaction of its business and which provide for the time and place of regular meetings and for the calling of special meetings. The board shall hold regular meetings once a month unless otherwise notified by the chair. The chair may call special meeting as needed. No business shall be conducted by the board without a quorum of at least five members, and all action must be taken by a majority of the quorum. 
(Ord. No. 960051, § 1, 3-10-97)  
Secs. 2-324—2-335. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CIVIL CITATIONS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 950796, adopted October 23, 1995, created Div. 4, consisting of §§ 2-301—2-304, pertaining to civil citations. At the editor's discretion said sections have been redesignated as Div. 6, §§ 2-336—2-339. Former Div. 6 of Art. V, which consisted of §§ 2-336—2-341 and pertained to the hazardous materials committee, was repealed by Ord. No. 3846, § 2, adopted Mar. 15, 1993. The repealed provisions derived from §§ 2-166—2-172 of the 1960 Code. 
 
Sec. 2-336. - Authority and purpose. 
This division is adopted pursuant to F.S. Ch. 162, Part II, as a supplemental municipal code and ordinance enforcement procedure. 
(Ord. No. 950796, § 1, 10-23-95)  
Sec. 2-337. - Code enforcement citation procedures. 
(a)  Designation of code enforcement officer. For the purpose of this division, the term "code enforcement officer" shall mean any designated employee or agent of the City of Gainesville whose duty it is to enforce codes and ordinances enacted by the city, and who has received appropriate training as determined by the City of Gainesville. This shall include, but not be limited to, code inspectors, including building inspectors, law enforcement officers, and municipal fire safety inspectors as defined in F.S. Ch. 633. Designation of a code enforcement officer and appropriate training for such officer shall be determined by city manager or designee, but shall include at a minimum at least a forty-hour minimum standards training course in the appropriate area of expertise. 
(b)  Citation procedure. 
(1)  Any code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation to a person when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted code or ordinance of the City of Gainesville and that the county court will hear the charge. 
(2)  Prior to issuing a citation, a code enforcement officer shall provide notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of a city code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than 30 days. If, upon personal investigation, a code enforcement officer finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the time period, the code enforcement officer may issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation. A code enforcement officer shall not be required to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation if the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare, if a repeat violation is found or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(3)  A citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be in a form prescribed by the city and shall contain: 
a.  The date and time of issuance. 
b.  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
c.  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
d.  The facts constituting reasonable cause. 
e.  The number or section of the code or ordinance violated. 
f.  The name and authority of the code enforcement officer. 
g.  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
h.  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
i.  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
j.  A conspicuous statement that, if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(4)  After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, a code enforcement officer shall deposit the original and one copy of the citation with the county court. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  A violation of a code or an ordinance cited and enforced under the provisions of this division shall be deemed a civil infraction. 
(2)  The maximum civil penalty shall not exceed $500.00. 
(3)  A civil penalty of less than the maximum civil penalty shall be assessed if the person who has committed the civil infraction does not contest the citation. 
(4)  Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
(e)  If a person fails to pay the civil penalty or request a hearing, fails to appear in court to contest the citation when a hearing has been requested, or fails to appear in court as may be required, the court may enter judgment for an amount not to exceed $500.00 per infraction and/or may issue a rule to show cause upon the request of the city. The court rule shall require such person to appear before the court to explain why action on the citation has not been taken. If any person who is issued such rule fails to appear in response to the court's directive, the person may be held in contempt of court. The city as an additional remedy may refer cases of violations not paid and not contested within 15 days of issuance to a collection agency for processing, collection, and notification of failure of payment to the credit bureau. At any hearing pursuant to this division, the commission of a violation of a code or ordinance must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence. The Florida Rules of Civil Procedure and the Florida Evidence Code shall be applicable to any hearing. 
(f)  All civil penalties shall be paid to and collected by the clerk of the court. All penalties collected by the clerk shall be turned over to the city finance department. A total of $2.00 per citation collected shall be credited to the revenues of the city and earmarked for training of code enforcement officers. The remaining funds shall be deposited in the general revenues of the City of Gainesville. An exception to the general revenues deposit requirement shall only be allowed when specifically designated otherwise by ordinance. 
(g)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to the enforcement pursuant to sections of the standard building codes adopted pursuant to section 553.73 as they apply to construction, provided that a building permit is either not required or has been issued by the city. 
(h)  The provisions of this division are additional and supplemental means of enforcing city codes or ordinances and may be used for the enforcement of all codes and ordinances as designated to the city commission by ordinance, adopting a schedule of violations and penalties. Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the City of Gainesville from enforcing its codes or ordinances by other means. 
(Ord. No. 950796, § 1, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 970538, § 1, 11-24-97)  
Sec. 2-338. - Jurisdiction. 
The terms and provisions of this division shall apply to all real property lying within the City of Gainesville. All civil infractions of applicable codes and/or ordinances, as determined by the city commission, may be enforced by this division by citation to the appropriate county court of Alachua County, except where prohibited by law or statute. 
(Ord. No. 950796, § 1, 10-23-95)  
Sec. 2-339. - Applicable codes and ordinances. 
The following ordinances are enforceable by the procedures described in this division: 
Section 	Description 	Class 	Penalty 
2-67(b) 	Declaration of water emergency imposing water use restrictions 	I 	$50.00 
4-4 	Open consumption of and/or possession of an open container of alcoholic beverage 	IV 	$200.00 
4-52 
4-53(a)(1) 
4-53(a)(2) 
4-53(c)(10)a 	Underage prohibition in alcoholic beverage establishments 	IV 	$500.00 
Chapter 5 except as 
provided below 	Animal control 	I 	$250.00 
5-2(c) 	Animal molesting or biting pedestrian or bicyclist 	IV 	$250.00 
6-3 	104.1.1 of adopted Standard Building Code, as amended Building, electrical, plumbing, gas, and/or mechanical work within a required permit 	II 	$75.00 
6-183(1) 	False advertising 	III 	$125.00 
6-185 	Acting as a contractor without a valid contractor certificate 	IV 	$200.00 
6-186(b)(2) 	No journeyman or certified craftsman on the job site 	II 	$75.00 
Article IX of Chapter 6 	Downtown minimum property standards 	I 	$50.00 
Chapter 10 	All adopted fire prevention and protection codes inclusive of the Florida Fire Prevention Code 	II 	$250.00 
10-70(b) 	Failure to obtain burning permit — Residential 	I 	$75.00 
10-70(b) 	Failure to obtain burning permit — Commercial 	II 	$150.00 
10-70(d) 	Failure to obtain burning permit — Boiler 	I 	$75.00 
10-71 	Failure to obtain burn permit — Pyrotechnic 	II 	150.00 
11.5-1 	Availability of potable water 	I 	$50.00 
11.5-18 	Use of a nicotine dispensing device where smoking prohibited 	II 	$25.00 
11.5-41 	Prohibition of smoking outdoors at or around all RTS bus facilities 	II 	$25.00 
11.5-42 	Prohibition of smoking outdoors in City parks 	II 	$25.00 
Article III of Chapter 13 	Commercial building code 	II 	$250.00 
13-171 	Insects, outdoor storage, trash and yard maintenance 	I 	$250.00 
13-181 	Hazardous conditions on residential property 	I 	$250.00 
Article II of Chapter 14.5 	Merchandising of tobacco products 	II 	$75.00 
Article III of Chapter 14.5 	Towing from or immobilizing vehicles on certain private property 	II 	$125.00 
14.5-1 	Not having landlord permit 	II 	$250.00 
14.5-171 	Violation of security and safety standards for convenience businesses 	II 	$250.00 
Chapter 15 	Noise violations 	I 	$250.00 
16-19 	Dangerous buildings/hazardous lands 	I 	$[250.00] 
17-2 	Fliers on utility poles or other fixtures 	I 	$250.00 
17-6 	Synthetic drug violations 	IV 	$250.00 
17-8 	Urinating in public 	II 	$125.00 
17-34 	Knowingly rent or let a residence to a sexual offender or sexual predator to use as a temporary or permanent residence contrary to the Sexual Predator Ordinance 	II 	$125.00 
17-38 	Practicing conversion therapy on a minor 	II 	$250.00 
18-20(28) 	Prohibition of smoking outdoors in all City parks 	II 	$25.00 
19-2 	Violation of regulations for peddling in Downtown Plaza 	I 	$50.00 
19-34 	Violation of permit requirements for commercial peddlers, solicitors, or canvassers 	I 	$250.00 
19-52 	Unauthorized solicitation of alms or financial assistance 	I 	$50.00 
19-53 	Unauthorized sale or transfer of goods and services; religious and charitable organizations soliciting for contributions without a permit 	I 	$50.00 
19-55 	Violation of restrictions and requirements for permitted soliciting 	I 	$50.00 
19-92 	Operation of a vending booth or a game day vending booth without a permit 	I 	$250.00 
19-93 	Violation of regulations on permitted vending booth or game day vending booth 	I 	$250.00 
19-95 	Maintaining display, stand, article or item of personal property without proper permit 	I 	$50.00 
19-112 	Unauthorized soliciting of funds 	I 	$50.00 
19-127 	Violation of prohibition on throwing or distributing handbills upon property displaying a "No Handbills" sign 	I 	$125.00 
21-53(b)(6) 	Non-permitted, revoked or suspended alarm system 	IV 	$200.00 
21-58(a) 	Failure to register alarm monitoring company 	II 	$125.00 
21-58(c) 	Failure to maintain records 	II 	$125.00 
21-59 	Failure to make alarm verified call 	II 	$125.00 
21-60(a) 	Failure to register—Alarm system contractors 	II 	$125.00 
21-60(b) 	Maintenance, repair, alter or service of system for compensation by noncontractor 	II 	$125.00 
21-60(c) 	Failure to issue ID 	I 	$50.00 
21-60(d) 	Use of equipment or methods below minimum standards 	II 	$125.00 
21-60(e) 	Activation/servicing non-permitted alarm 	II 	$125.00 
21-60(f) 	Causing false alarm during servicing 	II 	$125.00 
21-60(g) 	Failure to provide blank alarm permit application 	I 	$50.00 
21-61(a) 	Operating automatic dialing device 	II 	$125.00 
21-61(b) 
21-61(c) 	Failure to remove non-permitted features 	I 	$50.00 
21-62 	Operating alarm system without auxiliary power 	II 	$125.00 
Chapter 22 	Secondhand Goods 
Secondhand Dealers 	III 	$125.00 
26-137 	Abandoned vehicles 	I 	$250.00 
27-73 	Solid waste violations except (4), (8) and (9) 	I 	$250.00 
27-76(b)(1)b 	Improper use of cart 	I 	$250.00 
27-79(a) and (f) 	Commercial franchise violations 	IV 	$200.00 
27-85(a) 	Failure to separate designated recyclable materials, except for de minimus amounts, from solid waste loads 	II 	$125.00 
27-90 	Expanded polystyrene containers and single-use carry out plastic bags 	II 	$250.00 
Chapter 28 	Vehicle for hire regulation 	I 	$50.00 
29-3 	Registration of lobbyists 	I 	$50.00 
30-45 	Prohibited use in zoning district 	I 	$125.00 
30-51(c) 	Permitted uses in single family districts 	II 	$125.00 
30-56(b) and (c) 	Residential parking 	I 	$250.00 
30-56(c)(5) 	Violation of special event parking permit requirements 	I 	$250.00 
30-57(a)(3) 	Residential leases—Over occupancy 	II 	$250.00 
30-59(c) 	Permitted uses in office districts 	I 	$50.00 
30-61(c) 	Permitted uses in general business district 	I 	$50.00 
30-62(c) 	Permitted uses in automotive oriented business district 	I 	$50.00 
30-63(c) 	Permitted uses in tourist-oriented business district 	I 	$50.00 
30-64(e) 	Permitted uses in mixed use low intensity district 	I 	$50.00 
30-65(c) 	Permitted uses in mixed use medium intensity district 	I 	$50.00 
30-66(c) 	Permitted uses in central city district 	I 	$50.00 
30-67(g) 	Illegal outdoor storage and sales 	I 	$50.00 
30-68(c) 	Permitted uses in warehousing and wholesaling district 	I 	$50.00 
30-69(c) 	Permitted uses in limited industrial district 	I 	$50.00 
30-70(c) 	Permitted uses in general industrial district 	I 	$50.00 
30-86 	Use, parking, storage and keeping of recreational vehicles 	I 	$250.00 
30-125 	Operation of food trucks in violation of regulations 	I 	$250.00 
30-315 et seq. 	Violation of sign regulations 	I 	$250.00 
30-357 	New business, expansion or change of use without zoning compliance permit 	I 	$250.00 
 
Second violation of the same Class I or Class II offense shall be double the amount shown on the penalty schedule. 
Third and subsequent violations of the same Class I or II offense shall require a mandatory court appearance. 
Second and subsequent violations of the same Class III or Class IV offense shall require a mandatory court appearance. 
(Ord. No. 950796, § 1, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 970512, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 970127, § 2, 11-10-97; Ord. No. 990697, § 2, 1-10-00; Ord. No. 990698, § 1, 1-10-00; Ord. No. 980475, § 4, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 990442, § 3, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 00053, § 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 000055, § 1, 10-9-00; Ord. No. 000866, § 2, 2-26-01; Ord. No. 001700, § 2, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 020023, § 3, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 021104, § 1, 10-27-03; Ord. No. 030785, § 6, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 021198, § 2, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 050115, § 2, 11-28-05; Ord. No. 060275, § 2, 3-26-07; Ord. No. 051236, § 2, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 070133, § 1, 8-27-07; Ord. No. 080261, § 1, 10-2-08; Ord. No. 070941, § 2, 2-5-09; Ord. No. 080284, § 4, 3-19-09; Ord. No. 090326, § 2, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 090296, § 3, 10-15-09; Ord. No. 090119, § 2, 1-21-10; Ord. No. 090657, § 3, 8-5-10; Ord. No. 100217, § 2, 2-17-11; Ord. No. 100840, § 6, 5-19-11; Ord. No. 080481, § 2, 6-16-11; Ord. No. 110017, § 2, 8-18-11; Ord. No. 120139, § 4, 9-5-13; Ord. No. 130695, § 1, 3-6-14; Ord. No. 130679 , § 4, 11-20-14; Ord. No. 130769 , § 2, 3-5-15; Ord. No. 140495 , § 1, 3-5-15; Ord. No. 140190 , § 1, 4-16-15; Ord. No. 130141 , § 1, 7-16-15; Ord. No. 140741 , § 2, 9-3-15; Ord. No. 150406 , § 4, 3-16-17; Ord. No. 160200 , § 2, 4-5-18; Ord. No. 170487 , § 2, 1-17-19)  
Secs. 2-340—2-355. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - UTILITY ADVISORY BOARD[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 170808 , § 1, adopted August 2, 2018, amended division 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 7, §§ 2-356—2-362, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 2-356. - Intent and creation. 
It is the intent of the city commission to hereby create, empower, staff, and fund a utility board to study the city's utility and make policy recommendations regarding the utility's management, operations, and finances. 
(Ord. No. 170808 , § 1, 8-2-18)  
Sec. 2-357. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Customer means the natural person or legal entity that has a utility services account in his/her/its name and is responsible for payment for utility services at that specific location. 
Utility means the city doing business as Gainesville regional utilities. 
Utility board means the advisory board created by this division and includes both voting and non-voting members. 
Utility governance means the making and administering of the utility's course of action. Governance decisions are those decisions designed to influence and guide management's decisions, actions and other matters of the utility. The responsibilities of utility governance are more specifically described in Subsections 1.04(2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), and (8), of the City Charter. 
Utility management means the directing, supervising or carrying on of utility business affairs in a manner as directed by the city commission. The responsibility for utility management is more specifically described in Section 3.06 of the City Charter. 
Utility services means the electric, gas, telecommunications, water, and wastewater services provided by the utility. 
(Ord. No. 170808 , § 1, 8-2-18)  
Sec. 2-358. - Utility board; membership; terms; officers; procedural rules. 
(a)  Voting members. The utility board shall have seven voting members. All voting members' permanent residence shall be within the utility service area and receive utility service. A minimum of one voting member shall reside outside the Gainesville city limits. Applicants with any of the following types of experience are encouraged to apply for a voting member seat: 
(1)  Experience as a utility demand customer; 
(2)  Experience as a utility service provider; 
(3)  Investment banking, financial or certified public accounting experience; 
(4)  Experience in energy and water conservation; 
(5)  Experience with business, contract or corporate law, or contract administration; or 
(6)  Engineering experience. 
The city commission may appoint voting members with any qualifications or experience the city commission deems relevant or beneficial to service on the utility board. 
(b)  Non-voting members. The Alachua County Board of County Commissioners and the Alachua County School Board may each appoint one non-voting member to the utility board, subject to the approval of the city commission. Elected officials, or a person appointed to fill an elected official's seat until the next election, may not be appointed or serve as a non-voting member. Non-voting members shall have the same rights and privileges as voting members, except non-voting members shall not make motions or vote on motions under consideration. 
(c)  Term. 
(1)  Each voting and non-voting member shall be appointed to a four-year term. 
(2)  Members may be reappointed for consecutive terms and may remain a member after expiration of their term until a successor has been appointed and qualified. Members may serve no more than three consecutive terms. 
(3)  When a voting position becomes vacant before the end of the term, the city commission may appoint a substitute voting member to fill the vacancy for the duration of the vacated term. When a non-voting position becomes vacant before the end of the term, the respective appointing board may appoint a substitute non-voting member to fill the vacancy for the duration of the vacated term, subject to approval by the city commission. 
(d)  Officers. The voting members of the utility board shall annually elect a chair and vice-chair from among the voting members. 
(e)  Compensation of members. The utility board members shall not be deemed employees of the city, nor entitled to compensation, pension, or other retirement benefits on account of service on the utility board. Utility board members may be paid for mileage, travel and any other such expenses incurred on board business from funds budgeted by the city commission pursuant to city financial policies and procedures. 
(f)  Attendance. Voting members are required to attend all regular and special meetings of the utility board. Each voting member may be granted four absences per calendar year. A voting member shall notify the board secretary of an absence prior to the meeting, if practicable. 
(g)  Removal from board. A utility board member may be removed by the city commission. Non-voting members may also be removed by official action of their respective appointing board. 
(h)  Rules of procedure. 
(1)  The utility board shall adopt rules of procedure to carry out its purposes. All rules must conform to this code and state law and must be approved by the city commission and approved as to form and legality by the city attorney. 
(2)  The utility board shall meet at least once each calendar month, unless cancelled by the board or its chair. The utility board may meet more often at the call of the chair, the city commission, or at the request of two or more voting members of the utility board. When the most efficient use of utility staff time and city resources dictate, the utility board may meet concurrently with the city commission. 
(3)  A quorum shall consist of a majority of the voting members of the utility board; however, a smaller number may adjourn a meeting. Official action can only be taken by majority vote when a quorum is present. 
(Ord. No. 170808 , § 1, 8-2-18; Ord. No. 180479 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 2-359. - Functions, powers and duties of the utility board. 
The utility board has full authority to make and shall make independent recommendations regarding all aspects of utility governance to the city commission. Utility board recommendation prior to city commission consideration of an item is not required if the utility business item is an emergency or a time-sensitive item. If the utility board fails to timely make recommendations to the city commission, the city commission may take action on the item as it deems necessary. The functions, powers, and duties of the utility board include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Utility Policy. The utility board shall develop and recommend a utility policy for consideration and adoption by the city commission. The utility policy shall evaluate energy and utility issues based on a triple bottom line approach of equity, economy, and environment. The utility board shall recommend updates and revisions to the utility policy, as necessary. Issues addressed by the utility policy shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Delivering safe, reliable, cost-effective (which shall include a reasonable return on the city's investment), and environmentally responsible utility service: 
(2)  The future utility needs of the city; 
(3)  Opportunities to coordinate integrated planning; 
(4)  Promoting cooperation between the utility, city commission, other city boards and committees, city departments, and other individuals, institutions, and agencies in the community so that similar activities within the city can be coordinated. Such activities may include, but are not limited to, initiatives on energy affordability, affordable housing, economic development, renewable energy, environmental stewardship, and transportation. 
(b)  Budget. The utility board shall consider and make recommendations regarding the utility's budget. In particular, the utility board shall: 
(1)  Engage in budget planning and make recommendations for future budget items with reference to the goals of the utility policy; 
(2)  Review and track the utility's budget on an ongoing basis, with special attention given to capital and operations/maintenance projects in excess of ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00); 
(3)  Review quarterly reports of utility staff comparing budget estimates to actuals and issue observations and recommendations regarding such to the city commission. 
(c)  Work plan. The utility board shall develop its goals and priorities each year with reference to the utility policy, and recommend such annually in the form of a work plan for consideration and approval by the city commission. 
(d)  City commission referrals. The city commission may refer issues, questions of interests, or areas of study to the utility board. Upon receipt of the referral, the utility board shall meet, review, and study the referred issue and shall subsequently provide a recommendation to the city commission within six months (or sooner if so specified by the city commission) of the referral. 
(e)  General manager for utilities items. The utility board shall review and make a recommendation on all items the general manager of utilities intends to place on a city commission agenda. However, the utility board review and recommendation prior to city commission consideration of an item is not required if the utility business item is an emergency or a time-sensitive item. Where such items would appear on the consent agenda of the city commission, the utility board may also address such items on consent. 
(Ord. No. 170808 , § 1, 8-2-18)  
Sec. 2-360. - Utility board guidelines. 
(a)  The utility board is expected to actively engage in the collection and evaluation of information related to utility management and governance. The utility board members shall conduct research, gather information and learn from the experiences of industry experts. The utility board may consider information from various sources including, but not limited to, standards setting organization in the engineering and utilities sectors, prominent conservation organizations, municipal and investor-owned utilities, and public and private research institutes. 
(Ord. No. 170808 , § 1, 8-2-18)  
Sec. 2-361. - City resources. 
(a)  The utility board may request information and assistance from the general manager for utilities and such other city charter officers as the utility board finds necessary. At the direction of the city charter officers, city staff shall prepare such reports, analysis, and recommendations as the utility board deems necessary to remain fully informed and to carry out its responsibilities as set forth in this division. 
(b)  The utility board may make requests, through the city commission, to the city auditor for specified audits of utility services. 
(c)  The city attorney, or designee, shall serve as legal advisor to the utility board. 
(d)  The clerk of the commission shall designate a staff member to serve as clerk to the utility board. The clerk shall prepare notices of meetings, shall prepare an agenda and shall record and keep minutes of each utility board meeting. 
(Ord. No. 170808 , § 1, 8-2-18)  
Secs. 2-362—2-375. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD; SPECIAL MAGISTRATE[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 121102, § 1, adopted Aug. 1, 2013, changed the title of Div. 8 from "Code Enforcement Board" to "Code Enforcement Board; Special Magistrate." 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; housing code, § 13-16 et seq.; nuisances, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 23; occupational license tax, § 25-40 et seq.; vehicles for hire, Ch. 28; land development code, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act, F.S. Ch. 162. 
 
Sec. 2-376. - Declaration of intent; authorization of board or special magistrate. 
It is the intent of this division to promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of this city by authorizing the creation of an administrative board and provision for a special magistrate, both of whom would be vested with authority to impose administrative fines and other noncriminal penalties to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective, and inexpensive method of enforcing any applicable codes, where a pending or repeated violation continues to exist. The board and special magistrate would not exercise such powers concurrently, but rather the city commission would by resolution adopted from time to time, specify whether the board or the special magistrate is authorized to exercise such powers. This division is specifically authorized by F.S. ch. 162, known as the Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act. 
(Code 1960, § 29B-1; Ord. No. 020196, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 121102, § 1, 8-1-13) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.02.  
Sec. 2-377. - Applicability; jurisdiction. 
(a)  The Gainesville Code Enforcement Board shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide cases in which violations are alleged of any provisions of the following provisions of this Code of Ordinances as they may exist or may hereafter be amended by ordinance: 
(1)  Chapter 6, Article II, "Building Code;" 
(2)  Chapter 6, Article III, "Electrical Code;" 
(3)  Chapter 6, Article IV, "Plumbing Code;" 
(4)  Chapter 6, Article V, "Gas Code;" 
(5)  Chapter 6, Article VI, "Mechanical Code;" 
(6)  Chapter 6, Article VII, "Swimming Pools;" 
(7)  Chapter 6, Article IX, "Downtown Minimum Property Standards;" 
(8)  Chapter 10, "Fire Prevention and Protection;" 
(9)  Chapter 13, "Housing and Commercial Building Codes;" 
(10)  Chapter 16, Article II, "Dangerous Building and Hazardous Land Code;" 
(11)  Chapter 16, Article III, "Perilous Land Code;" 
(12)  Chapter 16, Article IV, "Mosquito Breeding Grounds;" 
(13)  Chapter 23, "Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places;" 
(14)  Chapter 25, Article III, "Business Tax;" 
(15)  Chapter 26, Article III, Division 5, "Abandoned, Wrecked, Nonoperating Vehicles;" 
(16)  Chapter 27, Article III, "Solid Waste Disposal;" 
(17)  Chapter 27, Article IV, Sections 27-180 through 27-182.2, "Sewerage;" 
(18)  Chapter 30, "Land Development Code;" 
(19)  Chapter 14.5, Article I, "Landlord Permits;" 
(20)  Chapter 14.5, Article II, "Merchandising of Tobacco Products." 
(b)  Any alleged violation of the aforesaid provisions may also be enforced in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1960, § 29B-2; Ord. No. 3566, § 1, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 3866, § 4, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 980470, § 2, 10-12-98; Ord. No. 990698, § 2, 1-10-00; Ord. No. 990442, § 4, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 020023, § 2, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 031205, § 1, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 070022, § 1, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 140292 , § 1, 7-21-16)  
Sec. 2-378. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
Board shall mean the Gainesville Code Enforcement Board. 
City shall mean the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
Clerk or clerk of the board shall mean the administrative staff person in the city responsible for the preparation, development and coordination of all administrative and case management services necessary for the proper functioning of the board. 
Code shall mean any of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Gainesville, Florida, as described in section 2-377 above. 
Code inspector or code officer shall mean any employee or other agent of the city designated by law, ordinance, the city manager, or the general manager for utilities, whose duties are to ensure compliance and enforce city codes or ordinances. 
Commission shall mean the city commission which is the legislative body of the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
Special magistrate shall mean a person authorized to hold quasi-judicial hearings and assess fines against violators of the City Code of Ordinances and such other authority as may be conferred by F.S. ch. 162, or any other law. 
(Code 1960, § 29B-3; Ord. No. 3566, § 2, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 020196, § 2, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 031205, § 2, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 121102, § 1, 8-1-13) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.04.  
Sec. 2-379. - Composition. 
(a)  The board shall be composed of seven members and shall be appointed by the commission. The commission may appoint up to two alternate members for each board member to serve on the board in the absence of board members. The membership of each enforcement board shall, whenever possible, include: 
(1)  An architect; 
(2)  A business person; 
(3)  An engineer; 
(4)  A general contractor; 
(5)  A realtor; 
(6)  A subcontractor. 
(b)  Qualifications. Each member appointed to the board shall possess, in addition to experience or interest in the fields of zoning and building control, the following minimum qualifications at time of appointment: 
(1)  Any architect and any engineer so appointed shall be registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of architecture and engineering, respectively, or shall possess similar qualifications under the laws of other states or shall have actual experience deemed by the commission to be equivalent to such registration. 
(2)  Any general contractor or subcontractor so appointed shall possess a valid certificate of competency and business tax receipt, recognized and accepted under the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city regulating the business of contracting or subcontracting and where required, state registration as a contractor or subcontractor, or shall possess similar qualifications under the laws of other states, or shall have actual experience deemed by the commission to be equivalent to such certification. 
(3)  Any realtor shall be licensed under the laws of the state which license a real estate broker as either a broker or a salesperson or shall possess similar qualifications under the laws of other states or shall have actual experience deemed by the commission to be equivalent to the licensing, and shall hold a current and valid business tax receipt issued by the city. 
(4)  Any businessperson shall be actively engaged in any lawful business within the city, and shall hold a current and valid business tax receipt issued by the city, or shall be an officer or employee of a business entity holding a current and valid business tax receipt issued by the city. 
(5)  Each member of the board shall be a resident of the city. 
(6)  No person shall be eligible for appointment to the board should the person have pending, either before the board or in any county, circuit or appellate court of the state, a case concerning cited or proven violation of any of the codes or ordinances enumerated in section 2-377. The members shall serve in accordance with ordinances of the city and may be suspended and removed for cause as provided in such ordinances for removal of members of boards. 
(c)  All appointments after the initial appointments shall be made by the commission for a term of three years. 
(d)  Appointments to fill any vacancy to the board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. 
(e)  If any member fails to attend two of three successive meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chair, the board shall declare the member's office vacant, and the local governing body shall promptly fill such vacancy. Any member, who becomes a candidate for public elective office or becomes an employee of the city, shall automatically forfeit his/her membership. Should a member of the board be adjudicated guilty of a violation of any of the codes or ordinances enumerated in Division 6, Civil Citations or Division 8, Code Enforcement Board, the matter shall be placed on the next agenda of the city commission for a determination as to whether the member should be allowed to continue, be temporarily suspended, or be removed from the board. In making this determination, the city commission shall consider, among other things, the nature of the code or ordinance cited, the severity and extent of the cited violation and the past history of the member concerning previous violations of the subject codes or ordinances. 
(Code 1960, § 29B-4; Ord. No. 020196, § 3, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 070022, § 1, 6-25-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.05(1), (2).  
Sec. 2-380. - Organization. 
The members of the board shall elect a chair, who shall be a voting member, from among the members of the board. The presence of four or more members shall constitute a quorum of the board. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for such travel, mileage, and per diem expenses as may be authorized by the commission or as are otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1960, § 29B-5; Ord. No. 020196, § 4, 9-9-02) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.05(3).  
Secs. 2-381, 2-382. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 020196, §§ 5, 6, adopted Sept. 9, 2002, repealed §§ 2-381 and 2-382 which pertained to quorum and compensation, respectively, and derived from Code 1960, §§ 29B-6 and 29B-7.  
Sec. 2-383. - Powers of the board. 
The board shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings. 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Police department of the city or the sheriff of Alachua County may serve subpoenas. 
(3)  Subpoena evidence to its hearings. 
(4)  Take testimony under oath. 
(5)  Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance. 
(Code 1960, § 29B-8; Ord. No. 3566, § 3, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 020196, § 7, 9-9-02)  
Sec. 2-384. - Legal counsel. 
The commission shall appoint an attorney who is a member of The Florida Bar, either residing or practicing in the city, to represent and act as counsel to the code enforcement board, and such person shall attend all meetings of the board. The attorney shall be compensated as provided for by the commission. 
(Code 1960, § 29B-9) 
State Law reference— Authority to appoint legal counsel to the board, F.S. § 162.05(1).  
Sec. 2-385. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the code inspector to initiate enforcement proceedings of the various codes; however, no member of a board shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d), if a violation of the codes is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator and give him or her a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the code inspector shall notify the board and request a hearing. The board, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be hand delivered or mailed as provided in section 2-390 to said violator. In the case of notice provided under section 2-390(a), such shall be given at least seven days in advance of the hearing, not counting the day of the hearing. At the option of the board, notice may additionally be served by publication or posting as provided in section 2-390. If the violation is corrected and then recurs or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code inspector, the case may be presented to the board even if the violation has been corrected prior to the board hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(c)  If a repeat violation is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. The code inspector, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, shall notify the board and request a hearing. The board, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing and shall provide notice pursuant to section 2-390. In the case of notice provided under section 2-390(a), such shall be given at least seven days in advance of the hearing, not counting the day of the hearing. The case may be presented to the board even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the board hearing, and the notice shall so state. If the repeat violation has been corrected, the board retains the right to schedule a hearing to determine costs and impose the payment of reasonable enforcement fees upon the repeat violator. The repeat violator may choose to waive his or her rights to this hearing and pay said costs as determined by the board. 
(d)  If the code inspector has reason to believe a violation or the condition causing the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately notify the board and request a hearing. 
(e)  If the owner of property which is subject to an enforcement proceeding before the board transfers ownership of such property between the time the initial pleading was served and the time of the hearing, such owner shall: 
(1)  Disclose, in writing, the existence and the nature of the proceeding to the prospective transferee. 
(2)  Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the pleadings, notices, and other materials relating to the code enforcement proceeding received by the transferor. 
(3)  Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee that the new owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and with orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding. 
(4)  File a notice with the code enforcement official of the transfer of the property, with the identity and address of the new owner and copies of the disclosures made to the new owner, within five days after the date of the transfer. A failure to make the disclosures described in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) before the transfer creates a rebuttable presumption of fraud. If the property is transferred before the hearing, the proceeding shall not be dismissed, but the new owner shall be provided a reasonable period of time to correct the violation before the hearing is held. 
(Code 1960, § 29B-10; Ord. No. 3566, § 4, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 020196, § 8, 9-9-02) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.06.  
Sec. 2-386. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 020196, § 9, adopted Sept. 9, 2002, repealed § 2-386 which pertained to initiation of actions and derived from Code 1960, § 29B-11; Ord. No. 3179, § 2, adopted Nov. 18, 1985; and Ord. No. 3566, § 5, adopted Sept. 18, 1989.  
Sec. 2-387. - Hearing; proceedings; orders. 
(a)  Upon request of the code inspector, or at such other times as may be necessary, the chair of the board may call a hearing of an enforcement board; a hearing also may be called by written notice signed by at least three members of the seven-member board. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings by the board, and all hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public and any person whose interests may be affected by the matter before the board shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The commission shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by each board for the proper performance of its duties. The chairperson of the board shall provide the clerk of the board with sufficient signed and blank witness and document subpoenas to be provided to alleged violators and the code inspector for the purpose of having witnesses and records subpoenaed. The alleged violator shall pay the board for each subpoena served at his or her request. 
(b)  The board shall proceed to hear the cases on the agenda for that day. Each case before the board shall be presented by the city's code inspector. The board shall take testimony from the code inspector and alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. All relevant evidence shall be admitted if, in the opinion of the board, it is the type of evidence upon which reasonable and responsible persons would normally rely in the conduct of business affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make the evidence inadmissible over objections in civil actions. The chairperson of the board may exclude irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence. Hearsay evidence may be accepted for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but such hearsay evidence shall not in and of itself be considered sufficient to support a finding or decision unless the evidence would be admissible over objections in a civil action. Each party to the hearing shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, introduce exhibits, cross-examine opposing witnesses, impeach witnesses and rebut evidence. The alleged violator has the right to be represented by an attorney at any board hearing. All testimony before the board shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The alleged violator or the city may cause the proceedings to be recorded by a certified court reporter or by a certified recording instrument. The burden of proof shall be with the code inspector, to show by the greater weight of the evidence that a code violation exists and that the alleged violator committed or was responsible for the violation. 
(c)  If notice has been provided to an alleged violator of the formal hearing, a hearing may be conducted and an order rendered in the absence of the violator. The board may, for good cause shown, postpone or continue a formal hearing upon a majority vote of those members present and voting. The board shall in every proceeding make a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall issue findings of fact, based on evidence of record and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with powers granted herein. The finding shall be by motion approved by a majority of those members present and voting, except that at least four members of the board, must vote in order for the action to be official. Every enforcement order shall be signed by the chairperson, or in his/her absence, the vice-chairperson, and shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board. A copy of the signed order shall be sent by regular mail, within five working days of the hearing, or where hand delivery would be effective, by hand delivery by the code inspector, to the violator, within five working days of the hearing. If the city prevails in prosecuting a case before the board, it shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred in prosecuting the case before the board and such costs may be included in the lien authorized under section 2-388.1. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed and, under the conditions specified in section 2-388.1, the cost of repairs and/or other remedy may be included along with the fine if the order is not complied with by said date. A certified copy of such order may be recorded in the public records of the county and shall constitute notice to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns if the violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding upon the violator and, if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns. If an order is recorded in the public records pursuant to this subsection and the order is complied with by the date specified in the order, the board shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required to issue such an order acknowledging compliance. 
(Code 1960, § 29B-12; Ord. No. 3179, § 3, 11-18-85; Ord. No. 3566, § 6, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 000928, § 1, 3-26-01; Ord. No. 020196, § 10, 9-9-02) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.09.  
Sec. 2-388. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 020196, § 11, adopted Sept. 9, 2002, repealed § 2-388 which pertained to hearing procedures and derived from Code 1960, § 29B-13.  
Sec. 2-388.1. - Administrative fines; costs of repair; liens. 
(a)  The board, upon notification by the code inspector that an order of the board has not been complied with by the set time or upon finding that a repeat violation has been committed, may order the violator to pay a fine in an amount specified in this section for each day the violation continues past the date set by the board for compliance or, in the case of a repeat violation, for each day the repeat violation continues, beginning with the date the repeat violation is found to have occurred by the code inspector. In addition, if the violation is a violation that presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the board shall notify the city manager through the commission, which may make all reasonable repairs or undertake such other remedies which are required to bring the property into compliance or eliminate the violation, and the board charge the violator with the reasonable cost of such along with the fine imposed pursuant to this section. Undertaking such repairs or remedies does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the city to make further repairs or to maintain the property and does not create any liability against the city or its agents or assigns for any damages to the property if such repairs or other remedies were completed or undertaken in good faith. 
(b)  A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $1,000.00 per day per violation for the first violation and shall not exceed $5,000.00 per day per violation for a repeat violation, and, in addition, may include all costs of repairs pursuant to subsection (a). However, if the board finds the violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may impose a fine not to exceed $15,000.00 per violation. 
(c)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the board shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation; 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(d)  The board may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this section. 
(e)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine, or a fine plus repair costs and/or remediation, shall be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order shall be enforceable in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including execution and levy against the personal property of the violator, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant to this part shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this section runs in favor of the city, and the commission may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this section. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the board may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on the lien or to sue to recover a money judgment for the amount of the lien plus accrued interest or the city may authorize a collection agency to enforce and collect upon the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this part may be foreclosed on real property, which is a homestead under section 4, Article X of the State Constitution. The money judgment provisions of this section shall not apply to real property or personal property, which is covered under section 4, Article X of the State Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 3566, § 7(29B-13.1), 9-18-89; Ord. No. 020196, § 12, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 051162, § 1, 7-10-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3566, § 7, adopted Sept. 18, 1989, amended the 1960 Code by the addition of § 29B-13.1, said provisions being included herein at the discretion of the editor as § 2-388.1.  
Sec. 2-388.2. - Duration of lien. 
No lien provided under this division shall continue for a period longer than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action is commenced pursuant to section 2-388.1 of the Code, in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien or for a money judgment, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee, that it incurs in the action. The city commission shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(Ord. No. 020196, § 13, 9-9-02)  
Sec. 2-389. - Appeals. 
An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final administrative order of the board to the circuit court in Alachua County. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the board. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Code 1960, § 29B-14; Ord. No. 3179, § 4, 11-18-85); Ord. No. 020196, § 14, 9-9-02) 
State Law reference— Appeals, F.S. § 162.11.  
Sec. 2-390. - Notices. 
(a)  All notices required by this part shall be provided to the alleged violator by: 
(1)  Certified mail, return receipt requested, provided if such notice is sent under this paragraph to the owner of the property in question at the address listed in the tax collector's office for tax notices, and at any other address provided to the city by such owner and is returned as unclaimed or refused, notice may be provided by posting as described in subparagraph (c) and by first class mail directed to the addresses furnished to the local government with a properly executed proof of mailing or affidavit confirming the first class mailing; 
(2)  Hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer, code inspector, or other person designated by the city; 
(3)  Leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above 15 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice; or 
(4)  In the case of commercial premises, leaving the notice with the manager or other person in charge. 
(b)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (a), at the option of the board, notice may also be served by publication or posting, as follows: 
(1)  Such notice shall be published once during each week for four consecutive weeks (four publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the board is located. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under F.S. ch. 50 for legal and official advertisements. 
(2)  Proof of publication shall be made as provided in F.S. §§ 50.041 and 50.051. 
(c)  In lieu of publication as described in subsection (b), such notice may be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing, or prior to the expiration of any deadline contained in the notice, in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be, in the case of municipalities, at the primary municipal government office, in the city. Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. 
(d)  Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (a). Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (a), together with proof of publication or posting as provided in subsection (b) and (c), shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this part have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Code 1960, § 29B-15; Ord. No. 020196, § 15, 9-9-02) 
State Law reference— Subpoena power of code enforcement board, F.S. § 162.08.  
Sec. 2-391. - Special magistrates. 
(a)  Alternative proceedings. In lieu of having the code enforcement board hear and decide code violations, the city commission may appoint one or more special magistrates to hear and dispose of such matters. Special magistrates shall have the same status, jurisdiction and authority as the code enforcement board. All references to the code enforcement board in the Gainesville Code of Ordinances shall apply to the special magistrate, except that no section 2-384 legal counsel shall be appointed for magistrate hearings. 
(b)  Minimum qualifications. The minimum qualifications to be eligible for service as a special magistrate are as stated below. In addition, the city may specify further required qualifications in its solicitation for special magistrates. 
(1)  Be an active member in good standing of the Florida Bar with a minimum of five years recent experience practicing law, which experience shall include litigation and administrative hearing experience. 
(2)  Reside in Alachua County. 
(3)  Not be an employee of the city or hold any office with the city government, nor hold any other elective or appointive office in the county or state while serving as special magistrate. 
(4)  Comply with the Code of Ethics of the State of Florida. 
(c)  Solicitation and appointment. Eligible candidates for special magistrate shall be solicited through a request for proposals, or other competitive solicitation pursuant to the city's purchasing policy and procedures. The selection committee shall evaluate and make recommendations to the city commission for the appointment of special magistrates. Terms of appointment and compensation for the special magistrates shall be established pursuant to a contract approved by the city commission. The city commission may appoint up to two alternate special magistrates to serve in the event of legal conflict of interests or in the absence of the special magistrate. 
(d)  Additional duties. The city commission may, by ordinance and contract, specify that the special magistrate appointed under this section shall perform additional duties as a hearing officer conducting quasi-judicial hearings on other matters concerning the City Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Removal. The special magistrate shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission and may be removed from service at any time, with or without cause, by a majority vote of a quorum of the city commission. 
(f)  Conflicts. In the event a legal conflict of interest prevents the special magistrate and any alternate special magistrate from hearing a case, the city manager, notwithstanding the language of section 2-391(b)(2) above, may contract with any current special magistrate of another Florida jurisdiction to hear the case. 
(Ord. No. 121102, § 2, 8-1-13) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of § 2-391 by Ord. No. 121102, Ord. No. 020196, § 16, adopted Sept. 9, 2002, repealed § 2-391 which pertained to calling of hearings and derived from Code 1960, § 29B-16.  
Sec. 2-391.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 020196, § 17, adopted Sept. 9, 2002, repealed § 2-391.1 which pertained to notices and derived from Ord. No. 3566, § 8(29B-16.1), adopted Sept. 18, 1989; Ord. No. 991278, § 1, adopted June 26, 2000.  
Sec. 2-392. - Other remedies. 
The provisions and procedures contained in this division shall be in addition and supplemental to any other remedies now existing or subsequently provided for by law, regarding violations of municipal ordinances. 
(Code 1960, § 29B-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.13.  
Secs. 2-393—2-405. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4074, § 2, adopted May 8, 1995, amended former §§ 2-406—2-409 and § 2-411, pertaining to downtown redevelopment agency, in their entirety to read as herein set out. Provisions of former §§ 2-406—2-409 and § 2-411 derived from Code 1960, §§ 6-1—6-3 and § 6-5, and Ord. No. 3412, § 1, 3-7-88. 
Cross reference— Downtown minimum property standards, § 6-231 et seq.; land development code, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Community redevelopment, F.S. § 163.330 et seq.; creation of community redevelopment agency, F.S. § 163.356. 
 
Sec. 2-406. - Community redevelopment agency. 
The city commission of the City of Gainesville shall constitute the community redevelopment agency. 
(Ord. No. 4074, § 2, 5-8-95)  
Sec. 2-407. - Membership and terms. 
Each member of the commission shall be a member of the community redevelopment agency during his or her term of office. 
(Ord. No. 4074, § 3, 5-8-95)  
Sec. 2-408. - Bylaws and internal governance. 
The community redevelopment agency shall formulate and may amend its own rules of procedure and written bylaws. A majority of the agency's membership shall constitute a quorum, and all action shall be taken by a vote of at least a majority of the quorum unless in any case the bylaws shall require a larger number. The agency shall designate a chair and vice-chair from among the members. The agency shall hold such meetings as are necessary to fulfill its redevelopment responsibilities and shall provide in its bylaws for holding special meetings. All meetings shall be given public notice and shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 4074, § 4, 5-8-95)  
Sec. 2-409. - Bylaws and governance. 
The community redevelopment agency may employ an executive director who shall serve at the pleasure of the members of the agency. The agency may appoint the city manager to serve as executive director and may request the services of such other technical experts, agents and employees of the city as it may require; or the agency may employ such technical experts, agents and employees as it may require and determine their qualifications, duties and compensation. For such legal service as it may require, the agency may employ or retain its own counsel and legal staff or utilize the services of the law department. 
The agency shall create an advisory board to represent each of the districts within the community redevelopment area. To the extent possible members of each advisory board should reside or work in the district to which he or she is appointed. Each board will serve in an informal advisory capacity. Spending authority will reside with the community redevelopment agency. Staff support for the advisory boards will be under the direction of the executive director of the community redevelopment agency. 
The agency shall file with the city commission and with the auditor general on or before March 31 of each year, a report of its activities for the preceding calendar year, which report shall include a complete financial statement setting forth its assets, liabilities, income and operating expense as of the end of the calendar year. At the time of filing the report, the agency shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the community a notice to the effect that the report has been filed with the city and the report is available for inspection during business hours in the office of the clerk of the city commission and in the office of the agency. 
(Ord. No. 4074, § 5, 5-8-95)  
Sec. 2-410. - Boundaries of the Downtown Expansion redevelopment area. 
(a)  The following described area has been designated as a slum or blighted area and found to be appropriate for a community redevelopment project by Resolution No. R81-74 passed September 21, 1981 and Resolution 001008 passed February 26, 2001. The area described in subsections (b) and (c) shall be the community redevelopment area in which the agency shall undertake activities for the elimination and prevention of the development and spread of slums and blight in accordance with this division. 
(b)  The area shall consist of all the territory lying within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of NE 6th Avenue and NE 1st Street proceed South on NE 1st Street to NE 2nd Avenue; thence run east on NE 2nd Avenue to NE Boulevard; thence run South along NE Boulevard and Sweetwater Branch to SE 4th Place; thence run West on SE 4th Place to SE 2nd Street; thence run South on SE 2nd Street to SE 5th Avenue; thence West on SE 5th Avenue to South Main Street, thence North on South Main Street to SW 4th Avenue; thence West on SW 4th Avenue to SW 5th Street; thence North on SW 5th Street to SW 2nd Avenue; thence West on SW 2nd Avenue to SW 5th Terrace; thence North on SW 5th Terrace to West University Avenue; thence West on West University Avenue to NW 6th Street; thence North on NW 6th Street to NW 2nd Avenue; thence East on NW 2nd Avenue to a point 150 feet west of the west right-of-way line of NW 2nd Street (being also a point on the west line of Lots 1 and 2 of Block 18 of the Baird Replat as per Plat Book "A", page 96, being a replat of a portion of Brush's Addition as per Deed Book "O", page 218, all as recorded in the Public Records of Alachua County, Florida); thence run North to NW 3rd Avenue; thence run East on NW 3rd Avenue to NW 1st Street; thence run North on NW 1st Street to NW 6th Avenue; thence run East on NW and NE 6th Avenue to the point-of-beginning, and close. All lying and being in the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
Less and except the following described parcels: 
1.  Lot #9 and the west 170 feet of Lot #4 of Brush's Addition, as per Deed Book "O", page 218, a replat of Block 28 as per Plat Book "A", page 71, of the Public Records of Alachua County, Florida, also known as tax parcel #14536 and #14544 and the south 104 feet of tax parcel #14537; 
2.  Commence 138 feet east and 43 feet south of the northwest corner of the Southeast one-quarter (SE ¼) of Section 5, Township 10 South, Range 20 East, for the point-of-beginning; thence run South along the east right-of-way line of SW 5th Terrace 581 feet more-or-less to its intersection with the north right-of-way line of SW 2nd Avenue; thence run East along the said north line of SW 2nd Avenue, 160.95 feet; thence run North 285.5 feet; thence run West 25.9 feet; thence run North 296 feet more-or-less, to the south right-of-way line of West University Avenue; thence run West 118.9 feet along said south right-of-way line to the point-of-beginning, and close. Said area also known as tax parcel #12939, 12940, 12942 and 12942-1; and 
3.  Lots 5 and 8 of Block 2; Lots 1 and 4 of Block 2, (less any right-of-way); Lot 5 and the South one half (S½) of Lot 6, Block 1, all in the Parrish and Parrish Addition to Gainesville, as per Plat book "A", page 107 of the Public Records of Alachua County, Florida. 
(c)  The area shall consist of all the territory lying within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of NE 2nd Avenue and the centerline of NE Boulevard, proceed east along the centerline of NE 2nd Avenue to the centerline of NE 7th Street; thence north along the centerline of NE 7th Street to the centerline of NE 3rd Avenue; thence east along the centerline of NE 3rd Avenue to the centerline of Waldo Road; thence south along the centerline of Waldo Road to the centerline of the abandoned Seaboard Coast Railroad right-of-way (being known as part of parcel number 12745-300); thence southwest along the centerline of said property to the centerline of SE 4th Street; thence southeast along the centerline of SE 4th Street to the centerline of SE 10th Avenue; thence southwest along the centerline of SE 10th Avenue to the western boundary of tax parcel 15706-001 according to the Alachua County Property Appraiser's records; thence south along the western boundary of 15706-001 to the centerline of a southeasterly extension of SE 10th Avenue; thence Northwest along said southeasterly extension and along the centerline of SE 10th Avenue to the centerline of S Main Street; thence north along the centerline of Main Street to the centerline of SW Depot Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of SW Depot Avenue to the centerline of SW 6th Street; thence north along the centerline of SW 6th Street to the south line of W University Avenue; thence east along the south line of W University Avenue 119 feet east of the east line of SW 5th Terrace; thence south 296 feet; thence run East 25.9 feet; thence run South 285.5 feet to the north line of SW 2nd Avenue; thence east along the north line SW 2nd Avenue to the centerline of SW 5th Street; thence south along the centerline of SW 5th Street to the centerline of SW 4th Avenue; thence east along the centerline of SW 4th Avenue to the centerline of S Main Street; thence south along the centerline of Main Street to the centerline of SE 5th Avenue, thence east along the centerline of SE 5th Avenue to the centerline of SE 2nd Street; thence north along the centerline of SE 2nd Street to the centerline of SE 4th Place; thence east to the southerly extension of the east line of Lot 7 of Block 2; thence run North along said southerly extension and along the east line of Lot 7 and Lot 6 to the northeast corner of Lot 6; thence run East to the east line of SE 5th Street; thence run South along said east line to the northwest corner of Lot 5 of Block 1; thence run East along the north line of said Lot 5 and along the north line of Lot 6 of Block 1, (all in the Parrish and Parrish Addition to Gainesville, as per Plat Book "A", page 107 of the Public Records of Alachua Count, Florida) to the centerline of Sweetwater Branch; thence run north along said Sweetwater Branch and along the centerline of NE Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of NE 2nd Avenue; being the Point-of-Beginning, and close 
TOGETHER WITH THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PARCELS: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of NW 6th Street and NW 2nd Avenue proceed East along the centerline of NW 2nd Avenue to the east property line of tax parcel 14536; thence south along the east property line of tax parcel 14536 to the north property line of tax parcel 14544; thence East to the west line of tax parcel 14543; thence run South along said west line to the north line of NW 1st Avenue; thence west along the north line of NW 1st Avenue to the centerline of NW 6th Street; thence North along the centerline of NW 6th Street to the Point-of-Beginning. 
AND: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of NW 1st Street and NW 8th Avenue proceed east along the centerline of NW 8th Avenue to the centerline of NE 1st Street; thence south along the centerline of NW 1st Street to the centerline of NE 6th Avenue; thence west along the centerline of NE 6th Avenue to the centerline of NW 1st Street; thence north along the centerline of NW 1st Street to the Point-of-Beginning. 
(Code 1960, § 6-4; Ord. No. 960249, § 1, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 002142, § 1, 12-10-01)  
Sec. 2-410.1. - Boundaries of the N.W. Fifth Avenue Neighborhood/Pleasant Street area. 
Commence at the intersection of N.W. 8th Avenue and N.W. 1st Street as the Point-of-Beginning: thence run South along N.W. 1st Street to N.W. 3rd Avenue: thence run West to a point 150 feet west of the west right-of-way line of N.W. 2nd Street (being also a point on the west line of Lots 1 and 2 of Block 18 of the Baird Replat as per Plat Book "A", page 96, being a replat of a portion of Brush's Addition as per Deed Book "O", page 218 all as recorded in the Public Records of Alachua County. Florida); thence run south to N.W. 2nd Avenue; thence run west along N.W. 2nd Avenue to N.W 6th Street: thence run north along N.W. 6th Street to N.W. 3rd Avenue; thence run west along N.W. 3rd Avenue to N.W. 13th Street; thence run north along N.W. 13th Street to N.W. 8th Avenue; thence run east along N.W. 8th Avenue to its intersection with N.W. 1st Street being the point-of-beginning, and close. All lying and being in the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 960248, § 1, 10-28-96)  
Sec. 2-410.2. - Boundaries of the College Park/University Heights community redevelopment area. 
(a)  The following described area has been designated as a slum or blighted area and found to be appropriate for a community redevelopment project by Resolution No. R-94-63 passed September 26, 1994 and Resolution 050067 passed June 13, 2005. The area described in subsections (b) and (c) shall be the Community Redevelopment Area in which the agency shall undertake activities for the elimination and prevention of the development and spread of slums and blight in accordance with this division. 
(b)  The area shall consist of all the territory lying within the following boundaries: 
Commence at the point of intersection with a southerly extension of the east right-of-way line of S.W. 6th Street and the south line of the abandoned Seaboard Coastline Railroad right-of-way (a/k/a the Department of Transportation Depot Avenue Rail Trail) as the point-of-beginning; thence run south and southwesterly along said south line to the west right-of-way line of S.W. 13th Street, thence run north along said west right-of-way line to the south right-of-way line of West University Avenue; thence run west along said south right-of-way line to the west right-of-way line of N.W. 20th Terrace; thence run north along said west right-of-way line to the north right-of-way line of N.W. 3rd Avenue; thence run east along said north right-of-way line to the west right-of-way line of N.W. 20th Street; thence run north along said west right-of-way to the north right-of-way line of N.W. 5th Avenue; thence run east along said north right-of-way line to the west right-of-way line of N.W. 15th Street; thence run north along said west right-of-way line to the north right-of-way line of N.W. 7th Avenue; thence run east along said north right-of-way line to the west right-of-way line of N.W. 13th Street; thence run south along said west right-of-way line to the north right-of-way line of N.W. 3rd Avenue; thence run east along said north right-of-way line to the east right-of-way line of N.W. 6th Street; thence run south along said east right-of-way line to the intersection of a southerly extension of the east right-of-way line of S.W. 6th Street and the south line of the abandoned Seaboard Coastline Railroad right-of-wy (a/k/a the Department of Transportation Depot Avenue Rail Trail) being the point-of-beginning, and close. All lying and being in the city. 
(c)  The area shall consist of all the territory lying within the following boundaries: 
All of the platted and uplatted lands and rights-of-way lying within Section 8, Township 10 South, Range 20 East, Alachua County, Florida, lying south of the northerly rights-of-way line of the Southwest Depot Avenue (on its west end intersecting the northerly extension of the west right-of-way line of Southwest 13 th Street, and lying south of the northerly line of Parcel #15539-200-000 and an easterly extension thereof intersecting the northerly extension of the easterly right-of-way line of Main Street); and lying west of said easterly right-of-way line of South Main Street (on its north end intersecting the easterly extension of said northerly line of Parcel #15539-200-000, and on its south end intersecting the easterly extension of southerly right-of-way line of Southwest 16 th Avenue); and lying north of said southerly right-of-way line of Southwest 16th Avenue (or its east end intersecting the southerly extension of said easterly right-of-way line of South Main Street, and on its west end intersecting the southerly extension of the aforesaid west right-of-way line of Southwest 13 th Street); and lying east of said west right-of-way line of Southwest 13 th Street (on its south end intersecting the westerly extension of said southerly right-of-way line of Southwest 16 th Avenue, and on its north and intersecting the westerly extension of the aforesaid right-of-way line of Southwest Depot Avenue). All lying and being in the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 960728, § 2, 3-10-97; Ord. No. 050718, § 1, 12-19-05)  
Sec. 2-410.3. - Boundaries of the Eastside Community Redevelopment Area. 
(a)  The following described area has been designated as a slum or blighted area and found to be appropriate for a community redevelopment project by: Resolution No. 000728, passed November 27, 2000; Resolution 060217, passed July 10, 2006; Resolution 080712 and Resolution 080713, passed on January 15, 2009. The area described in subsections (b), (c), (d) and (e) shall be the community redevelopment area in which the agency shall undertake activities for the elimination and prevention of the development and spread of slums and blight in accordance with this division. 
(b)  The area shall consist of all the territory lying within the following boundaries: 
An area of land located in Sections 3, 4, 9, 33 and 34 of Township 10 South, Range 20 East of Alachua County, Florida, being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the southeast corner of the intersection of NE 15th Street and NE 16th Avenue, as the point-of-beginning; from said point-of-beginning run east along the south right-of-way line of said NE 16th Avenue (and an easterly extension thereof) to a point lying on the northeasterly right-of-way line of the abandoned Seaboard Coastline Railroad property (parcel number 10812-300-000) also known as the Rail-to-Trail property; thence run in a Southwesterly direction to a point on the south line of a City of Gainesville drainage ditch as per Official Record Book 573, page 33, of the Public Records of Alachua County, Florida; thence run along said south line to the east line of Section 34, Township 9 South, Range 20 East; thence run south along said east line to a point lying on the south right-of-way line of NE 8th Avenue; thence run west along said south right-of-way line to the east right-of-way line of NE 25th Street; thence run south along the east right-of-way line of said NE 25th Street to the south right-of-way line of East University Avenue; thence run west along said south right-of-way line of East University Avenue to the east right-of-way line of SE 21st Street; thence run south along said east right-of-way line of SE 21st Street to a point on an easterly extension of the south right-of-way line of SE 6th Avenue; thence run west along said south right-of-way line extension and along the south right-of-way line of SE 6th Avenue to the west right-of-way line of SE 17th Terrace; thence run north along said west right-of-way line of SE 17th Terrace to the south right-of-way line of SE 4th Avenue, thence run West along said south right-of-way line of SE 4th Avenue to the east right-of-way line of SE 15th Street; thence run south along said east right-of-way line of SE 15th Street to its intersection with the south line of Section 4, Township 10 South, Range 20 East; thence run west along said south right-of-way line of Section 4, Township 10 South, Range 20 East to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of SE 12th Street; thence run south 10 feet; thence run west to the east right-of-way line of SE 11th Street; thence run south along said east right-of-way line of SE 11th Street to an easterly extension of the south right-of-way line of SE 9th Avenue; thence run west along said southerly extension and along the south right-of-way line of SE 9th Avenue to a point lying 119 feet east of the east right-of-way of SE 7th Street (being also the east line of tax parcel number 16044-000-000); thence run south to the south right-of-way line of SE 9th Place and a westerly extension thereof to the west right-of-way line of SE 4th Street; thence run northwesterly along said westerly right-of-way line of SE 4th Street to the south right-of-way line of the abandoned Seaboard Coastline Railroad property, tax parcel number 12745-300-000 (also known as the Rail-to-Trail property); thence run easterly and northeasterly along said right-of-way line of the abandoned Seaboard Coastline Railroad property to the north right-of-way line of NE 3rd Avenue; thence run west along said north right-of-way line of NE 3rd Avenue to the east right-of-way line of NE 12th Court; thence run north along said east right-of-way line of NE 12th Court to a creek branch; thence run northwesterly along aid creek branch (being also the south line of tax parcel 12560-000-000) to the east line of Lot 1, Block 1, Range 5 of Doig and Robertson edition as per Deed Book "W", page 437, of the Public Records of Alachua County, Florida; thence run north to the south right-of-way line of NE 5th Avenue; thence run east along said south right-of-way line to a southerly extension of the east line of Sperry Heights, a subdivision as per Plat Book "E", page 1, of the Public Records of Alachua County, Florida; thence run northeasterly along said east line of Sperry Heights Subdivision to the south right-of-way line of NE 6th Place; thence run west along said south line of NE 6th Place to the west right-of-way line of NE 12th Street; thence run north along said west right-of-way line of NE 12th Street to the south right-of-way line of NE 8th Avenue; thence run east along said south right-of-way line of NE 8th Avenue to a southerly extension of the easterly right-of-way line of NE 14th Street; thence run northerly and northeasterly along said southerly extension and along said easterly right-of-way line of NE 14th Street and along the easterly right-of-way line of NE 15th Street to the southeast corner of the intersection of NE 15th Street and NE 16th Avenue, being the point-of-beginning, and close. All lying and being in the City of Gainesville, Florida; containing 952 acres more-or-less. 
(c)  The area shall consist of all the territory lying within the following boundaries: 
An area of land situated in sections 3, 9 and 10 of Township 10 South, Range 20 East of Alachua County, Florida, being more particularly described as follows: Commence at the intersection of the west right-of-way line of S.E. 21st Street and the north line of lot 104 of New Gainesville as recorded in plat book "A", page 66 of the public records of Alachua County, Florida (henceforth abbreviated PRACF), said point also being the southeasterly most corner of the existing Eastside Community Redevelopment Association East boundary line, and the point-of-beginning; thence run north along said east line and the west right-of-way line of S.E. 21st Street to the south right-of-way line of State Road 20 (also known as S.E. Hawthorne Road); thence leaving said east line run southeast along the south right-of-way line of State Road 20 to the northwest corner of tax parcel number 11344 also being that parcel described in Official Records Book (ORB) 2189, page 2886; thence run southwest and south along the west line of said tax parcel to the southwest corner of said tax parcel, said point being on the south line of lot 107 of the aforementioned New Gainesville and on the easterly extension of the north right-of-way line of S.E. 8th Avenue; thence run west along the south line of lots 107 thru 101 of said New Gainesville also being the easterly extension of the north right-of-way line of S.E. 8th Avenue and the north right-of-way line thereof to a point on the northerly extension of the west line of Lincoln Estates 2nd Addition as per plat book "G", page 36 of the PRACF; thence run south along the northerly extension of the west line of Lincoln Estates 2nd Addition and the west line thereof to the southwest corner of Lincoln Estates 2nd Addition, said point being on the north line of Lincoln Estates 1st Addition as per plat book "F", page 38 of the PRACF; thence run west along the north line of Lincoln Estates 1st Addition to the northwest corner of Lincoln Estates 1st Addition, said point being on the east line of Lincoln Estates as per plat book "F", page 19 PRACF; thence run north along the east line of said Lincoln Estates to the northeast corner thereof; thence run west along the north line of said Lincoln Estates to the northwest corner thereof also being a point on the east right-of-way line of S.E. 15th Street; thence run north along the east right-of-way line of S.E. 15th Street to the easterly extension of the north right-of-way line of S.E. 11th Avenue; thence run west along the easterly extension of the north right-of-way line of S.E. 11th Avenue and the north right-of-way line thereof and the westerly extension of the north right-of-way line thereof to the west right-of-way line of S.E. 12th Street; thence run south along the west right-of-way line of S.E. 12th Street to the north right-of-way line of S.E. 11th Avenue; thence run west along the north right-of-way line of S.E. 11th Avenue to the east right-of-way line of State Road 331 (also known as S.E. Williston Road); thence run southwesterly along the east right-of-way line of State Road 331 to the south right-of-way line of S.E. 13th Avenue; thence run east along the south right-of-way line of S.E. 13th Avenue to the west right-of-way line of S.E. 15th Street; thence run south along the west right-of-way line of S.E. 15th Street to the westerly extension of the south line of tax parcel number 16107-504 as described in ORB 495, page 247; thence run east along the westerly extension of the south line of said tax parcel and the south line thereof and north along the east line of said tax parcel to the northeast corner of said tax parcel, said point being on the south line of Wedgewood 1st Addition as per plat book "H", page 5 of the PRACF; thence run East along the south line and north along the east line of Wedgewood 1st Addition to the northeast corner thereof also being a point on the south right-of-way line of S.E. 15th Avenue; thence run east along the south right-of-way line of said S.E. 15th Avenue also being the north line of tax parcel number 16107-200 to the northeast corner of said tax parcel as described in ORB 1994, page 279 of the PRACF; thence run along the boundary of said tax parcel the following 6 courses: South to the northeast corner of the east one-half (½) of the southeast one-quarter (¼) of the southwest one quarter (¼) of section 10, Township 10 South, Range 20 East (E ½ of the S.E. ¼ of the SW ¼ of S10-T10S-R20E); thence west along the north line of said E ½ of the S.E. ¼ of the S.W. ¼ of S10-T10S-R20E to the northwest corner thereof; thence South along the west line of said E ½ of the S.E. ¼ of the SW ¼ of S10-T10S-R20E to the southwest corner thereof; thence West along the south line of said section 1O-T10S-R20E to the southeast corner of Chas Baltimore Subdivision, an unrecorded subdivision (with 2 current parcels described in ORB 2138, page 2076 and 1902, page 2536, respectively) also described as the south 420 feet of the west 210 feet of the SW ¼ of said S10-T10S-R20E and being a point on the north right-of-way line of S.E. 23 RD Place; thence north along the west line of Chas Baltimore Subdivision and the south 420 feet of the west 210 feet of said S 10-T10S-R19E to the northeast corner thereof; thence west along the north line of said Chas Baltimore Subdivision and the S 420 feet of the west 210 feet to a point on the east right-of-way line of S.E. 15 th Street; thence North along the east right-of-way, line of said S.E. 15 th Street to a point opposite of and perpendicular to the southeast corner of tax parcel number 15995-54 as described in ORB 229, page 31 of the PRACF, said corner also being on the northerly right-of-way line of S.E. 22 nd Avenue; thence leaving said boundary of tax parcel number 16107-200 run west to the southeast corner of said tax parcel number 15995-54; thence run along the southwesterly line of said tax parcel and along the said northerly right-of-way line of S.E. 22 nd Avenue northwesterly and west to a point on the east line of the former railroad right-of-way as described in ORB 2259, page 1142 of the PRACF; thence run northwesterly along the east line of the said former railroad right-of-way to an intersection with the northwest right-of-way line of State Road 331 (also known as S.E. Williston Road); thence run southwest along the northwest right-of-way line of State Road 331 to the south line of the Lester Robinson Property, an unrecorded subdivision as described in ORB 3256, page 447 of the PRACF; thence run west along said south line to the west line of said unrecorded subdivision, said west line also being the west line of section 9, Township 10 South, Range 20 East; thence run north along the west line of said section 9 to an intersection with the centerline of Sweetwater Branch; thence run northeast along the centerline of Sweetwater Branch to the north right-of-way line of S.E. 13th Avenue; thence run east along the north right-of-way line of S.E. 13th Avenue and the easterly extension thereof to the southerly extension of the east right-of-way line of S.E. 10th Street; thence run north along said southerly extension and the east right-of-way line of S.E. 10th Street to the north right-of-way line of S.E. 9th Avenue and a point on the southerly line of the existing Eastside Community Redevelopment Association Boundary; thence continue along said southerly line of the existing Eastside Community Redevelopment Association boundary the following seven courses: East along the north right-of-way line of S.E. 9th Avenue to the west right-of-way line of State Road 331 (also known as S.E. 11 th Street); thence north along the west right-of-way line of state road 331 to the north right-of-way line of S.E. 8th Avenue; thence East along the north right-of-way line of S.E. 8th Avenue to the west right-of-way line of S.E. 15th Street; thence north along the west right-of-way line of S.E. 15th Street to the westerly extension of the north right-of-way line of S.E. 4th Avenue; thence east along the westerly extension of the north right-of-way line of S.E. 4th Avenue and the north right-of-way line thereof to the northerly extension of the east right-of-way line of S.E. 17th Terrace; thence south along the northerly extension of the east right-of-way line of S.E. 17th Terrace, the east right-of-way line and a southerly extension thereof to the south right-of-way line of S.E. 6th Avenue, also being a point on the north line of lot 100 of the aforementioned New Gainesville; thence east along the south line of lots 100 thru 104 of said New Gainesville also being the south right-of-way line of S.E. 6th Avenue and the easterly extension thereof to the west right-of-way line of S.E. 21st Street and the point-of-beginning. 
(d)  The area shall consist of all the territory lying within the following boundaries: 
A tract of land situated in Sections 26, 27 and 34, Township 9 South, Range 20 East, Alachua County, Florida being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the intersection of the easterly projection of the south right-of-way line of Northeast 16th Avenue and the northeasterly right-of-way line of the abandoned Seaboard Coastline Railroad property [now being the easterly right-of-way line of Waldo Road (State Road 24)] and the point of beginning, said corner being on the existing CRA boundary line; thence leaving said CRA boundary line, run northerly along said easterly right-of-way line of Waldo Road to the southerly right-of-way line of Northeast 39th Avenue (State Road 222); thence run southeasterly along said southerly right-of-way line to the southerly projection of the East line of the lands as described in ORB 796, Page 238, of the Public Records of Alachua County, Florida (hereafter abbreviated ORB _____, Page _____ PRACF); thence run northerly along said projection and the East line thereof to the Northeast corner of said lands; thence run West, North, and West along the northerly lines of said lands to the Northwest corner of said lands, said corner being on the easterly right-of-way line of Waldo Road (State Road 24); thence run northwesterly to the Northeast corner of the lands as described in ORB 1994, Page 1444, PRACF, said corner being on the westerly right-of-way line of said Waldo Road; thence run Northwest along the North line of said lands and the North lines of the lands as described in ORB 943, Page 108, PRACF and the lands as described in ORB 1000, Page 707, PRACF to the Northwest corner of the lands as described in ORB 1000, Page 707, PRACF; thence run Southwest along the West line of said lands to the Southwest corner of said lands, said corner being on the North right-of-way line of Northeast 39th Avenue (State Road 222); thence run Southwest to the Northwest corner of Seaboard Industrial Park, a plat as recorded in Plat Book "G" Pages 73 and 74 PRACF, said corner being on the southerly right-of-way line of said Northeast 39th Avenue (State Road 222); thence run southeasterly along said southerly right-of-way line and North line of said plat to the Northeast corner of Lot 13 of said plat; thence run southerly along the East line of said Lot 13 to the Southeast corner of said Lot 13; thence run southerly to the Northeast corner of Lot 12 of said plat; thence run southerly along the east line of said Lot 12 and the West line of the lands as described in ORB 3323, Page 196, PRACF to the Southwest corner of said lands; thence run East along the South line of said lands to the Southeast corner of said lands, said corner being on the West line of Lot 16 of said plat; thence run South along said West line and the West line of Lot 17 of said plat to the Southwest corner of said Lot 17, said corner being on the North right-of-way line of Northeast 31st Avenue; thence run West along said North right-of-way line to the northerly projection of the West right-of-way line of Northeast 21st Way; thence run Southwest along said projection and the West line thereof to the beginning of a curve concave Northwest marking the Southeast corner of Lot 119 of Hugh Edwards Industrial Center, a plat as recorded in Plat Book "E", Page 41, PRACF; thence run Southeast to the Northeast corner of Lot 134 of said plat; thence run Southwest along the East line of said Lot 134 and the East lines of Lots 135, 138, 139, 142, 143, 145, 146, 147, and 148 to the North right-of-way line of Northeast 23rd Avenue; thence run West along said North right-of-way line to the northerly projection of the West right-of-way line of a drainage right-of-way as shown in Carol Estates East, a plat as recorded in Plat Book "F", Page 10, PRACF; thence run South along said northerly projection and said West right-of-way line to the South right-of-way line of Northeast 21st Place; thence run Southeast along said South right-of-way line to the West right-of-way line of Northeast 16th Way; thence run Southwest along said West right-of-way line and the southerly extension thereof to a point on the South right-of-way line of Northeast 16th Avenue, said point being on the existing Eastside CRA boundary line; thence run East along said existing Eastside CRA boundary line and said South right-of-way line and the easterly extension thereof to its intersection with the northeasterly right-of-way line of the abandoned Seaboard Coastline Railroad property [now being the easterly right-of-way line of Waldo Road (State Road 24)] and the point of beginning. 
(e)  The area shall consist of all the territory lying within the following boundaries: 
A tract of land situated in Sections 2, 3, and 10, Township 10 South, Range 20 East, Alachua County, Florida being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the Northeast corner of Section 10, Township 10 South, Range 20 East, Alachua County, Florida, said corner being on the existing City of Gainesville limit line per Ordinance #3865 and the point of beginning; thence run South along the East line of said Section 10 and said City of Gainesville limit line to a point on the southerly right-of-way line of Hawthorne Road (State Road No. 20), said point being on the existing CRA boundary line; thence leaving said City of Gainesville limit line run northwesterly along said southerly right-of-way line and existing CRA boundary line to the southerly projection of the easterly right-of-way line of Southeast 21st Street; thence run North along said projection and the easterly right-of-way line thereof to the southerly right-of-way line of East University Avenue (State Road 26); thence run East along said southerly right-of-way line to the southerly projection of the easterly right-of-way line of Northeast 25th Street; thence run North along said southerly projection to the northerly right-of-way line of said East University Avenue; thence leaving said existing CRA boundary line, run East along said northerly right-of-way line to a point lying 1481.74 feet East of the West line of Section 2, Township 10 South, Range 20 East and being on the existing City of Gainesville limit line as per Ordinance #3865; thence run southerly along the centerline of a drainage easement according to said ordinance to the South line of said Section 2; thence run West along said South line of Section 2 to the Southwest corner of Section 2, said corner also being the Northeast corner of Section 10, Township 10 South, Range 20 East and the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 002143, § 2, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 060336, § 1, 9-11-06; Ord. No. 100405, § 1, 11-18-10)  
Sec. 2-411. - Powers. 
The community redevelopment agency shall have all the powers necessary and convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of F.S. Ch. 163, Part III including all powers listed in F.S. § 163.370(1). 
(Code 1960, § 6-5; Ord. No. 4074, § 6, 5-8-95)  
Sec. 2-412. - Downtown expansion redevelopment; trust fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a trust fund, to be separately administered and accounted for, to be known as the downtown expansion redevelopment trust fund. 
(b)  The trust fund shall be used for the deposit of all tax increment funds obtained by the Gainesville Community Redevelopment Agency to finance or refinance community redevelopment projects within the downtown expansion community redevelopment area and all such funds shall be used to carry out redevelopment activities included in the community redevelopment plan. 
(c)  Until all redevelopment projects included in the downtown expansion community redevelopment plan are completed and paid for, the trust fund shall receive the annual tax increment, as hereinafter defined, from all taxing authorities except school districts and those taxing authorities listed in F.S. § 163.387(2)(c), for the area described in section 2-410. 
(d)  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.387, the tax increment to be allocated annually to the trust fund shall be that amount equal to 95 percent of the difference between: 
(1)  The amount of ad valorem taxes levied each year by all taxing authorities except school districts and those taxing authorities listed in F.S. § 163.387(2)(c), exclusive of any debt service millage on taxable real property contained within the geographic boundaries of the community redevelopment area; and 
(2)  The amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year, by or for all taxing authorities except school districts and those taxing authorities listed in F.S. § 163.387(2)(c), exclusive of any debt service millage upon the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the community redevelopment area described in section 2-410(b) and (c), as shown upon the most recent assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by each taxing authority prior to the effective date of the ordinances providing for the funding of the trust fund for the areas described in section 2-410(b) and section 2-410(c) respectively. 
(e)  It is hereby determined that the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the area redescribed in section 2-410(b), as shown by the most recent assessment roll prior to the effective date of the ordinance adopting the downtown redevelopment plan was $18,779,230.00. It is hereby determined that the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the area described in section 2-410(c), as shown by the most recent assessment roll prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 002142 (December 10, 2001) was $29,813,210. 
(f)  Until such time as the redevelopment plan is completed and paid for, the city shall, and all other taxing authorities except school districts and those taxing authorities listed in F.S. § 163.387(2)(c) are called upon to, annually appropriate to the trust fund the tax increment described above for the area described in section 2-410(b) and (c). 
(Code 1960, § 6-6; Ord. No. 960249, § 2, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 002142, § 2, 12-10-01)  
Sec. 2-413. - College Park/University Heights CRA; trust fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a trust fund, to be separately administered and accounted for, to be known as the College Park/University Heights redevelopment trust fund. 
(b)  The trust fund shall be used for the deposit of all tax increment funds obtained by the community redevelopment agency to finance or refinance community redevelopment projects within the College Park/University Heights community redevelopment area and all such funds shall be used to carry out redevelopment activities included in the community redevelopment plan for the College Park/University Heights community redevelopment area. 
(c)  Until all redevelopment projects included in the College Park/University Heights Community Redevelopment Plan are completed and paid for, the trust fund shall receive the annual tax increment, as hereinafter defined, from all taxing authorities except school districts and those taxing authorities listed in F.S. § 163.387(2)(c) for the area described in section 2-410.2(b) and (c). 
(d)  Except for Alachua County and except for Alachua County school district(s) and those taxing authorities listed as exempt in F.S. § 163.387(2)(c), pursuant to F.S. § 163.387, the tax increment to be contributed annually to the trust fund shall be that amount equal to 95 percent of the difference between: 
(1)  The amount of the ad valorem taxes levied each year by each taxing authority exclusive of any debt service millage on taxable real property contained within the geographic boundaries of the College Park/University Heights Community Redevelopment Area described in Section 410.2(b) and (c); and 
(2)  The amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which tax is levied each year by each taxing authority exclusive of any debt service millage, upon the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the College Park/University Heights Community Redevelopment Area described in section 2-410.2(b) and (c) as shown upon the most recent assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by each taxing authority prior to the effective date of the ordinances providing for the funding of the trust fund for the areas described in section 2-410.2(b) and section 2-410.2(c) respectively. 
(e)  As to Alachua County, the tax increment to be contributed annually to the trust fund shall be that amount equal to 95 percent of the difference between: 
(1)  The amount of the ad valorem taxes levied each year by the City of Gainesville exclusive of any Alachua County debt service millage on taxable real property contained within the geographic boundaries of the College Park/University Heights Community Redevelopment Area described in Section 410.2(b) and (c); and 
(2)  The amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which tax is levied each year by the City of Gainesville exclusive of any Alachua County debt service millage, upon the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the College Park/University Heights Community Redevelopment Area described in section 2-410.2(b) and (c) as shown upon the most recent assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by each taxing authority prior to the effective date of the ordinances providing for the funding of the trust fund for the areas described in section 2-410.2(b) and section 2-410.2(c) respectively. 
(f)  It is hereby determined that the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the area described in section 2-410.2(b), as shown by the most recent assessment roll prior to the effective date of the ordinance, initially providing for the College Park/University Heights trust fund was $73,462,770.00. It is hereby determined that the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the area described in section 2-410.2(c), as shown by the most recent assessment roll prior to the effective date of this ordinance was $43,710,250. 
(g)  Until such time as the College Park/University Heights Community Redevelopment Plan is completed and paid for, the city shall, and all other taxing authorities except school districts and those taxing authorities listed in F.S. § 163.387(2)(c) are called upon to, annually appropriate to the trust fund the tax increment described above for the area described in section 2-410.2 (b) and (c). 
(Ord. No. 4065, § 1, 3-13-95; Ord. No. 960728, § 1, 3-10-97; Ord. No. 050718, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 180104 , § 1, 10-18-2018)  
Sec. 2-414. - N.W. Fifth Avenue Neighborhood/Pleasant Street; trust fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a trust fund, to be separately administered and accounted for, to be known as the N.W. Fifth Avenue Neighborhood/Pleasant Street redevelopment trust fund. 
(b)  The trust fund shall be used for the deposit of all tax increment funds obtained by the community redevelopment agency of the city to finance or refinance community redevelopment projects within the N.W. Fifth Avenue Neighborhood/Pleasant Street community redevelopment area and all such funds shall be used to carry out redevelopment activities included in the community redevelopment plan for the N.W. Fifth Avenue Neighborhood/Pleasant Street community redevelopment area. 
(c)  Each taxing authority shall make annual appropriations to the trust fund as provided by law. 
(d)  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.387, the tax increment to be allocated annually to the trust fund shall be that amount equal to the difference between: 
(1)  The amount of ad valorem taxes levied each year by all taxing authorities except school districts on taxable real property contained within the geographic boundaries of the N.W. Fifth Avenue Neighborhood/Pleasant Street community redevelopment area; and 
(2)  The amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year by or for all taxing authorities, except those public bodies or taxing authorities exempted pursuant to law, upon the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the N.W. Fifth Avenue Neighborhood/Pleasant Street community redevelopment area as shown upon the most recent assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by each taxing authority prior to the adoption of the redevelopment plans. 
(e)  It is hereby determined that the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the N.W. Fifth Avenue Neighborhood redevelopment area, as shown on the most recent assessment roll prior to the effective date of the original N.W. Fifth Avenue Neighborhood redevelopment plan, adopted on May 5, 1980, by Ordinance Number 2481, is $5,947,440.00. It is hereby determined that the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Pleasant Street redevelopment area, as shown on the most recent roll prior to the effective date of the original Pleasant Street Plan, adopted on July 10, 1989, by Ordinance Number 3546, is $5,388,560.00. 
(Ord. No. 4068, § 1, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 960248, § 2, 10-28-96)  
Sec. 2-415. - Eastside Community Redevelopment Area; trust fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a trust fund, to be separately administered and accounted for, to be known as the Eastside community redevelopment area trust fund. 
(b)  The trust fund shall be used for the deposit of all tax increment funds obtained by the city community redevelopment agency to finance or refinance community redevelopment projects within the Eastside community redevelopment area described in section 2-410.3 and all such funds shall be used to carry out redevelopment activities included in the community redevelopment plan for the Eastside community redevelopment area. 
(c)  Each taxing authority shall make annual appropriations to the trust fund as provided by law. 
(d)  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.387, the tax increment to be allocated annually to the trust fund shall be that amount equal to the difference between: 
(1)  The amount of ad valorem taxes levied each year by all taxing authorities except school districts and those taxing authorities listed in F.S. § 163.387(2)(c), exclusive of any debt service millage on taxable real property contained within the area described in subsections 2-410.3(b), (c), (d) and (e). 
(2)  The amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year by or for all taxing authorities, except school districts and those taxing authorities listed in F.S. § 163.387(2)(c), exclusive of any debt service millage, upon the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Eastside community redevelopment area described in sections 2-410.3 (b), (c), (d) and (e) as shown upon the most recent assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by each taxing authority prior to the adoption of: Ordinance No. 002143, as to subsection 2-410.3(b); Ordinance No. 060336, as to subsection 2-410.3(c); and this Ordinance No. 090966, as to subsections 2-410.3 (d) and (e). 
(e)  It is hereby determined that the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Eastside community redevelopment area described in subsection 2-410.3(b), as shown on the most recent assessment roll prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 002143, is $34,980.826.00. It is hereby determined that the total of the assessed value of taxable property in the Eastside community redevelopment area described in subsection 2-410.3(c), as shown on the most recent assessment roll prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 060336 is $10,167,610.00. It is hereby determined that the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Eastside community redevelopment area described in subsection 2-410.3(d), as shown on the most recent assessment roll prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 090966, is $17,668,780.00. It is hereby determined that the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Eastside community redevelopment area described in subsection 2-410.3(e), as shown on the most recent assessment roll prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 090966 is $7,384,460.00. 
(Ord. No. 002143, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 030403, § 1, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 060336, § 2, 9-11-06; Ord. No. 100405, § 2, 11-18-10)  
Secs. 2-416—2-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - RESERVED[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4087, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 12, 1995 deleted the provisions of former Div. 10, §§ 2-421—2-425, which pertained to Gainesville Sister Cities Board, as derived from Ord. No. 3238, § 1, 7-28-86, Ord. No. 3485, §§ 1, 2, 11-14-88. 
 
Secs. 2-421—2-430. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - RESERVED[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 002071, § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 2002, repealed the provisions of former Div. 11, §§ 2-430.1—2-430.5, which pertained to the disabled and elderly citizens' advisory board, as derived from Ord. No. 3377, § 1, adopted Oct. 12, 1987. 
 
Secs. 2-430.1—2-430.15. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - TREE BOARD OF APPEALS[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3529, § 1, adopted Apr. 10, 1989, adding §§ 2-224—2-229 to the 1960 Code, has been included as Div. 12, §§ 2-430.16—2-430.21 hereof at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Tree advisory board, § 2-430.31 et seq.; standards for yards and landscaped areas in Central City District, § 6-236; land development code, Ch. 30; landscape and tree management, § 30-251 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-430.16. - Creation; composition; appointment; term of members; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The tree board of appeals shall consist of three members nominated by the tree advisory board and appointed by the city commission. Any candidate for the tree board of appeals shall be qualified in arboriculture. The board is authorized to hear appeals from any order, decision, or determination made by the city manager or designee with respect to the removal of trees, documentation regarding failure to protect trees during development and construction, or the determination/interpretation of the tree appraised value with respect to the mitigation requirements for heritage trees. Appeals shall be filed with the city manager or designee The tree board of appeals shall apply standards and considerations found in section 30-254 and 30-254.1 of the Land Development Code and shall have authority to decide any question involving the interpretation of the city manager or designee's order. Each member shall be appointed for a term of three years and shall remain in office until a successor has been appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant. Terms shall expire on January 1 of the year the term expires. 
(b)  Schedule. The terms and expiration of terms for the tree board of appeals are as follows: one term shall expire January 1, 1990; one term shall expire January 1, 1991; and one term shall expire January 1, 1992. After each term expires, appointments shall be made for three-year terms or for unexpired terms. 
(Ord. No. 3529, § 1, 4-10-89; Ord. No. 3593, § 1, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 090878, § 17, 6-6-13)  
Sec. 2-430.17. - Officers and rules. 
The tree board of appeals shall elect a chairperson from its membership and adopt rules for the conduct of its affairs which shall be in full force and effect when approved by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 3529, § 1, 4-10-89)  
Sec. 2-430.18. - Meetings. 
(a)  Schedule. The board shall meet when directed by the appropriate authority or within ten working days of the filing of an appeal. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the chairperson or upon the written request of any two members of the board. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing each member's absence, failure to vote, or vote, and shall keep records of its examinations and all other official actions which shall be filed immediately in the office of the board and which shall become public records. 
(b)  Attendance. Three board members must be present at the meeting. If one board member is unable to attend a specific meeting, an alternate, duly appointed by the chairperson of the tree advisory board, shall substitute for the aforementioned specific meeting only. Furthermore, only one substitute will be permitted at each meeting. 
(Ord. No. 3529, § 1, 4-10-89; Ord. No. 3593, § 2, 1-22-90)  
Sec. 2-430.19. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  General. The tree board of appeals shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by this division. The tree board of appeals shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary or proper to the performance of its powers and duties hereunder, and may amend or repeal the same. The rules and regulations shall be approved by resolution of the city commission prior to becoming effective. 
(b)  Conditions and safeguards. Upon reaching a decision, the board may attach such conditions and safeguards as may be required to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 3529, § 1, 4-10-89)  
Sec. 2-430.20. - Decisions. 
Every decision of the tree board of appeals shall be final and binding on all persons. All decisions of the board shall be in writing and indicate the vote upon the decision. A decision shall be rendered on all appeals within ten working days of the filing of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 3529, § 1, 4-10-89)  
Sec. 2-430.21. - Notification to adjacent property owners for errors by administrative officials. 
Notification of any appeal of the arborist's decision shall be given to all owners of property within 100 feet of the premises which are involved in the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 3529, § 1, 4-10-89)  
Secs. 2-430.22—2-430.30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - TREE ADVISORY BOARD[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3592, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 1990, adding §§ 2-230—2-232 to the 1960 Code, has been included as Div. 13, §§ 2-430.31—2-430.33 hereof at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Tree board of appeals, § 2-430.16 et seq.; land development code, Ch. 30; landscape and tree management, § 30-251 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-430.31. - Creation; composition; appointment; term of members; filling of vacancies. 
The tree advisory board shall consist of five members who serve on the tree advisory board and are appointed by the city commission. At least four members of the tree advisory board shall have knowledge of urban forestry. Each member shall be appointed for a term of three years and shall remain in office until a successor has been appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant. Terms shall expire on January first of the year the terms expire. Notwithstanding provisions of the previous subsection, one term shall expire January 1, 1993, one term shall expire January 1, 1994, one term shall expire January 1, 1995, one term shall expire January 1, 1996, and one term shall expire January 1, 1997. After each of said terms expires, appointments shall be made for three-year terms or for unexpired terms. 
(Ord. No. 3592, § 1(2-230), 1-22-90)  
Sec. 2-430.32. - Meetings; records. 
The board shall meet when directed by the appropriate authority or on the second Thursday of each month. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the chairperson or upon the written request of any two members of the board. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing each member's absence, failure to vote, or vote, and shall keep records of its examinations and all other official actions which shall be filed immediately in the office of the board and which shall become public records. 
(Ord. No. 3592, § 1(2-231), 1-22-90)  
Sec. 2-430.33. - Duties. 
The duties of the tree advisory board shall include: 
(1)  To act as the technical information collector/exchange forum on tree issues where citizens need coordination of information from varied sources. 
(2)  To clarify tree regulations that exist in the city's codes and ordinances and make them known to city residents. 
(3)  To act on referrals from the city commission. 
(4)  To guide the creation of a master tree plan for the city. 
(5)  To assist in the development of the goals and objectives for the city's comprehensive plan with respect to trees and to review proposed changes to the Land Development Code regarding tree and landscape regulations. 
(6)  To advise all departments of the city on tree issues. 
(7)  To communicate general tree information and develop tree projects that would benefit the community. 
(8)  To serve on the tree board of appeals (three of the five members will be recommended by the tree advisory board for appointment by the city commission). 
(9)  To determine species that qualify as high quality heritage trees, and to maintain a list of ratings that identify the relative value of trees in the urban forest for the purpose of calculating tree appraised value. 
(10)  To establish monetary values for trees as necessary to calculate tree appraised value, mitigation payment and other payments required for regulated trees. 
(Ord. No. 3592, § 1(2-232), 1-22-90; Ord. No. 090878, § 17, 6-6-13)  
Secs. 2-430.34—2-430.40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - RESERVED[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note— Former Div. 14 of Art. V, which consisted of §§ 2-430.41—2-430.44 and pertained to the youth advisory board, was repealed by Ord. No. 3845, § 3, adopted Mar. 15, 1993. The repealed provisions derived from Ord. No. 3575, § 1, adopted Oct. 9, 1989. 
 
Secs. 2-430.41—2-430.50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - STUDENT COMMUNITY RELATIONS ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-430.51. - Membership. 
(a)  The student community relations advisory board shall consist of seven voting members who serve on the board and are appointed by the city commission. 
(b)  When possible the student community relations advisory board will include the following: 
(1)  Three students. Students are defined as persons attending a postsecondary educational institution. 
(2)  Three non-students. A non-student is defined as a person who is not a student, as defined above. 
(3)  One administrator from a postsecondary educational institution. The city commission may appoint two additional administrators from postsecondary educational institutions to be nonvoting members of the board. 
(c)  If no applicants meet the above criteria any resident of the city may be appointed to the board. 
(d)  Student and non-student members of the student community relations advisory board shall be and remain bona fide residents of the city. If at any time any student or non-student member of the student community relations advisory board fails to be and remain a resident of the city the person shall be automatically disqualified and removed from the board. 
(e)  Student members shall be appointed for a term of one year. Administrator and non-student members shall be appointed for a term of two years. Members may be reappointed for consecutive terms, but no member shall serve more than four successive years. Reappointment may then occur after at least one year of absence from the student community relations advisory board. If a vacancy occurs, a new appointment shall be made by the city commission for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 060431, § 1, 12-11-06)  
Sec. 2-430.52. - Officers. 
(a)  The members of the student community relations advisory board shall annually elect a chair and vice-chair from among the members and may create and fill other offices as the board deems necessary, as provided in the rules of the board. 
(b)  The student community relations advisory board may create subcommittees it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the board. 
(c)  The chair of the board shall annually appoint the membership of each subcommittee from the regular members of the board. 
(d)  The city manager shall appoint a city employee to serve as secretary to the board, recorder, and custodian of all board records. 
(Ord. No. 060431, § 1, 12-11-06)  
Sec. 2-430.53. - Attendance requirements, legal counsel. 
(a)  Student members attending less than 50 percent of student community relations advisory board meetings for a six-month period commencing January 1 and July 1 and ending June 30 and December 31, respectively, shall be automatically removed from the board upon filing the attendance record with the clerk of the commission. This requirement supersedes section 2-247 of this Code where there is a conflict. 
(b)  Non-student and administrative members shall be subject to the rules of attendance as provided in section 2-247 of this Code. 
(c)  The city attorney shall provide legal counsel to advise and represent the board as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 060431, § 1, 12-11-06)  
Sec. 2-430.54. - Rules of procedure. 
The student community relations advisory board shall adopt rules of procedure to carry out its purposes. All rules must conform to this article, the Code of Ordinances, and state law. 
(1)  The board shall meet at least once each month, unless cancelled by the board or its chair, and more often at the call of the chair or the city commission. 
(2)  The student community relations advisory board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, indicating the attendance of each member and the decision on every question. 
(3)  The board shall adopt rules setting the number of members needed to establish a quorum. 
(4)  Each decision of the board must be approved by a majority vote of the regular members present at a meeting in which a quorum is in attendance and voting. 
(5)  All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 060431, § 1, 12-11-06)  
Sec. 2-430.55. - Functions, powers, and duties. 
(a)  The goal of the student community relations advisory board is to strive for a more cohesive non-student and student community. 
(b)  To act as a vehicle for students and non-students to voice their concerns and opinions. 
(c)  To review, discuss, and forward recommendations as appropriate, on issues, concerns, and initiatives relevant to students and non-students. 
(d)  To establish and implement a new member orientation. 
(e)  To assess and address needs of non-students as they pertain to student issues. 
(f)  To provide outlets for action by students and non-students. 
(g)  To be a knowledgeable liaison between the city commission and the students and non-students of Gainesville. 
(h)  To encourage involvement by non-students and students in planning and implementation of improvements. 
(i)  To ensure that student issues are addressed by providing a link between the students, non-students, and the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 060431, § 1, 12-11-06)  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCES[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Cross reference— Department of finance, § 2-226 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference— Municipal borrowing, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; financial matters pertaining to political subdivisions, F.S. Ch. 218. 
 
Sec. 2-431. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and close on the 30th day of September of each year. 
(Code 1960, § 2-14) 
State Law reference— Mandate for fiscal year, F.S. §§ 166.241, 218.33.  
Sec. 2-432. - Accounts to be opened and closed in accordance with fiscal year. 
The accounts of each and every officer of the city shall be open on the first day of October and closed on the 30th day of September of each year. 
(Code 1960, § 2-15)  
Sec. 2-433. - Annual audit of accounts; report to be published. 
The city commission shall employ a certified public accountant, not connected with the government of the city, to audit the accounts maintained and the financial statements prepared by the city during the fiscal year. The audit shall cover the period ending with the 30th day of September of each fiscal year. The report of the audit shall be furnished to the city commission as early as practicable after the 30th day of September of each fiscal year and shall be made available for viewing by the public on the city's website. 
(Code 1960, § 2-16; Ord. No. 060553, § 1, 11-27-06) 
State Law reference— Mandate for annual audit, F.S. §§ 166.241, 218.33.  
Sec. 2-434. - Security for city deposits. 
Each bank or savings association operating within the state receiving funds from the city for deposit in demand or time accounts must be designated by the state treasurer as a qualified public depository in accordance with provisions of the Florida Security for Public Deposits Act, F.S. Ch. 280. All other funds of the city invested in government securities, government agency securities, corporate stocks, etc., will be evidenced by an appropriate receipt, from the agency holding such investment, to be held in the possession of the director of finance. 
(Code 1960, § 2-21) 
State Law reference— Investments by municipalities, F.S. § 166.261.  
Sec. 2-435. - Appraisal required of acquisition or disposition of certain real property. 
The city commission shall not approve a contract for the purchase or sale of fee title to real property at a cost of $100,000.00 or more until the city has first obtained an appraisal of such real property. 
(Code 1960, § 2-21.1; Ord. No. 3242, § 1, 8-25-86; Ord. No. 050470, § 1, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 100629, § 1, 5-2-13)  
Sec. 2-436. - Real property polices. 
The acquisition or disposition of real property by the city shall be conducted in accordance with real property polices as adopted by and as may be amended from time to time by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 110629, § 3, 5-2-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 110629, adopted May 2, 2013, repealed § 2-436 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 2-436 pertained to sale of land obtained by the city through foreclosure and derived from § 2-21.2 of the 1960 Code.  
Sec. 2-437. - Payment of costs involved in obtaining and/or enforcing liens or special assessments. 
Whenever under the provisions of any ordinance or law, the city or any of its officers or agents are expressly or impliedly required or authorized to secure a lien or special assessment on specific property, and the lien or special assessment is actually obtained, the court costs and attorney's fees required by the city or any of its officers and agents in obtaining or enforcing the lien or special assessment shall be paid by the owner of the property. Such costs and attorney's fees shall be in addition to any other charges and costs due to the city under any other ordinances or laws. 
(Code 1960, § 1-12)  
Sec. 2-438. - Investment of funds of the city. 
The director of finance and/or subordinates designated by the director of finance are authorized to invest and reinvest funds, execute trades and otherwise conduct business involving the investment of the funds of the city. Investments shall be made in accordance with the city's approved investment policy. The rules of this section and the city investment policy shall not apply to pension or retirement funds, OPEB funds, certain special use funds, or funds related to the issuance of debt where there are other existing policies or indentures in effect for such funds. Funds held by trustees or fiscal agents are excluded from these rules; however, all funds are subject to regulations established by the State of Florida. Except for excluded funds, and restricted and special funds, the city commingles its funds for investment purposes to maximize investment earnings and to increase efficiencies with regard to investment pricing, safekeeping and administration. Investment income is allocated to the various funds based on their respective participation and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Funds of the city may be invested in any investments authorized by F.S. § 218.415(16), and/or in one or more of the following investment instruments: 
(1)  Any bonds or other obligations which as to principal and interest constitute direct obligations of, or are unconditionally guaranteed by, the United States of America, including obligations of any of the federal agencies set forth in subsection (3) below to the extent unconditionally guaranteed by the United States of America and any certificates or any other evidences of an ownership interest in obligations or in specified portions thereof (which may consist of specified portions of the interest thereon) of the character described in this subsection; 
(2)  Any bonds or other obligations of any state of the United States of America or of any agency, instrumentality or local governmental unit of any such state which at the time of their purchase are rated investment grade by a nationally recognized rating agency; 
(3)  Bonds, debentures or other evidences of indebtedness issued or guaranteed by any agency or corporation which has been or may hereafter be created pursuant to an Act of Congress as an agency or instrumentality of the United States of America including securities issued by Federal Agencies and Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs) such as: Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA), Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA), Federal Farm Credit Banks (FFCB), Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB), Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC), Small Business Administration (SBA), and Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA); 
(4)  Mortgage Backed Securities (MBS), Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities (CMBS), Collateralized Mortgage Obligations (CMO), and Asset Backed Securities (ABS) issued by a federal agency or instrumentality, or by a private corporation, which at the time of their purchase are rated investment grade by a nationally recognized rating agency; 
(5)  Interest-bearing time deposits or savings accounts in qualified public depositories, including certificates of deposit, whether negotiable or nonnegotiable, issued by any bank or trust company organized under the laws of any state of the United States or any national banking association which is a member of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, savings and loan associations which are members of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and credit unions which are members of the National Credit Union Administration Insurance Fund, provided that the aggregate principal amount of all certificates of deposit issued by any such bank, trust company, national banking association, savings and loan association or credit union which are purchased with moneys of the city are fully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Insurance Fund; or secured to the extent not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Insurance Fund by such securities as are described in subsections (1) through (3), inclusive, having a market value (exclusive of accrued interest, other than accrued interest paid in connection with the purchase of such securities) at least equal to the principal amount of such certificates of deposit (or portion thereof not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Insurance Fund) which shall be lodged with the city, or a depositary, as custodian, by such bank, trust company, national banking association, savings and loan association or credit union, and such bank, trust company, national banking association, savings and loan association or credit union shall furnish the city or the depositary, if any, with an undertaking satisfactory to it that the aggregate market value of all such obligations securing such certificates of deposit will at all times be an amount which meets the requirements of this subsection and the city or the depositary, if any, shall be entitled to rely on each such undertaking; 
(6)  Bonds, notes, debentures or other evidences of indebtedness issued or guaranteed by any corporation which are, at the time of purchase, rated investment grade by a nationally recognized rating agency; 
(7)  Any repurchase agreement with any bank or trust company organized under the laws of any state of the United States or any national banking association or government bond dealer reporting to, trading with and recognized as a primary dealer by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which agreement is secured by any one or more of the securities described in subsections (1), (2), or (3); 
(8)  Bankers Acceptances which are issued by institutions whose senior obligations are, at the time of purchase, rated investment grade by a nationally recognized rating agency; 
(9)  Commercial Paper rated at the time of purchase at least A-1 by Standard and Poor's, P-1 by Moody's, or F1 by Fitch; 
(10)  Local Governmental Investment Pools and Funds authorized pursuant to the Florida Interlocal Cooperation Act of 1969, including but not limited to the SBA Local Government Surplus Funds Trust Fund (Florida Prime), the Florida Education Investment Trust Fund (FEITF), the Florida Cooperative Liquid Assets Securities System (FLCLASS), the Florida Surplus Asset Fund Trust (FLSAFE), the Florida Local Government Investment Trust Day to Day Fund (FL Trust), and the Florida Treasury Investment Pool; 
(11)  SEC registered money market funds in good standing with the Securities and Exchange Commission which are rated investment grade by a nationally recognized rating agency, provided that such money market fund assets are limited to investments authorized by this section; 
(12)  Securities of, or other interests in, any open-end or closed-end management-type investment company or investment trust registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940, 15 U.S.C. ss. 80a-1 et seq., as amended from time to time, provided that the portfolio of such investment company or investment trust is limited to obligations of the United States Government or any agency or instrumentality thereof and to repurchase agreements fully collateralized by such United States Government obligations, and provided that such investment company or investment trust takes delivery of such collateral either directly or through an authorized custodian. 
(Code 1960, § 2-20; Ord. No. 3046, § 1, 8-27-84; Ord. No. 981207, § 1, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 020368, § 1, 10-28-02; Ord. No. 040466, § 1, 11-8-04; Ord. No. 160951 , § 2, 6-1-17)  
Sec. 2-439. - Electronic Signatures and Transactions Act. 
Purpose and intent. In accordance with F.S. §§ 668.001 through 668.06, and § 668.50, the Electronic Signature Act of 1996 and the Uniform Electronic Transaction Act, respectively, the City of Gainesville intends to treat an electronic document as having the same force and effect as a document obtained by traditional, manual means. Electronic commerce, including the implementation and authorization of electronic signatures, records, and transactions, can benefit the City of Gainesville. Electronic commerce has the potential to facilitate economic development and improve the efficiency of government services, expedite business transactions, decrease paper use and reduce costs associated with manual signatures. 
(Ord. No. 080515, § 1, 12-4-08)  
Sec. 2-440. - Permissible use of electronic signatures, records and transactions. 
(1)  Authorization. The charter officers of the city are authorized to use electronic signatures, records and transactions, and to conduct transactions electronically. 
(2)  Use. The charter officers of the city are authorized, to the extent consistent with F.S. §§ 668.001 through 668.06, and 668.50 to: 
(a)  Determine appropriate use of electronic signatures, records and electronic transactions; and 
(b)  Produce, receive, accept, acquire, transmit, forward, store, preserve, or maintain records in electronic form; and 
(c)  Conduct transactions in electronic form. 
(3)  Force and effect of an electronic signature. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by law, an electronic signature may be used to sign a writing and shall have the same force and effect as a manual signature. 
(b)  The charter officers are authorized, to the extent consistent with F.S. §§ 668.001 through 668.06, and 668.50, when deemed appropriate: 
1.  To determine the manner and format in which electronic signatures are used and accepted; and 
2.  To adopt rules and regulations regarding the identification, security, confidentiality and use of electronic signatures to ensure the validity of electronic signatures. 
(4)  Force and effect of an electronic record . Electronic records shall be considered and treated the same as any other records for any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 080515, § 1, 12-4-08)  
Secs. 2-441—2-450. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[22] 
Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Cross reference— Equal employment opportunity, § 8-47 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-451. - Payments on account of sickness and injury. 
The city may make payments to its officers and employees for or on account of sickness and injury. 
(Code 1960, § 2-7.2)  
Sec. 2-452. - Supplemental benefits to persons retiring prior to January 1, 1968. 
Anything in this article or any other ordinance or provision notwithstanding, all persons who prior to January 1, 1968, were retired from the employment of the city under the retirement provisions of this article, whether by retirement for length of service or by disability, shall as of January 22, 1969, receive in addition to the amounts of pension otherwise provided for an additional $2.00 per month multiplied by the number of years the person had been retired from the employment of the city calculated from the date of the retirement to January 22, 1969, which sum shall be paid each and every month hereafter following January 22, 1969: 
(1)  The benefits provided for under this section shall be calculated as of January 22, 1969, and shall not thereafter be recalculated so as to include any additional persons or to provide any additional increases other than those expressly provided for as of January 22, 1969. 
(2)  No prorations of years or parts of years will be considered in determining benefits under this section, it being expressly intended that the multiplier for the number of years of retirement since one's initial retirement date multiplied by $2.00 per month shall be considered only as a whole year if the year has been completed as of January 22, 1969. 
(Code 1960, § 20-95)  
Secs. 2-453—2-465. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 160313, § 1, adopted January 5, 2017 , repealed §§ 2-466—2-473, which pertained to compensation in the event of catastrophic conditions and mutual aid assistance. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Secs. 2-466—2-480. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LONGEVITY PAY 
 
Sec. 2-481. - Eligibility; amount. 
(a)  All regular, part-time and full-time city employees hired prior to March 2, 1992, who remain in the continuous, regular, full-time or part-time employ of the city, shall receive longevity pay in addition to their regular base pay in accordance with the following schedule: All such employees who have been in the regular, part-time or full-time employ of the city for: 
(1)  Five years and not more than ten years; two percent of base pay; 
(2)  Ten years and not more than 15 years; three percent of base pay; 
(3)  Fifteen years and not more than 20 years; four percent of base pay; 
(4)  Twenty years and not more than 25 years; five percent of base pay; 
(5)  In excess of 25 years; six percent of base pay. 
(b)  Fulltime regular certified police officers and firefighters employed by the police and fire departments who are otherwise eligible to receive longevity pay and who elect to enter a DROP must, in order to enter and to continue to participate in the DROP, make an irrevocable election upon entry into the DROP as follows: The employee may (1) continue to receive longevity payments and merit increases (assuming merit increases are provided and applicable), but forego receipt of all future general (COLA) salary increases, or (2) continue to receive general (COLA) salary increases and merit increases (assuming merit increases are provided and applicable) but become ineligible for future receipt of longevity pay, or (3) in the case where the applicable pay plan does not provide separately for general and merit increases, the employee may forego either future receipt of longevity payments, or any and all future salary increases. In those cases where an otherwise eligible employee elects to forego receipt of future longevity payments, entry into the DROP shall be treated as separation from service for the purposes of section 2-484. 
(Code 1960, § 2-10; Ord. No. 3594, § 1, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 950994, § 1, 12-11-95; Ord. No. 981266, § 21, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 000051, § 13, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 031300, § 1, 6-28-04)  
Sec. 2-482. - Base pay; when payable; basis of extra compensation. 
(a)  "Base pay" defined. The base pay of each eligible employee shall be the amount of regular base pay as indicated on the applicable salary schedule effective as of the first full pay period in January or July of each year which the employee is entitled to draw from immediately preceding the January or July in which longevity payment is actually made, exclusive of any overtime, longevity, incentive or other type pay. 
(b)  Establishment of eligibility. Regular, part-time and full-time employment of employees shall be determined as of the January first or July first immediately preceding the January or July in which longevity payment is to be made; provided, for employees receiving longevity for the first time, eligibility shall be determined as of the first full month after the employee reaches his or her five-year adjusted service date and payment shall be made only in accordance with subsection (d)(1); and provided further, except as may be provided for DROP participants, any person who is retired under a pension plan of the city shall not be eligible for such additional compensation under the provisions of this division. In order for the employee's time employed to be counted for purposes of calculating his/her years of service for longevity purposes, the employee must have been in the continuous, regular (paid), full-time or part-time employ of the city for the entire period, as described hereafter. Employees incurring hours of leave without pay of one normal workday or less within any month shall be considered to be in a continuous regular (paid) permanent full-time or part-time employ of the city for that month. Except as may otherwise be required by law, employees incurring a leave without pay of greater than one normal workday within any month shall not be considered to be in continuous regular (paid) full-time or part-time employ of the city for that month. Further, in order to receive payment under this division the employee must still be in a regular (paid) status with the city the month in which the payment is actually made. 
(c)  Calculation of payment—Normal payments in general. 
(1)  Longevity pay shall be paid to each eligible employee in January and July of each year and shall normally cover the six months preceding the month in which payment is made. 
(2)  Longevity pay for each eligible employee shall be calculated by multiplying the base pay of the employee for the month of January or July next preceding the month in which longevity pay is to be paid by the number of months in which the employee was considered to be in continuous, regular (paid) full-time or part-time employ, intervening from the month preceding the month in which longevity pay was last made to and including the month preceding the month in which payment of longevity pay is to be made. The results thus obtained shall then be multiplied by the applicable percentage rate as shown in the schedule in section 2-481 and the result shall be the amount of longevity pay to be paid. 
(d)  Same—Proration. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c), the provisions of this subsection (d) shall apply when applicable. 
(1)  First eligibility. For employees receiving longevity for the first time, the pay shall cover the period of between one and six full months in which the employee has been eligible immediately following the anniversary of the employee's five-year adjusted service date as an eligible employee. In order for a month to count for purposes of the calculations herein required, the employee must have reached the anniversary of his/her five-year adjusted service date and then have worked the entire month sought to be counted. (Example: If an employee hired out as a part-time or full-time employee with the city on July 1, 1973, the employee would receive the first longevity check in January, 1979, and the months for which the employee would receive credit would be July, August, September, October, November and December, 1978. However, if that employee had hired out on July 2, 1973, there would be no credit for July, 1978.) In the case of those employees hired February 1, 1990 and thereafter but prior to July 1, 1990, their first longevity payment in January, 1996 shall be calculated as would a normal payment, as described in section 2-482(c)(1) the "last made" payment being deemed to be July, 1995. In the case of those employees hired after July 1, 1990 but before January 1, 1991, their first longevity payment in January, 1996 shall be calculated and prorated as if they had been eligible immediately following the anniversary of his/her five-year adjusted service date. 
(2)  In payment period. If an employee's anniversary of his/her adjusted service date for longevity purposes falls within any six months' period for which the employee is being paid under the provisions of this division, then the number of full months' service in such period after the employee's adjusted service date shall be computed at the higher rate indicated above and the remainder of the months shall be calculated at the lower rate indicated above. (Example: If an employee hired out as a regular part-time or full-time employee with the city on January 13, 1958, the employee's twenty-year adjusted service date would be on January 13, 1978. For the payment in July, 1978, the employee would receive payment for January, 1978, calculated at the rate of four percent, and for February, March, April, May and June, 1978 the employee would receive pay calculated at the rate of five percent.) 
(e)  The provisions of this section and the payments authorized hereby shall apply prospectively only, and shall apply to all eligible employees except employees in a bargaining unit for collective bargaining purposes who shall be paid as provided in any applicable and effective collective bargaining agreement. 
(Code 1960, § 2-11; Ord. No. 3594, § 2, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 950994, § 2, 12-11-95; Ord. No. 031300, § 2, 6-28-04)  
Sec. 2-483. - Same—Continuity of service; exceptions. 
(a)  Continuity of service in the city's employ shall not be interrupted because of absence due to compulsory military service or due to voluntary military service in the armed forces of the United States of America in accordance with appropriate contract provisions or applicable personnel policies, and all time spent in the armed forces of the United States of America shall apply toward accrued service for longevity pay. 
(b)  Continuity of service in the city's employ shall not be interrupted because of absence when the absence shall have been granted in accordance with the appropriate contract provisions or applicable personnel policies as approved by the city commission. Except as provided in section 2-482(b), none of such time on an approved leave without pay shall apply toward the employee's service credit for determining longevity pay unless the absence was for military leave as provided in subsection (a) above. 
(Code 1960, § 2-12; Ord. No. 950994, § 3, 12-11-95)  
Sec. 2-484. - Separation from service. 
If any eligible employee dies, retires or is separated from the service of the city for any reason, the employee shall be paid longevity pay from the date of the last payment of longevity pay to the employee for each month (except as provided in section 2-482(b) to the end of the month preceding the month in which the person dies, retires or is separated from the service of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 2-13; Ord. No. 950994, § 4, 12-11-95)  
Sec. 2-485. - University cooperative education program trainees. 
If a duly registered full-time trainee under a university cooperative education program is under such program as allowed by the city and later the person becomes a full-time permanent employee of the city then: 
(1)  When the employee becomes entitled to longevity pay as provided for in this division the full-time regular employee shall then be credited in ascertaining longevity pay benefits with the time of service as an employee of the city under the university cooperative education program. 
(2)  When the employee becomes entitled to pension benefits as provided for in this article the full-time regular employee shall then be credited in ascertaining pension benefits with the time of service as an employee of the city under the university cooperative education program. 
(Code 1960, § 2-13.1; Ord. No. 031300, § 3, 6-28-04)  
Secs. 2-486—2-500. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - OLD AGE AND SURVIVORS' INSURANCE[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
State Law reference— Social security for public employees, F.S. Ch. 650; authority of political subdivisions of state to submit plans for inclusion under the social security act, F.S. § 650.05. 
 
Sec. 2-501. - Participation by city officers and employees generally. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend effective as of October 1, 1956, to the employees and officials thereof not excluded by law nor excepted in this division the benefits of the system of old age and survivors' insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, and by F.S. Ch. 650; and to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment as defined in F.S. § 650.02, performed in the employ of the city by employees and officials thereof, except service of an emergency nature, service in the judicial class of part-time positions, and service in the legal class of part-time positions. 
(b)  The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges and other conditions thereunto appertaining of Title II of the Social Security Act as amended on behalf of all officers and employees of its departments and agencies to be covered under the agreement. 
(Code 1960, § 20-1)  
Sec. 2-502. - Firfighter and police officer included. 
There shall be included in any agreement entered into under section 2-503 only services in positions of: 
(1)  Firefighters and police officers who are members of or eligible to be members of the city's employee's pension plan and who have, prior to date of federal approval of old age and survivors' insurance coverage, filed written election to receive old age and survivors' insurance coverage. 
(2)  Firefighters and police officers who, on or after the date of federal approval, become eligible for membership in the above-named retirement system. 
(Code 1960, § 20-2)  
Sec. 2-503. - Agreement with state authorized. 
The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the division of retirement of the department of administration as state agency, and to request the governor to authorize an employee referendum, for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by the system of old age and survivors' insurance to the employees and officials of this city as provided in sections 2-501 and 2-502, which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan by the city as are found by the state agency to be necessary and proper and, subject to employee referendum, shall be effective with respect to services in employment covered by the agreement performed on and after the first day of October, 1965. 
(Code 1960, § 20-6; Ord. No. 980128, § 2, 7-27-98)  
Sec. 2-504. - Employees' contributions; withholding authorized. 
Withholdings from salaries, wages or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 2-501 are hereby authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency designated by such laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1960, § 20-3)  
Sec. 2-505. - City contributions; appropriations. 
There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from general revenue and utility funds, such amounts, at such times as may be required to pay promptly the contributions, assessments, and referendum costs of the city as applicant or employer by state or federal laws or regulations, which shall be paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 1960, § 20-4)  
Sec. 2-506. - Custodian of funds; records. 
(a)  The director of the department of management and financial services is hereby designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the appropriated funds for the contribution of the city, and the director of the department of management and financial services is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purpose of this division. 
(b)  The city shall keep such further records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall adhere to the regulations of the state agency. 
(Code 1960, § 20-5)  
Secs. 2-507—2-520. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - EMPLOYEES PENSION PLAN[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
State Law reference— Actuarial soundness of retirement systems, F. S. § 112.60 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-521. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this division shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context: 
Accumulated contributions shall mean the sum of all amounts deducted from the compensation of a member and credited to his/her individual account in the pension fund. 
Actuarial deficiency shall mean the present value as of the date of actuarial valuation, or pension credit granted for service prior to the date of actuarial valuation of the pension plan, as the term is used in F.S. Ch. 175 and Ch. 185. 
Actuarial equivalent shall mean a benefit of equal value or equal cost when computed based on the 1994 Group Annuity Mortality Basic Table Unisex 50/50 and an interest rate of 9.5 percent except as otherwise specified in section 2-526, below. This table and interest rate are used exclusively for calculation of actuarial equivalencies for optional forms of benefit. 
Actuary shall mean one who is skilled in calculations involving compound interest and life contingencies who shall be a member of an actuarial society, association, or conference. 
Advisory committee shall mean a committee established to advise the board of trustees on matters related to the pension plan as established in accordance with section 2-527. 
Annuity shall mean annual payments for life to be paid in equal monthly installments on the last day of the month in which the same accrue. Such payments shall be made on a calendar month basis and the payments for any month may lie prorated if appropriate. 
Base pay shall mean an employee's established rate of annual or monthly compensation, not including pay for overtime or bonuses. 
Beneficiary shall mean any person, except a pensioner, who is in receipt of a pension or other benefits, payable from funds of the plan; or any person designated by a member of the plan to receive benefits from the plan upon the member's death. 
Board shall mean the board of trustees created to administer this plan. 
Credited service shall mean the total number of months of service with the city, expressed in terms of full and fractional years. Additional months of service shall be credited for unused sick leave and personal critical leave bank (PCLB) credits, assigning one day of service for each day of unused sick leave and unused personal critical leave, unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, in applicable personnel policies, collective bargaining agreements, or DROP provisions. For service earned on or after October 1, 2012, no additional months of service shall be credited for unused sick leave or PCLB credits earned on or after October 1, 2012. In calculating credited service on or after October 1, 2012, the lesser number of months between the additional months of service credited for unused sick leave or PCLB credits earned on or before September 30, 2012 and months of unused sick leave or PCLB credits available to a member at the time of his or her retirement shall be used. Employees of the Gainesville Police Department Communications Center at the time the combined communications center is activated who are hired by the Alachua County Sheriff on or about said date and who elect to remain members of this plan and the City of Gainesville Employees Disability Plan (GPD employees) shall designate some, none, or all of their city sick leave or PCLB balances at time of hire by the sheriff to be applied as credited service under the plan. Such sheriff department employee's sick leave (or equivalent benefit) balances at the time of termination from the sheriffs department shall not be applied towards credited service nor shall any cash out of such benefit be included in such member's final average earnings. GPD employees' employment with the city shall not be deemed to be terminated, for the purposes of this section, when hired by the Sheriff on or about the activation date. If the employment of a member is terminated, by reason of layoff, and the member is subsequently reemployed by the city, the credited service to which he/she was entitled as of his/her termination date shall be included in any further computation of credited service if the member refunds withdrawn contributions, if any, as described in section 2-626(i). Further provided, that if the employment of a member is terminated, other than layoff, and the member is subsequently reemployed by the city, the credited service to which he/she was entitled as of his/her termination date shall be included in any further computation of credited service. 
(1)  If the member was entitled to a termination benefit; or 
(2)  If the member was not entitled to a termination benefit and his/her number of calendar months that he/she was not employed is less than his/her aggregate months of service credited under the plan as of his/her termination date and he/she has repaid withdrawn contributions as provided in section 2-526(i). 
(3)  If the member was not entitled to a termination benefit, and he/she remains in the continuous employ of the city for at least five years subsequent to his/her re-employment, and he/she has repaid withdrawn contributions as provided in section 2-526(i). Continuous employ shall not be deemed interrupted because of absence, when the absence shall have been granted in accordance with appropriate contract provisions or applicable personnel policies as approved by the city commission. Approved absences shall count as credited service under the plan, in accordance with the terms of the plan. 
Deferred retirement option program shall mean an optional program of the city's retirement systems or plans for deferring retirement income while remaining in the active employ of the city. This shall also be known as a DROP. 
Early retirement shall mean retirement, in accordance with the terms of the plan, at an age earlier than normal retirement age. 
Earnings shall mean only base pay (which shall include all paid leaves), all overtime pay (which shall include time paid at time-and-a-half, double-time, and double-time-and-a-half), stand-by pay, call-back pay, working out of classification pay, acting out of classification pay, longevity pay, special assignment pay, and termination vacation pay, or for members entering a DROP any lump sum payment of some or all of such member's vacation balance upon entering the DROP, except as may be otherwise expressly provided for herein or in collective bargaining agreements. To calculate earnings for service earned on or after October 1, 2012 by members whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or before October 1, 2012, no more than 300 hours of overtime pay per year earned on or after October 1, 2012 shall be included, nor shall termination vacation pay earned on or after October 1, 2012 be included. To calculate earnings for service earned on or after October 2, 2012 by members whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or after October 2, 2012, no more than 150 hours of overtime pay per year earned on or after October 2, 2012 shall be included, nor shall termination vacation pay earned on or after October 2, 2012 be included. Effective October 1, 1996, earnings in excess of $150,000.00 annually shall be disregarded for all purposes of this plan. As of January 1 of each calendar year, the dollar limitation in Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(17) for that calendar year will become effective for the plan year commencing thereafter in lieu of the dollar limitation provided in the preceding sentence. For an employee who became a member of the plan prior to October 1, 1996, this limitation shall not be applicable. 
Effective date of the plan shall mean the date on which the operation of the plan is to commence for the purpose of determining eligibility, benefits, and related matters, which is hereby fixed as the first day of August, 1965. 
Employee shall mean a person employed by the city and so classified in the personnel records of the city, including probationary and permanent employees, but excluding employees defined in section 2-596. Any appointed officer shall be qualified under this plan under only one office, that office being the one from which he/she received the largest annual salary, compensation, or remuneration. Independent employees are excluded from participation in this plan. 
Final average earnings shall mean: 
(1)  For members whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or before October 1, 2007, the average of the annual (12 consecutive months) earnings received by an employee during any 36 consecutive months of employment by the city during which the employee received the highest earnings paid him/her by the city; provided, however, for employees who are demoted for disciplinary reasons by the city, the terms shall refer to the greater of: 
a.  The average of the annual (12 consecutive months) earnings received by an employee his/her final 36 consecutive months of employment with the city; or 
b.  The average of the annual (12 consecutive months) earnings received by an employee during any 36 consecutive months of employment by the city subsequent to the demotion during which the employee received the highest earnings paid him/her by the city. 
(2)  For members whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or after October 2, 2007 but on or before October 1, 2012, the average of the annual (12 consecutive months) earnings received by an employee during any 48 consecutive months of employment by the city during which the employee received the highest earnings paid him/her by the city; provided, however, for employees who are demoted for disciplinary reasons by the city, the terms shall refer to the greater of: 
a.  The average of the annual (12 consecutive months) earnings received by an employee his/her final 48 consecutive months of employment with the city; or 
b.  The average of the annual (12 consecutive months) earnings received by an employee during any 48 consecutive months of employment by the city subsequent to the demotion during which the employee received the highest earnings paid him/her by the city. 
(3)  For members whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or after October 2, 2012, the average of the annual (12 consecutive months) earnings received by an employee during any 60 consecutive months of employment by the city during which the employee received the highest earnings paid him/her by the city; provided, however, for employees who are demoted for disciplinary reasons by the city, the terms shall refer to the greater of: 
a.  The average of the annual (12 consecutive months) earnings received by an employee his/her final 60 consecutive months of employment with the city; or 
b.  The average of the annual (12 consecutive months) earnings received by an employee during any 60 consecutive months of employment by the city subsequent to the demotion during which the employee received the highest earnings paid him/her by the city. 
(4)  If a member has been absent from work (performs no duties) due to an injury claimed to be compensable under F.S. Ch. 440 during the period of time which would be utilized to determine his/her final average earnings, then such period of absence shall not be considered months of employment for the purposes of this section. The months of employment immediately preceding the absence shall be deemed to be consecutive with the months of employment, if any, earned after his/her return to work. 
(5)  If the employment of a member is terminated and such former member, who is not a retiree or receiving a termination benefit (or whose termination benefit was cashed out under section 2-526(a)(3)), is subsequently re-employed by the city as an eligible member, such member's final average earnings shall be calculated as follows, except as otherwise required by subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this definition: The months of employment immediately preceding the termination shall be deemed to be consecutive with the months of employment earned after the member's re-employment. 
(6)  If a continuously employed member ceases to earn eligible service for more than one month during the period of such employment and subsequently begins to again earn eligible service, such member's final average earnings shall be calculated as follows, except as otherwise required by subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this definition: The months of employment during which eligible service were earned shall be deemed consecutive. 
Fund or pension fund shall mean all sums of money paid into the plan by the city, and all gifts and contributions received by the fund, accepted from other sources, together with earnings and appreciation of the same, less disbursements made from such money, in accordance with the plan, and less any losses or depreciation of asset value. 
Gross pay shall mean those types of compensation which presently (as of July 2000) have member contributions deducted therefrom. Types of compensation created, or first applied to members after July 2000, may, at the discretion of the city, have member contributions deducted therefrom provided that, unless otherwise agreed to, such types of compensation shall also thereafter be included in earnings effective upon the date contributions are deducted therefrom. 
Interest shall mean the rate of interest adopted by the board for computation of pension plan costs and values, unless another meaning is clearly evident from the context in which the term is used. 
Member shall mean any person who is included in the membership of the plan. 
Normal annuity form shall mean a monthly annuity payable from date of retirement to death. 
Normal cost shall mean the annually accruing cost of pension benefits granted under this article, as the term is used in F.S. Ch. 175 and Ch. 185. 
Normal retirement age shall mean the age at which an employee first becomes eligible for normal retirement under the plan. 
Past service cost shall mean the same as "actuarial deficiency" as the term is used in this division. 
Pension shall mean an annual amount, payable in equal monthly installments throughout the life of a retired employee, payable from the funds of the plan. 
Pensioner shall mean a member who has retired with a pension payable from the funds of the plan. 
Permanent or regular employee shall mean an employee appointed to an authorized and budgeted position on a regular and continuous basis. 
Plan, pension plan or employees' pension plan shall mean the system of retirement benefits provided under this division. 
Plan year shall mean a twelve-month period beginning on Oct. 1 and ending on Sept. 30. 
Predecessor retirement plan shall mean the employee's pension plan on July 31, 1965. 
Retiree shall mean a former employee who is receiving, or a current employee who has deferred receipt (into a deferred retirement option plan account) of, a monthly retirement benefit from a defined benefit pension plan of the city. 
Retirement shall mean withdrawal from the service of the city with a pension granted in accordance with the provisions of this plan. 
Retirement annuity option shall mean an optional form of retirement income, other than the normal annuity form, which an employee may elect in accordance with the terms of this plan. Optional annuity forms are the joint and survivorship annuity and the social security option. 
Service credit rules: 
(1)  Day of service shall mean each day for which a member is: 
a.  Paid or entitled to payment by the city for performance of duties; 
b.  Paid or entitled to payment by the city on account of a period of time during which no duties are performed (e.g., vacation, holiday, illness, incapacity, layoff, jury duty, military duty or approved leave of absence); 
c.  Each day for which back pay, irrespective of mitigation or damages, has been either awarded to or agreed to by the city; provided, however, that the same day shall not be credited as a day of service more than once. 
(2)  Month of service shall mean a one-month period beginning on the day of the month corresponding to a member's date of employment, during which the member has earned at least ten days of service; provided, however, that ten days of service will be deemed to have been earned in each month of service in which occurs: 
a.  An approved leave of absence, not to exceed 90 days, authorized by the city, in accordance with a uniform policy applied on a nondiscriminatory basis to all members similarly situated; or 
b.  Voluntary or involuntary service in the armed forces of the United States for a period not greater than one enlistment, provided that the member is legally entitled to reemployment pursuant to the provisions of any federal law applicable to veterans' reemployment rights, and any amendments thereto, and is reemployed by the city within the manner provided by law and under the conditions prescribed by law; or such member dies while performing qualified military service as defined in Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code, in which case the member shall be treated as if he or she had returned to employment and then terminated employment on account of death. 
(3)  A member shall not earn any days or months of service for any purpose under the plan after entering in a DROP, except as a re-employed retiree, if applicable. 
(4)  If the employment of a member is terminated, and the former member is subsequently reemployed by the city, the member's date of employment for purpose of determining additional months of service, shall be reestablished as his/her date of reemployment. 
Service retirement shall mean retirement from employment of the city with a pension based upon service in the employ of the city, as distinct from retirement with a pension based on disability. 
Service retirement age shall mean the age at which an employee first becomes eligible for service retirement. 
Social security option shall mean an optional form of retirement annuity as described in this division. 
Trustees shall mean the trustees of the pension plan established under this article. 
(Code 1960, § 20-40.1; Ord. No. 3140, § 1, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 3867, § 1, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 951232, § 1, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 970592, §§ 1—4, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 981266, § 22, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 991457, § 1, 6-26-00; Ord. No. 000051, §§ 1—5, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 001385, § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. No. 120218, § 1, 9-10-12; Ord. No. 130122, § 1, 9-19-13) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-522. - Establishment of system. 
(a)  Establishment of employees pension plan; fund. There is hereby created for the employees of the city, a pension plan to be known as the "City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan;" that plan to be administered and payment made therefrom as provided in this article. There is hereby established a system of retirement and death benefit for employees of the city. There is also established a fund to be known as the "City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan Fund." 
(b)  Predecessor retirement plan revoked. The predecessor retirement plan known as the "City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan" is hereby revoked, except that all retired employees and beneficiaries under the revoked plan on August 1, 1965, shall continue to receive such retirement benefits as provided for in the revoked plan in such amounts and for the length of time as stated therein, also provided as stated in section 2-525(b). 
(c)  Purpose. The purpose of the establishment of the fund and the system is to provide for payment of benefits set forth under a predecessor retirement plan for employees of the city and to establish a system of pension benefits for people who are and shall become employees of the city. Neither the city nor the board of trustees shall authorize or permit any part of the trust fund to be diverted for purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of members and their beneficiaries. 
(Code 1960, § 20-40.2; Ord. No. 3140, § 2, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 130122, § 2, 9-19-13)  
Sec. 2-523. - Membership and service. 
(a)  Eligible members. Members of the pension plan established under this division shall be: 
(1)  All employees of the city as of August 1, 1965, who participated in, and contributed to, the predecessor retirement plan for employees of the city; 
(2)  All permanent employees of the city as of August 1, 1965, who did not participate in and contribute to the predecessor retirement plan for employees of the city; 
(3)  All subsequently hired regular employees become members of the plan established under this division on the first day of the month following (or coinciding with) the date of their employment as permanent employees. 
(b)  Service before the effective date of the plan. 
(1)  A member of the plan described in subsection (a)(1) will be given full credit for service prior to August 1, 1965, in this plan for all service to the city as a full-time permanent employee before August 1, 1965. 
(2)  A member of the plan described in subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) will be given full credit for service to the city from date of employment or from January 1, 1964, whichever date is later. 
(c)  Members of the plan. 
(1)  All regular employees of the city as described in subsection (a) will be members of the plan except as provided in subsection (c)(2) below. 
(2)  Regular employees who elected/requested, in accordance with section 2-579 of this Code or the provisions of the city's § 401(a) Plan, to have future employer contributions made to the Deferred Compensation Plan (§ 457) or the § 401(a) Defined Contribution Plan in lieu of this plan are eligible for the disability benefit under section 5-526(d) of this plan but they are ineligible for any other benefits under this plan, unless such persons make an election(s) described in subsection (i), or are otherwise limited participants. Regular employees who are eligible employees as defined in section 2-596 of this Code are ineligible members of this plan. 
(3)  Limited participation. 
a.  Definitions: 
1.  Ineligible member means an employee of the city who is not an eligible member. 
2.  Limited participant means a member of the plan who, during part or parts of his/her employment with the city, is an eligible member and, during other parts of his/her employment with the city is an ineligible member. 
3.  Limited participant service means, in the case of a limited participant, credited service as defined in the plan, but including service during all times of his/her employment with the city, whether an eligible member or an ineligible member, except while a retiree or a recipient of a termination benefit from any defined benefit pension plan of the city. 
4.  Eligible service means, in the case of a limited participant, credited service as defined in the plan, during the part or parts of his/her employment during which he/she is an eligible member, except while a retiree or a recipient of a termination benefit from any defined benefit pension plan of the City of Gainesville. 
b.  For the purpose of determining a limited participant's credited service for any purpose of this plan, except for the purpose of determining his/her accrued benefit, his/her credited service shall mean his/her limited participant service. 
c.  For the purpose of determining a limited participant's accrued benefit, his/her credited service shall mean only his/her eligible service and calculation of final average earnings shall be based upon his/her eligible service earnings. 
(d)  Temporary, part-time and seasonal employees. This plan shall not be construed to include any temporary, part-time or seasonal employees (e.g., summer recreation program) of the city. If a temporary employee, part-time employee or seasonal employee subsequently becomes a permanent employee of the city as defined in this division, he/she shall not receive credited service for the period of employment as a temporary, part-time or seasonal employee, except that a member's period of employment while a CETA employee, as determined by the city, shall be considered as service as a permanent employee. Part-time employees as used in this section shall include only those persons not defined as "permanent employees" in this division. 
(e)  Questions and membership. The board shall decide any question as to who is a member of the plan and its decision shall be final and binding on all interested parties. 
(f)  War service credit. If a member who, while employed by the city, entered or enters the armed forces of the United States in time of war or other national emergency recognized by the city commission, and reenters the employ of the city in accordance with the definition of "service credit rules" in section 2-521, such service in the armed forces shall be credited him/her as credited service provided that he/she refunds withdrawn contributions, if any, in accordance with section 2-526. In any case of doubt as to the period to be so credited any member, the board shall have final power to determine such period. During the period of such armed service and until the employee's return to employment by the city the individual's contributions to the fund shall be suspended. 
(g)  Deferred benefits. A member of the plan who retires early in accordance with section 2-526 may elect to, in lieu of immediately receiving benefits, defer payment of benefits to a date subsequent to his/her early retirement date. In the event of such election, which shall be irrevocable, the employees' benefit shall be calculated in accordance with section 2-526, reduced for each month by which his/her benefit commencement date precedes his/her unreduced benefit commencement date. 
(h)  Participants in Gainesville Gas Group Pension Plan. The City of Gainesville shall purchase the Group Pension Plan for employees of Gainesville Gas and shall place all of the cash, investments, and other assets of said plan in the trust fund of the City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan (the "plan"). Retired and former participants shall remain entitled to the applicable benefits as described in the group pension plan, but shall not become members of the "plan." Active participants of the group pension plan who become employed by the City of Gainesville upon the city's acquisition of the Gainesville Gas Company shall become members of the "plan" on the first day following the acquisition date and shall be entitled to the benefits described below. 
(1)  The accrued benefit for such members shall be: 
a.  The accrued benefit earned under the Gainesville Gas Group Plan as of the acquisition date; plus 
b.  Two percent of final average earnings times credited service earned after the acquisition date; plus 
c.  For each year of credited service earned after the acquisition date, an additional two percent of final average earnings will be credited, not to exceed the service years earned under the accrued benefit formula under the Gainesville Gas Group Plan; less 
d.  For each year of Gainesville Gas Group Plan service credited under subsection c. above, the portion of the accrued benefit determined under subsection a. above based on such year(s), payable as a monthly life annuity from normal retirement date, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(2)  For purposes of determining normal retirement date, service accrued under the Gainesville Gas Group Plan prior to the acquisition date will be counted as vesting service. 
(3)  For the purpose of computing final average earnings, overtime and termination vacation pay shall not be included, except as provided below. For members retiring on or after October 1, 1996, overtime shall be included for the purpose of computing final average earnings, except as otherwise expressly provided for herein. To calculate earnings for service earned on or after October 1, 2012, no more than 300 hours of overtime pay per year earned on or after October 1, 2012 shall be included. For members retiring on or after May 1, 2016, termination vacation pay accrued and unused on or before October 1, 2012 shall be included in the calculation of final average earnings. 
(i)  Re-entry; purchase of limited participant service. 
(1)  Regular employees, actively employed on or after October 29, 2002, who previously elected/requested to have future employer contributions made to the Deferred Compensation Plan (§ 457) or the § 401(a) Defined Contribution Plan in lieu of this plan, may elect during the election periods described below to enter this plan as eligible members, and to have the employer cease employer contributions to the § 457 Deferred Compensation Plan or the § 401(a) Defined Contribution Plan. Elections may be made during the months of November, December, and January of each year. 
(2)  If elected by the employee under (1) above, participation in this plan and cessation of employer contributions to the § 457 Deferred Compensation Plan or the § 401(a) Defined Contribution Plan shall be effective commencing with the first administratively feasible pay period following execution and submission by the participant of an election form. 
(3)  An employee who has elected to enter this plan as an eligible member shall have the option during the periods of time described in subsection (i)(1) above to have some or all years of ineligible service count as eligible service by contributing to the plan the actuarial present value of benefits that are projected to be applicable for some or all the years of service as an ineligible member. If any particular "buy-back" involves less than all prior limited participant service, then in each case the period for which the employee receives credit must be for full years and must be the most recent unclaimed limited participant service. Such present value shall be determined by the Plan Actuary using the valuation applicable to the Budget Year in which the election is made. This option may be elected by the employee during any of the election periods described in subsection (1) above. Appropriate portions of those amounts contributed pursuant to this subsection (3) and (4) shall be considered employee contributions for the purpose of subsections 2-526(a)(3) and (e), (f), (g), and (h). 
(4)  A limited participant may also "buy-back" prior service as described in subsection (3) above, provided that the funds are received by the plan within 60 days of the effective date of the limited participant's termination of employment. 
(5)  Effective January 1, 2002, for purposes of contributing amounts to the plan, as described in subsection (i)(3) and (4) above, the plan will accept a cash or transfer of all or part of a member's account in the City of Gainesville's 457(b) Plan and will accept rollover contributions and/or direct rollovers of distributions (including after-tax contributions) made after December 31, 2001 that are eligible for rollover in accordance with Section 402(c), 403(a)(4), 403(b)(8), 408(d)(3)(A)(ii), or 457(e)(16) of the Internal Revenue Code, from all of the following types of plans; (1) a qualified plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code; (2) an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code; (3) an eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state; and (4) an individual retirement account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code (including SEPs, and Simple IRAs after two years of participating in the Simple IRA). The amount distributed from such plan must be rolled over to this plan no later than the 60th day after distribution as made from the plan, unless otherwise waived by the IRS pursuant to Section 402(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(j)  Re-employed retirees and recipients of termination benefits. A retiree or a former employee of the city receiving termination benefits from the city consolidated police officers and firefighters retirement plan, or this plan may, upon becoming re-employed by the City of Gainesville, become a new member of this plan, earn credited service, and become entitled to receive an additional retirement benefit subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Such member shall satisfy the eligibility requirements for participation in this plan. 
(2)  Such member shall not be entitled to disability benefits under the city employees disability plan, or become entitled to any other disability pension benefit payable from a retirement system or plan of the city. 
(3)  No service for which credit was received, or which remained unclaimed, at retirement or termination may be claimed or applied toward credited service earned following re-employment. 
(4)  Such re-employed member shall not be entitled to purchase additional credit for service performed prior to re-employment. 
(k)  Military service prior to employment. Members who are regular employees, actively employed after February 12, 2007, and not participating in the DROP, may have the year(s) that the member served on active duty in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior to initial employment with the city, added to his/her years of credited service provided that: 
1.  The member contributes to the fund an actuarially determined amount so that service purchased pursuant to the changes described in this plan amendment do not result in increase to the city's contribution to the plan. For purposes of purchasing service, the plan will accept cash or a transfer of all or part of a member's account in the city's 457 Deferred Compensation Plan or 401(a) defined contribution plans, and will accept rollover contributions and/or direct rollovers of distributions (including after tax contributions) made after December 31, 2001, that are eligible for rollover in accordance with Section 402(c), 403(a)(4), 403(b)(8), 408(d)(3)(A)(ii), or 457(e)(16) of the Code, from of the following types of plans: (1) a qualified plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code; (2) an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the Code; (3) an eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Code, which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state; and (4) an individual retirement account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or 408(b) of the Code (including SEP's and Simple IRA's after two years of participation in the Simple IRA). The amount distributed from such plan must be rolled over to this plan no later than the 60th day after distribution was made from the plan, unless otherwise waived by the IRS pursuant to Section 402(c)(3) of the Code. The plan shall absorb the cost of professional services for obtaining one actuarial estimate for a member. Any subsequent estimates shall be paid for in advance by the requesting member. 
2.  Purchase of credited service for military service prior to employment shall be in increments of one or more whole years, except where the remaining service available to be purchased is less than one year. Purchases may not be made more frequently than once every 12 months. Purchase of service may be made from February 12, 2007 to March 30, 2007, and during the months of November, December and January of each year. 
3.  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made in one lump sum payment, upon receipt of which credited service shall be given, except as provided in subsection 4 below. 
4.  Except as provided in subsection 5 below, service for which payment has been made pursuant to subsection 3 above shall not be deemed credited service under the plan until such date that the member is otherwise eligible for normal retirement under subsection 2-526(a)(1) or have reached age 55. In the event a member (or his or her beneficiary) begins receiving an amount under subsection 2-526(a)(3), the payments made pursuant to subsection 3 above shall be returned to member or beneficiary without interest at such time and no credited service given. 
5.  Service may be purchased, and credited, or previously purchased service credited, in advance of retirement eligibility as described in subsection 4 above under the following circumstances: When a member who is a regular employee at time of death has at least 80 percent of the credited service, including sick leave or PCLB, necessary for normal or early retirement, and meets the applicable age requirements for such, if any. In this circumstance previously purchased military service shall be credited if such service, including any additional service purchased as described in the following sentence, would result in the member's beneficiary becoming entitled to receive an annuity benefit. If service so eligible for purchase existed, but was not purchased prior to death, the member's beneficiary shall have 90 days following the date of death of the member to purchase the service necessary to receive an annuity. 
6.  The maximum credit purchased under this subsection (k) shall be four years. 
7.  Credited service purchased pursuant to this subsection (k) shall count for all purposes under the plan. 
8.  Purchase of credited service may not be requested unless the member has already earned at least five years of credited service at the time of the request. 
9.  A member may not obtain a benefit, nor base the amount of benefit received, upon service purchased under this subsection if such service is claimed for retirement purposes under any other federal, state, or local retirement or pension system where "length of service" is a factor in determining the eligibility for, or the amount of compensation received, except where credit for such service has been granted in a pension system providing retired pay for non-regular service in the Armed Forces of the United States as provided in 10 U.S.C. Chapter 1223. Any member claiming credit under this subsection must certify on a form prescribed by the plan that credit for such service has not and will not be claimed for retirement purposes under any other federal, state, or local retirement or pension system where "length of service" is a factor in determining the eligibility for, or the amount of compensation received, except where credit for such service has been granted in a pension system providing retired pay for nonregular service in the Armed Forces of the United States as provided in 10 U.S.C. Chapter 1223. Such certification shall also include written authorization for the plan to have access to information from any above-described pension systems to confirm that the requirements of this subsection are being complied with. If the member dies prior to retirement, the member's beneficiary must make the required certification before credit may be claimed. If such certification is not made by the member or the member's beneficiary, credit for prior military service shall not be allowed. If it is determined that a benefit based upon such service leave has been claimed in violation of this section, no credit for such service will be allowed under this plan, which may effect the eligibility for, or amount of, any benefit provided under this plan, and amounts contributed for purchase of such service shall be forfeited. 
(l)  Early separation program. Notwithstanding subsection (3) of service credit rules and subsection 2-534(c), certain members employed on October 1, 2009, having at that date 17 or more years of credited service, not including unused PCLB and sick leave, but including previously purchased prior military service eligible for use as credited service at that date, will be awarded an additional three years of credited service towards eligibility for service retirement, and towards the amount of his/her service retirement pension, effective beginning pension payments made at the end of the first month following separation, upon the following conditions: Said members must irrevocably agree to resign from employment with the city effective prior to January 1, 2010 and subsequently terminate employment pursuant to said agreement. Participation by members shall be restricted to those eligible members (as described above and below) whose offer to participate and resign is submitted between August 31, 2009 and September 30, 2009. Members who are general government employees below the level of department director, except as excluded below, are eligible to participate: 
(1)  Traffic signal technician classifications; 
(2)  A maximum of 4.5 positions in the planning division are eligible to participate, subject to: 
a.  If more than the above number of eligible planning division employees apply by the end of the election period, the initially accepted group of individuals will be determined by lottery. At this point, the city manager may accept additional eligible employees from the original planning division applicant pool if, after a review of the division workforce as it would be constituted following the separation of the initially accepted employees, the division would, even with the loss of one or more additional personnel, suffer only a minimal loss of productivity based upon the ability to train other existing employees, or readily hire new employees (at or near the minimum of any applicable pay range) to provide any necessary skill sets. 
b.  The number of additional eligible employees, if any, who may be accepted in the program will be determined as described above. If there are more eligible employees from the original applicant pool than additional openings in the program as described in (a) above, the criteria for selection will be as follows with the lowest scoring employee being eligible for the additional opening(s): 
1.  Demonstrates broad knowledge of division operations; 
2.  Achieves accurate results through speed and decisiveness; and 
3.  Communicates openly and effectively within and without the division. 
(m)  Early separation program. 
(1)  Notwithstanding subsection (3) of service credit rules and subsection 2-534(c), members employed on June 1, 2010, having at that date 17 or more years of credited service, not including unused PCLB and sick leave, but including previously purchased prior military service eligible for use as credited service at that date, will be awarded an additional three years of credited service towards eligibility for service retirement, and towards the amount of such retirement pension, effective beginning pension payments made at the end of the first month following separation, upon meeting the conditions set forth herein. 
(2)  Members employed on June 1, 2010, and on that date having attained age 55 and having at least 15 years of credited service, but less than 17 years of credited service, not including unused PCLB and sick leave, will be eligible for an early retirement benefit provided that the service retirement annuity would not be reduced by five-twelfths of one percent for each month by which his/her early retirement date is less than the date he/she would have reached age 65, upon meeting the conditions set forth herein. 
(3)  Said members must irrevocably agree to resign from employment with the city effective prior to September 1, 2010, and subsequently terminate employment pursuant to said agreement. 
(4)  Participation by members shall be restricted to those eligible members (as described above and below) whose offer to participate and resign is submitted between May 10, 2010, and June 10, 2010. 
(5)  Members who are general government employees not assigned to the regional transit system and below the level of department director, except as excluded below, are eligible to participate: 
a.  A maximum of one position in the traffic signal technician (TST) classifications. 
b.  A maximum of four positions in the planning division. 
c.  If more than one eligible employee in a TST classification, or more than four eligible planning division employees apply by the end of the election period, the initially accepted TST or planning division employees will be determined on the basis of the earliest proposed termination date, then if necessary, the earliest submitted application among equal early termination dates. At this point, the city manager may accept additional eligible employees from the original TST or planning division applicant pools if, after a review of the TST or division workforce as it would be constituted following the separation of the initially accepted employees, the city would, even with the loss of one or more additional personnel, suffer only a minimal loss of productivity based upon the ability to train other existing employees, or readily hire new employees (at or near the minimum of any applicable pay range) to provide any necessary skill sets. The number of additional eligible employees, if any, who may be accepted in the program will be determined as described above. If there are more eligible employees from the original applicant pool(s) than additional openings in the program as described in subsection a. or b. above, the criteria for selection will be as follows with the lowest scoring employee being eligible for the additional opening(s): 
1.  Demonstrates broad knowledge of TST or division operations; 
2.  Achieves accurate results through speed and decisiveness; and 
3.  Communicates openly and effectively. 
(n)  Temporary service prior to regular employment. A member who was actively employed on December 11, 2009, or thereafter as a regular employee, and is not receiving, as of September 15, 2010, a termination or retirement benefit, or then participating in the DROP, may have the months(s') that the member was employed as a full-time temporary employee with the city, added to his/her years of credited service, notwithstanding subsection 2-523(d), provided that: 
(1)  The incident(s) of temporary employment sought to be added is/are each a minimum of six continuous months, ending no more than 30 days preceding a period of regular employment with the city for which credited service has been granted, or in the case of consecutive incidents of temporary employment (no break in service of more than 30 days), the last of which ended no more than 30 days preceding a period of regular employment with the city for which credited service has been granted. 
(2)  The member contributes to the fund an actuarially determined amount so that service purchased pursuant this subsection (n) does not result in increase to the city's contribution to the plan. For purposes of purchasing service, the plan will accept cash or a transfer of all or part of a member's account in the City of Gainesville's 457 Deferred Compensation Plan or 401(a) defined contribution plans, and will accept rollover contributions and/or direct rollovers of distributions (including after tax contributions) made after December 31, 2001, that are eligible for rollover in accordance with Section 402(c), 403(a)(4), 403(b)(8), 408(d)(3)(A)(ii), or 457(e)(16) of the Internal Revenue Code, from of the following types of plans: (1) a qualified plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code; (2) an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the Code; (3) an eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Code, which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state; and (4) an individual retirement account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or 408(b) of the Code (including SEP's and Simple IRA's after two years of participation in the Simple IRA). The amount distributed from such plan must be rolled over to this plan no later than the 60 th day after distribution was made from the plan, unless otherwise waived by the IRS pursuant to Section 402(c)(3) of the Code. The plan shall absorb the cost of professional services for obtaining one actuarial estimate for a member. Any subsequent estimates shall be paid for in advance by the requesting member. 
(3)  Purchase of credited service attributable full-time temporary employment prior to regular employment shall be for each entire incident of temporary employment sought to be purchased. In the case of a member not actively employed as a regular employee on October 7, 2010, and a member/regular employee actively employed on October 7, 2010, who has satisfactorily completed his/her initial probation period prior to October 7, 2010. such member(s) shall have 60 days from November 1, 2010, to purchase any and all eligible incidents of temporary employment ending prior October 7, 2010. In the case of eligible incidents of temporary employment ending after October 7, 2010, or in the case of a member who has not completed his/her initial probation period by October 7, 2010, such must be purchased within 60 days of the member vesting in the plan. 
(4)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made in one lump sum payment, upon receipt of which credited service shall be given, except as provided in subsection (5) below. 
(5)  Except as provided in subsection (6) below, service for which payment has been made pursuant to subsection (4) above shall not be deemed credited service under the plan until such date that the member is otherwise eligible for normal retirement under section 2-526(a)(l) or has reached age 55. In the event a member (or his or her beneficiary) begins receiving an amount under section 2-526(a)(3) or a benefit under Division 6 of Article VII of Chapter 2 (Disability Pension Plan Benefit), the payments made pursuant to subsection (4) above shall be returned to member or beneficiary without interest at such time and no credited service given for the temporary employment. 
(6)  Service may be purchased, and credited, or previously purchased service credited, in advance of retirement eligibility as described in subsection (5) above under the following circumstances: When a member who is a regular employee at time of death has at least 80 percent of the credited service, including sick leave or PCLB, necessary for normal or early retirement, and meets the applicable age requirements for such, if any. In this circumstance, purchased temporary service shall be credited if such service, including any additional service purchased as described in the following sentence, would result in the member's beneficiary becoming entitled to receive an annuity benefit. If service so eligible for purchase existed, but was not purchased prior to death, the member's beneficiary shall have 90 days following the date of death of the member to purchase the service necessary to receive an annuity. 
(7)  The maximum credit purchased under this subsection (n) shall be four years. 
(8)  Credited service purchased pursuant to this subsection (n) shall count for all purposes under the plan. 
(9)  Purchase of credited service for temporary service prior to regular employment may not be requested unless the member has already earned at least five years of credited service at the time of the request. 
(Code 1960, § 20-40.3; Ord. No. 3140, § 3, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 3587, § 1, 1-8-90; Ord. No. 950189, § 1, 6-26-95; Ord. No. 951232, §§ 2, 3, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 951521, § 1, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 980761, §§ 1, 2, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 981266, § 23, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 990595, § 1, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 991457, §§ 2, 3, 6-26-00; Ord. No. 002141, §§ 1, 2, 2-25-02; Ord. No. 020464, § 1, 10-28-02; Ord. No. 060829, § 1, 2-12-07; Ord. No. 090114, § 1, 8-20-09; Ord. No. 090829, § 1, 5-6-10; Ord. No. 090969, § 1, 10-7-10; Ord. No. 120218, § 2, 9-10-12; Ord. No. 130122, § 3, 9-19-13; Ord. No. 140657 , § 1, 2-19-15; Ord. No. 150213 , § 1, 4-21-16)  
Sec. 2-523.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 951232, § 4, adopted Apr., 8, 1996, deleted the provisions of former § 2-523.1, which pertained to limited participant service for certain members, as derived from Ord. No. 3698, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 1991.  
Sec. 2-524. - Contributions and funding. 
(a)  Pension fund. The city employee pension fund shall be the fund in which shall be accumulated all contributions made to the fund and from which shall be paid benefits and other payments in accordance with this division. 
(b)  Member contributions. 
(1)  Effective the first full pay period following October 1, 2000, members, except members who have entered a DROP, will have a fixed employee contribution rate of five percent of earnings. There shall be no member contributions deducted from a member's compensation while participating in the DROP. Effective January 1, 1998, the contributions made by each member to the plan shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code (I.R.C.), Section 414(h), of 1986. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the member's gross income for federal income tax purposes. For all other purposes of the plan, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. No member shall have the option of choosing to receive the contributed amounts directly instead of having them paid by the city to the fund. 
(2)  The city manager shall cause contributions provided for in subsection (b)(1) to be deducted from the compensation of each member on each and every payroll, for each and every payroll, so long as each member is performing eligible service. A member's contribution provided for in this section shall be made notwithstanding that the minimum compensation provided by law for any members shall be changed thereby. Each member shall be deemed to consent and agree to the deduction made and provided for in this section and payment of his/her compensation less such deduction shall be full and complete discharge of all claims and demands whatsoever for the service rendered by the member during the period covered by such payment, except as to the benefits provided by this plan. The city manager shall cause the amount to be deducted from the compensation of each member for each and every payroll as authorized by this division and when deducted shall be paid into the fund of the plan and shall be credited to the individual member from whose compensation the deduction was made. 
(c)  City contributions. In addition to the contributions provided for herein to be paid by members of the plan, and any gifts, devises and bequests to the plan accepted by the city, the city commission is hereby authorized to deposit in the fund annually a sum which, together with the contributions from members and other sources of income to the fund, shall be sufficient to fund the normal cost of the plan and to amortize the unfunded liability, if any, of the plan over a period not longer than 40 years; provided, however, disability benefits under this division shall be funded by the city (not member contributions) through annual appropriations made to the fund, the amount of which shall be sufficient to fund the disability benefit on a sound basis. If the amortization schedule for the unfunded liability is to be based on a contribution derived in whole or in part from a percentage of the payroll of the plan membership, the assumption as to payroll growth shall not exceed the average payroll growth for the three years prior to the development of the amortization schedule, unless a different assumption is warranted by other circumstances. No city contributions shall be required or attributable to members during their participation in the DROP, or during any period subsequent to the conclusion of the DROP period when the member is not earning credited service. For the purpose of securing necessary funds, the city commission is hereby authorized to levy such taxes as may be necessary to fulfill these requirements. 
(Code 1960, § 20-40.4; Ord. No. 3140, § 4, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 970592, § 5, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 000051, §§ 6—8, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 120218, § 3, 9-10-12; Ord. No. 130122, § 4, 9-19-13; Ord. No. 140657 , § 2, 2-19-15)  
Sec. 2-525. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-526. - Benefits. 
(a)  Eligibility for service retirement. 
(1)  Normal retirement. 
a.  A member of the plan whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or before October 1, 2007 shall be eligible to retire under the terms of the plan upon the earlier of the date the member completes 20 years of credited service or more at any age, or upon the date the member completes ten years of credited service and attains age 65. In such event the member shall be entitled to and shall be paid an annuity calculated in accordance with subsection (b). 
b.  A member of the plan whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or after October 2, 2007 and on or before October 1, 2012 shall be eligible to retire under the terms of the plan upon the earlier of the date the member completes 25 years of credited service or more at any age, or upon the date the member completes ten years of credited service and attains age 65. In such event the member shall be entitled to and shall be paid an annuity calculated in accordance with subsection (b). 
c.  A member of the plan whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or after October 2, 2012 shall be eligible to retire under the terms of the plan upon the earlier of the date the member completes 30 years of credited service or more at any age, or upon the date the member completes ten years of credited service and attains age 65. In such event the member shall be entitled to and shall be paid an annuity calculated in accordance with subsection (b). 
(2)  Early retirement. An employee who is a member whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or before October 1, 2012 and has 15 years of credited service and has attained age 55, or an employee who is a member whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or after October 2, 2012 and has 20 years of credited service and has attained age 60, may make written application to the risk management department which shall promptly transmit the application to the appropriate administrative department head for early retirement. On the recommendation of the administrative department head and approval of the plan administrator, the employee may retire on the first day of any month following becoming eligible therefor as provided in this section. In such event he/she shall be entitled to and shall be paid an annuity calculated in accordance with subsection (b) except that the amount so computed shall be reduced by five-twelfths of one percent of such amount for each month by which his/her early retirement date is less than the date he/she would have reached age 65. 
(3)  Termination of employment. A member whose employment with the city terminates prior to the completion of at least five years of credited service, for any reason, shall not be entitled to any benefits under the plan; except as provided in paragraph e. below; provided, however, that in any event upon the written election of the member (in a form and manner determined by the board) amounts contributed by members shall be paid without interest to the member or, as applicable, the member's beneficiary. A member whose employment with the city terminates after the completion of at least five years of credited service, but prior to retirement, shall be entitled to a termination benefit, or, if applicable, return of contributions in accordance with subsections (e) and (f). Payment of the termination benefit shall be governed by the following provisions of this section. 
a.  Benefit amount. A member who is entitled to a termination benefit shall receive a monthly annuity equal to his/her accrued benefit, except as provided in subsection (j), determined as of his/her date of termination. 
b.  Benefit commencement date. The benefit commencement date of a member with at least five years' credited service but less than 20 years' credited service shall be the first day of the month after the member has attained age 65. 
c.  Benefit payments. The termination benefits shall be payable on the last day of each month. The first payment shall be made on the benefit commencement date, and benefits shall be payable thereafter according to the terms of the accrued benefit for the member's lifetime. A member may modify the amount and conditions of payment described in this section by electing an annuity option in accordance with the optional forms of benefit section. 
d.  Benefit forfeitures. That portion of a terminated member's benefit that is not vested shall be forfeited and used only to reduce future costs of the plan, provided, however, that amounts contributed by such a terminated member shall be paid without interest to the member or, as applicable, the member's beneficiary. 
e.  The beneficiary(ies) of a member who dies while performing qualified military service as described in the service credit rules shall receive the higher of the actuarial present value of his or her accrued benefit calculated as of time of death or return of employee contributions without any interest. In the alternative, said beneficiary may receive an annuity as described in subsections (e), (g), or (h), if such are applicable. 
(4)  Delayed retirement. A member of the plan may continue in employment to a date after eligibility for normal retirement. In such event, the member upon termination of employment shall be entitled to and shall be paid an annuity calculated in accordance with subsection (b), below. 
(b)  Service retirement pension. In the event of normal retirement, early retirement, or delayed retirement, the retiring employee shall be entitled to and shall be paid a monthly pension beginning with the month of retirement and continuing until death, except as provided in subsection (j), and subsection (g) of section 2-523. For members making application for retirement on or after May 1, 2016, such monthly pension payment will begin on the first day of the month after the member applies for retirement with the plan administrator, but not less than 30 days after making application. The amount of the monthly pension to which a retired employee whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or before October 1, 2012 will be entitled will be equal to two percent of the employee's final average earnings multiplied by the number of years of credited service divided by 12, except as provided in subsection (j), and subsection (g) of section 2-523. The amount of the monthly pension to which a retired employee whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or after October 2, 2012 will be entitled will be equal to 1.80 percent of the employee's final average earnings multiplied by the number of years of credited service divided by 12, except as provided in subsection (j), and subsection (g) of section 2-523. 
(c)  Pension payments. Pension payments shall be made monthly beginning at the end of the first month of retirement and continuing until the end of the month in which he/she dies, unless a retirement annuity option has been elected, in which case payments will be made in accordance with the option. 
(d)  Disability benefits. 
(1)  Definitions. Except as otherwise stated in this subsection, where the purpose and intent of this subsection is consistent with the definitions contained in section 2-521, as amended, the definitions as contained in section 2-521, as amended, shall have the same meaning when used in this subsection. 
ACE means "average current earnings," as utilized to determine benefit under 42 U.S.C. §§ 402 and 423. 
AWW means "average weekly wages" as utilized under F.S. Ch. 440 to determine compensation for disability. 
In-line-of-duty means an injury or illness arising out of and in the actual performance of duties required by a member's employment, during his or her regularly scheduled working hours or irregular working hours as required by the city. The administrator may require such proof as he or she deems necessary as to the time, date, and cause of any such injury or illness, including evidence from any available witnesses. Workers' compensation records under the provisions of F.S. Ch. 440 may also be used. Disability resulting from drug or alcohol abuse or use of tobacco products shall not be considered "in-line-of-duty." 
(2)  False, misleading, or fraudulent statements made to obtain disability benefits. 
a.  It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly make, or cause to be made, or to assist, conspire with, or urge another to make, or cause to be made, any false, fraudulent, or misleading oral or written statement or withhold or conceal material information to obtain a disability benefit under this subsection. 
b.  A person who violates section 2-526(d)(2)a. shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
c.  In addition to any applicable penalty under section 1-9, upon conviction for a violation described in section 2-526(d)(2)a., a participant or beneficiary of the plan may, in the discretion of the plan administrator, be required to forfeit the right to receive any or all disability benefits to which the person would otherwise be entitled under this subsection. For purposes of this paragraph, "conviction" means a determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld. 
(3)  Administration. The plan administrator or designee may condition processing the claim and the initial and continued payment of disability benefits upon receipt of any information reasonably related to eligibility for, or the amount of, disability benefits to be received by members or beneficiaries under this subsection, including, but not limited to, information related to the member's earnings, workers' compensation, and Social Security. 
(4)  Eligibility. Except as otherwise provided herein, all regular employees of the city will be eligible for disability benefits under the plan for: 
a.  "In-line-of-duty" disability. 
b.  Any other disability which occurs after the employee has been employed for at least five consecutive years as a regular employee, provided further that employment while on leave of absence without pay (not in pay status) for at least a full pay period shall not constitute a break in service, nor count towards the required years of employment. However, leave of absence due to service in the uniformed service shall not constitute a break in service and shall count towards the required years of employment. 
(5)  Credited service. Credited service for the purpose of determining benefits for disabled employees shall consist of service to the city rendered while a regular employee. Leaves without pay (the employee is not in pay status) do not count as credited service except as otherwise provided in this subsection. 
(6)  Military service. If an employee was absent due to service in the uniformed services and is eligible for, and in fact re-employed in accordance with the terms of USERRA, the employee shall be granted credited service for the period(s) of service, not including periods after discharge but before actual re-employment. Uniformed services means the Armed Forces; the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard when engaged in active duty for training, inactive duty training, or full-time National Guard duty; the commissioned corps of the public health service; and any other category of persons designated by the President in time of war or national emergency. It covers all categories of military training and service, including duty performed on a voluntary or involuntary basis, in time of peace or war. 
(7)  Leaves of absence. Any employee who has been granted a leave of absence of at least a full pay period without pay shall be accredited service prior to the leave of absence, and service credit shall resume upon return to active employment; except that an employee shall be given service credit for periods of leave of absence for military service. 
(8)  Application. Application for disability benefits must be made while a regular employee with the city and on or after February 20, 2015. 
(9)  Eligibility for both solely years of service-based disability retirement and for disability benefits. In no event shall an employee be eligible to receive disability benefits, if, at the date such benefits would commence, as provided in section 2-526(d)(14), the employee would then be eligible for a normal retirement under the plan, based upon the completion of 20 or more years of credited service, as defined under the plan, at any age. 
(10)  Disabled employees. A regular employee of the city who becomes, in the opinion of the board, totally and permanently unable to perform substantial work for pay within a 50-mile radius of his/her residence, or the distance between his/her residence and city hall; whichever is greater, and is wholly and continuously unable to perform any and every essential duty of his/her employment, with or without a reasonable accommodation, or of a position to which he/she may be assigned on the recommendation of the disability review committee as approved by the administrative department head, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, shall be entitled to disability benefits in accordance with this subsection. It is the intent of this paragraph to provide whenever practical and feasible for placement within the city of employees who may become unable to perform the duties of a particular job. If placement on another position is not practical or possible, this fact does not in itself determine disability. 
(11)  Proof of disability. Before payment of any disability benefit, the administrator shall require proof that the member is totally and permanently disabled as provided herein: 
a.  Such proof shall include the certification of the member's total and permanent disability by a physician or other qualified medical practitioner(s), and such other evidence of disability as the administrator may require, including reports from vocational rehabilitation, evaluation, or testing specialists who have evaluated the member for employment. 
b.  It must be documented that the member's medical condition occurred or became symptomatic during the time the member was employed as a regular employee of the city; the member was totally and permanently disabled at the time he or she terminated covered employment; and the member has not engaged in any activity or employment or self-employment inconsistent with the request for disability, after such termination. 
c.  If the application is for "in-line-of-duty" disability, in addition to the requirements of herein, it must be documented by competent medical evidence that the disability was caused as defined in section 2-526(d)(1). 
d.  If the application is for other than "in-line-of-duty" disability, the employee must have met the disability benefits eligibility requirements described herein on or before the workday immediately preceding the occurrence or manifestation of the injury or illness which caused the disability. 
e.  The unavailability of an employment position with the city that the member is physically and mentally capable of performing will not be considered as proof of disability, nor shall a finding of permanent total disability under the workers' compensation system be proof of permanent and total disability under the plan or that the injury or illness was incurred "in-line-of-duty." 
(12)  Disability review committee. A disability review committee is hereby created consisting of the risk management director, the human resources director, the plan administrator (who will serve as chair), the appropriate charter officer, and the appropriate administrative department head. This committee shall review all requests for disability payments, review and reexamine the entitlement of those members receiving disability benefits to the continuance of such benefits, and shall act as an advisory committee to the board as to all matters provided for or related to this subsection. The committee shall investigate each case, thoroughly considering all pertinent medical evidence which is available or may be requested. The committee shall establish the policies and procedures necessary to carry out the provisions of this subsection, including, but not limited to, the utilization of outside consultants and medical experts. After the investigation is complete in each instance, a written recommendation will be prepared and submitted to the board. 
(13)  Determination of eligibility. The board shall then consider the written recommendation of the disability review committee and may secure such other information as the board desires and determines appropriate. Following thorough consideration, the board will then determine the eligibility of the employee for benefits as provided in this subsection. The board may attach such conditions and safeguards to its findings and determinations as may be deemed appropriate in order to carry out the intent and purpose of this subsection. The determination of the board on any matters related to this subsection, its interpretation or the entitlement of one to disability benefits shall rest solely with the board, and its determination shall be final. 
(14)  Time disability payments begin. A disabled employee shall receive a monthly disability benefit beginning the later of the month following the occurrence of the disability or the month following the termination of any and all accumulated paid leave. Employees with accumulated paid leave to their credit at the time of disability must exhaust leave credit prior to receiving disability benefits. 
(15)  Calculation of disability benefit amount. The amount of monthly disability benefit to which a disabled employee will be entitled will be calculated as follows: 
a.  An employee's basic disability benefit percent will be equal to the greater of his/her years of creditable service times two percent with a minimum 42 percent for "in-line-of-duty" disability and a minimum 25 percent for other than "in-line-of duty" disability. 
b.  An employee's basic disability benefit will be equal to his/her disability benefit percent multiplied by his/her final average earnings as would be otherwise calculated under this plan and using his/her total period of creditable service if such is less than the applicable averaging period. 
c.  The employee's basic disability benefit will be reduced by the portion of any early or normal retirement benefits he/she may receive, which are attributable to employer contributions. 
d.  The employee's basic disability benefit will be reduced by his/her disability benefit percent up to a maximum of 50 percent multiplied by the monthly Social Security primary insurance amount (PIA) which he/she is initially receiving as a disabled worker, or the amount to which he or she would initially be entitled as a disabled worker if the employee has willfully failed or refused to apply for, and in good faith pursue, obtaining such benefit, unless this latter requirement is waived by the plan administrator for good cause. This reduction, once determined, shall not be further adjusted by subsequent increases in Social Security PIA amounts. 
e.  In no event shall the disability benefit payable by the city to a disabled employee exceed the lesser of $3,750.00 per month or an amount equal to his/her maximum benefit percent, less any reductions under c. and d. above and the initially determined wage replacement benefit made to the employee under workers' compensation laws. The deductions for workers' compensation payments shall not be made if the board determines that the disability for which benefits are payable is not, directly or indirectly, related to the injury for which workers' compensation payments were made. Unless otherwise provided by law, the reduction attributable to workers' compensation payments shall not reduce the disability benefit below the amount which, when such is combined with Social Security disability and workers' compensation benefits received by the employee, equals 80 percent of the employee's AWW or 80 percent of the employee's ACE (on a weekly basis), whichever is greater. A disabled employee's maximum benefit percent will be 80 percent if the employee's disability is due to a job related injury in the course of employment with the city resulting in payment of workers' compensation, and otherwise shall be 70 percent. 
(16)  Duration of disability payment. Disability payments shall continue until death of the employee or until termination of disability benefits as provided in section 2-526(d)(18). 
(17)  Limitations on payment of disability payments. Benefits are not payable for disability due to: 
a.  Self-inflicted injuries if intentional; 
b.  Participation in or in consequence of having participated in the commission of a crime, or while willfully participating in a riot, and insurrection, or other act of violence; 
c.  Service in uniformed services. 
d.  In the case of other than "in-line-of-duty" disabilities, a condition existing prior to employment or re-employment by the city (a) which condition, as it existed at that time, is the major contributory cause of the claimed disability, or (b) for which medical advice, diagnosis, care, or treatment was recommended, or received during the one year period immediately preceding employment or re-employment, or (c) when during any medical examination authorized under this subsection or otherwise, including pre-employment and post-employment medical examinations described in section 2-526(d)(20), the applicant, member or former employee, makes false representations regarding previous injuries, impairments, anomalies or disease, upon which the city has relied in making employment or benefit decisions. 
(18)  Termination or reduction of disability benefits. 
a.  In the event that a former employee is determined by the administrator to be no longer disabled as provided for in the plan, his/her disability benefits shall be discontinued as follows. In the event that he/she has been offered regular employment with the city, the disability benefits shall cease within 30 days of the date of the offer, unless extended by the administrator for good cause shown, or the date of beginning such employment, whichever sooner occurs. In any other case the disability benefits shall be discontinued six months after the date of such determination. 
b.  A disabled employee shall be considered as no longer disabled nor entitled to the benefits of this subsection when the employee becomes able to satisfactorily perform duties similar to those required by the position he/she held at the time of disability, or duties of a position which shall become and is available to the person and deemed suitable by the board. Such determination shall be made by the board upon the recommendation of the disability review committee concurred in by the appropriate administrative department head. If the disabled employee refuses to accept an offer of reemployment or reinstatement made in accordance with this subsection, his/her disability benefits shall cease immediately. The board shall make such termination of recovery based upon information provided by the disability review committee and other appropriate sources, and the determination shall be final and conclusive. 
c.  In the event that a disabled employee is able to engage in full or part-time employment for other employers, and/or substantial self-employment, resulting in current employment earnings, disability payments made to such employee shall be reduced as follows. The employee's monthly reported (city employment and approved outside employment) employment earnings at the date the disability occurred will be adjusted for seasonal or other reasonable variations, and then adjusted by cost of living increases to date of reduction. This amount (adjusted earnings) shall be compared with the employee's current employment earnings. If the employee's current employment earnings exceed 25 percent of his/her adjusted earnings, then for each three percent in excess of that level, the disability benefits shall be reduced by one percent. For example, if his/her current earnings become 55 percent of his/her adjusted earnings, then the disability payments shall be reduced by ten percent. Such recovery of earning capacity shall not affect the determination of disability unless the city specifically determines to discontinue disability payments upon the basis that the employee is no longer disabled as provided for herein. Any reduction authorized herein shall be imposed in addition, and subsequent to, any offsets authorized by section 2-526(d)(15). 
(19)  Payment in case of legal or other disability. Whenever a person entitled to disability payments under this subsection is under legal disability, the disability benefits shall be payable to his/her legal guardian. 
(20)  Medical examinations. 
a.  All regular employees shall be required to complete a medical history record at the time of their employment or reemployment. Any false or misleading statements or omissions made by the employee on his/her medical history record may cause the employee to be ineligible for receiving future disability benefits. 
b.  All preexisting physical or mental disabilities, impairments or limitations shall be stated on the medical history record. The employees shall, by signing a statement, waive any and all future rights to a disability benefit (except one rising out of and in the course of employment with the city) from the city if the future disability results from or is caused by a condition existing prior to employment or reemployment by the city. 
c.  Once each year following the receipt of disability benefits by reason of physical or mental incapacity and/or any other time for good cause, the plan administrator may require any such disability employee to undergo a medical examination by a duly qualified and licensed physician designated by the plan administrator. The plan administrator may cause an employee's disability benefit to be discontinued if he/she refuses to submit to the medical examinations. 
d.  The board shall have the right to review the eligibility and entitlement of an eligible employee to a disability benefit at any time, and such determination as may be made by the board shall be final. 
(21)  Transfer of employees' disability plan obligations and assets to the employees pension plan. To complete the transition of disability benefits from the City of Gainesville Employees' Disability Plan to the City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan, the finance director shall transfer the remaining obligations for disability benefits currently being paid to disabled retirees and requisite level of assets to satisfy these obligations, as determined by the disability plan actuary, from the City of Gainesville Employees' Disability Plan to the City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan as soon as administratively feasible. Thereafter, these obligations shall be assumed by the City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan and eligible employees who received disability benefits or submitted claims for disability benefits under the City of Gainesville Employees' Disability Plan before February 20, 2015, shall receive their disability benefits through the City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan. 
(e)  Death of an active member. If a member actively employed by the city dies prior to his/her eligibility for normal or early retirement, no death benefits shall be payable from the plan; provided however, that amounts contributed by members shall be paid without interest to the member's beneficiary. If a member actively employed by the city dies subsequent to his/her eligibility for normal or early retirement, and had selected an optional form of benefit, as provided in subsection (j), benefit payments will be made to the beneficiary in accordance with such option as though the member had retired on the day before he/she died and if he/she has elected the normal form amounts contributed by the member shall be paid without interest to the member's beneficiary. 
(f)  Death subsequent to termination of employment but prior to retirement eligibility. If a member dies subsequent to termination of employment but prior to eligibility for retirement, no death benefits shall be payable; provided however, that amounts contributed by members shall be paid without interest to the member's beneficiary. 
(g)  Death subsequent to retirement but prior to benefit commencement. If a member dies subsequent to retirement but prior to benefit commencement and had elected an optional form of benefit, as provided in subsection (j), benefit payments will be made to the beneficiary in accordance with the terms of such option as though the employee had commenced benefits on the day before he/she died; provided, however, that amounts contributed by members who elected the normal form shall be paid without interest to the member's beneficiary. 
(h)  Death after benefit commencement. If a member dies subsequent to his/her benefit commencement date, no death benefit shall be payable unless the member had elected an optional form of benefit, as provided in subsection (j), in which case the terms of the optional form selected shall apply; provided however, that amounts contributed by members in excess of retirement benefits paid to the member under the normal form shall be paid without interest to the member's beneficiary. 
(i)  Reemployed members. 
(1)  If employment of a member entitled to a termination benefit is terminated, and he/she is subsequently reemployed by the city prior to his/her benefit commencement date, he/she shall continue to be entitled to the credited service he/she had previously earned, and shall again participate in the plan and accrue benefits after such date of reemployment, in accordance with the terms of the plan. A member whose employment with the city terminated prior to the member's entitlement to any termination benefits and who has had the amount, if any, he/she contributed to this plan repaid without interest, shall no longer be a member of the plan and shall not be entitled to receive any benefits under the plan. If a member described in section 2-521 "Credited Service," subsection (2) or (3) is subsequently reemployed by the city, he/she may recoup his/her previous credited service to which he/she was previously entitled, if he/she, within 30 days from the date of his/her successful completion of his/her probationary period after reemployment, refunds the amount of contributions paid out, plus interest at the plan's assumed rate as stated in the most recent actuarial valuation report filed with the state pursuant to F.S. Ch. 112.63(2), for each year and portion thereof of his/her absence and the period of time after reemployment until the date of refund. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the requirements of this section and section 2-521 requiring that reemployed members repay withdrawn contributions, fleet management and janitorial services employees laid off on September 30, 1978, shall, upon reemployment, not be required to refund payments received pursuant to Ordinance No. 2350, in order to receive past service credits for the period of previous employment. 
(j)  Annuity options. Upon a member becoming eligible to receive an annuity either through regular retirement or through a DROP, he/she may elect to receive annuity benefits, payable under the plan in the form of a joint survivor annuity instead of a normal annuity form, which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the annuity he/she would receive under the normal form. If any member who has a spouse or registered domestic partner at his/her benefit commencement date fails to make such an election it will be assumed that he/she elected option A below with his/her spouse or registered domestic partner as the beneficiary and if the member does not have a spouse or registered domestic partner at his/her benefit commencement date, that the member elected the normal form. 
(1)  Option A—Joint annuity option. A reduced monthly annuity benefit which shall be payable during the joint lifetime of the member and his/her beneficiary, with two-thirds of such reduced annuity amount continuing after the death of the member during the lifetime of the beneficiary. If the beneficiary predeceases the member, 100 percent of the reduced benefit will continue to be received by the member. 
(2)  Option B—Joint and last survivor annuity option. A reduced monthly annuity benefit which shall be payable during the joint lifetime of the member and his/her beneficiary, with two-thirds of such reduced benefit amount continuing automatically after the death of either the member or his/her beneficiary, payable for the lifetime of the survivor. 
The election of either joint survivor option (for an unmarried member), or the election of option A or B (by a married member) must be requested by the member at least 30 days prior to the date of benefit commencement. Such election, if made, may not be changed by the member within three months prior to the date of benefit commencement. The election of the normal form by a married member must be requested by the member at least three months prior to the date of benefit commencement, or a notarized spousal waiver must be submitted 30 days prior to the date of benefit commencement, and may not be changed by the member within 30 days prior to the date of benefit commencement. The election of a joint survivor option shall be deemed automatically canceled at the death of the proposed beneficiary prior to the member's benefit commencement date. Provided, however, anything otherwise contained in this section or any other section of this division to the contrary notwithstanding, a member receiving an annuity, either through regular retirement or through a DROP, may change his/her option after benefit commencement either from an annuity option or to an annuity option in the event of (1) a divorce or legal separation, when the same has been considered and approved by the court granting same as a part of the settlement; or (2) the marriage of an unmarried employee who becomes married after the date of benefit commencement. Such change shall be effective no sooner than three months after the filing of a written election to effect such change with the personnel department. The benefits paid under such changed annuity shall be the actuarial equivalent to the remaining value of the former annuity determined as of the date of the benefit change. 
(k)  Social security option. An employee who begins receiving an annuity, either through regular retirement or through a DROP, before he/she is entitled to receive monthly benefits under the federal social security system may elect to have his/her annuity benefits increased before his/her social security benefits begin, and decreased thereafter to obtain, insofar as practical, a level total yearly retirement income from the two sources. The amount he/she will receive both before and after he/she becomes eligible for social security payments shall be the actuarial equivalent of the benefits to which he/she would have been entitled had he/she not selected this option. The social security option must be requested at least 90 days prior to date of benefit commencement. Such election, if made, may not be changed by the member within 90 days prior to date of benefit commencement. 
(l)  Maximum benefit limitation. 
(1)  The maximum annual benefit payable under the plan shall be limited to $205,000.00, subject to adjustment for increases in the cost of living in accordance with the following sentence. As of the first day of January of each calendar year, the maximum dollar limitation shall be adjusted automatically to an amount determined by the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service in accordance with Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code effective for that calendar year and shall apply only to that calendar year. 
Retirees in payment status whose benefits were limited in any year by the application of this limitation shall have their benefits adjusted automatically in subsequent years to take into account the then current dollar limit. 
(2)  In the event a member has earned a benefit which during a previous limitation year has met all the requirements of I.R.C. section 415, and if the member's accrued benefit exceeds the limitation of I.R.C. section 415 for the current limitation year, the member's maximum annual benefit, as described in subsection (1) of this section, shall not be less than the accrued benefit allowable under such previous limitation year. 
(3)  If the retirement benefit is payable in a form other than a straight-life annuity or a joint-and-survivor annuity with the spouse as joint annuitant, the annual benefit limitation in any year shall be the actuarial equivalent (as defined in subsection (5) of this section) of the maximum annual benefit for that year (payable in the form of a straight-life annuity), as described above. 
(4)  In the event payment of a retirement benefit under the plan to a member commences after the date the member attains age 65, the maximum benefit limitation shall be adjusted to be not more than the actuarial equivalent (as defined in subsection (5) of this section) of the then current dollar limit commencing at age 65 for the purpose of applying the benefit limit described in subsection (1) of this section. 
For years subsequent to the payment commencement year, benefits payable shall be limited to the actuarial equivalent determined as of the benefit commencement date, of the subsequent year's dollar limit assumed to commence at age 65. 
(5)  For the purpose of adjusting benefits in accordance with this section, actuarial equivalent shall be determined using the 1994 Group Annuity Mortality Table (50/50 Unisex) and the plan's interest rate for adjustments under subsections (3) and (4) of this section. For adjustment under subsections (3) and (4), no cost-of-living adjustment shall be taken onto account before the year for which such adjustment first takes effect. 
(6)  If a retirement benefit is payable to a member who has less than ten years of plan participation, the limitation described in subsection (1) of this section shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the member's years of plan participation and the denominator of which is ten. 
(m)  Distribution rules. Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan to the contrary, a form of retirement income payable from this plan after November 24, 1997, shall satisfy the following conditions: 
(1)  If any retirement income is payable before the member's death: 
a.  It shall either be distributed or commence to the member not later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ years or the calendar year in which he retires. 
b.  The distribution shall commence not later than the calendar year defined in paragraph a. above and (1) shall be paid over the life of the member or over the lifetimes of the member and his spouse, issue or dependent, or (2) shall be paid over the period extending not beyond the life expectancy of the member and his spouse, issue or dependent. 
Where a form of retirement income payment has commenced in accordance with the preceding paragraphs and the member dies before his entire interest in the plan has been distributed, the remaining portion of such interest in the plan shall be distributed no less rapidly than under the form of distribution in effect at the time of the member's death. 
(2)  If the member's death occurs before the distribution of his or her interest in the plan has commenced, his or her entire interest in the plan shall be distributed within five years of his or her death, unless it is to be distributed in accordance with the following rules: 
a.  The member's remaining interest in the plan is payable to his or her spouse, issue or dependent. 
b.  The remaining interest is to be distributed over the life of the spouse, issue, or dependent or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the spouse, issue or dependent; and 
c.  Such distribution begins within one year of the member's death unless the member's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary, in which case the distribution need not begin before the date on which the member would have attained age 70½, and if the member's spouse dies before the distribution to the spouse begins, this section shall be applied as if the spouse were the member. 
(n)  Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions. 
(1)  General. Notwithstanding any provisions of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  Eligible rollover distribution. An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for life (or life expectancy) of the distributee, or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under I.R.C. section 401(a)(9); and the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income, i.e., member contributions made prior to 1998. 
b.  Eligible retirement plan. An eligible retirement plan as defined in I.R.C. Section 402(c)(8)(B), including an individual eligible retirement account described in I.R.C. Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in I.R.C. Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in I.R.C. Section 403(a), an annuity contract described in I.R.C. Section 403(b) or a qualified trust described in I.R.C. Section 401(a) that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution, or an eligible deferred compensation plan described in I.R.C. Section 457(b) maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan. 
c.  Distributee. A distributee includes an employee, or a former employee, a surviving spouse as described in I.R.C. Section 402(c)(9), or designated beneficiary. Effective as of January 1, 2008, an employee's or former employee's non-spouse beneficiary is a distributee with regard to the interest of the employee or former employee. 
d.  Direct rollover. A direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. Effective as of January 1, 2008, a non-spouse beneficiary may make a direct rollover only to an "inherited" individual retirement account as described in Section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(o)  Rollovers to IRA's. A return of accumulated contributions in excess of $1,000.00 shall be paid in a direct rollover to an IRA designated by the plan administrator if, after notice, the member does not elect to either receive the distribution directly or have it paid in a direct rollover to an eligible retirement plan. 
(Code 1960, § 20-40.6; Ord. No. 3140, § 6, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 950189, § 2, 6-26-95; Ord. No. 951232, § 5, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 970592, §§ 6—10, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 980761, § 3, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 990595, § 2, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 00051, §§ 9, 10, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 002185, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 050595, § 1, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 070027, §§ 1, 2, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 080439, § 1, 11-20-08; Ord. No. 120218, § 4, 9-10-12; Ord. No. 130122, § 5, 9-19-13; Ord. No. 140657 , § 3, 2-19-15; Ord. No. 140860 , § 1, 5-7-15; Ord. No. 150213 , § 2, 4-21-16)  
Sec. 2-527. - Administration of the plan. 
(a)  General supervision. The general supervision of the employees pension plan shall be the responsibility of a board of trustees established in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Board of trustees. There is hereby created a board of trustees whose duty shall be to administer, manage and operate the plan carrying into effect its provisions. The members of the board of trustees shall be the members of the city commission. 
(c)  Trustees' term. Members of the city commission shall serve as trustees of the pension plan during their term of office as members of the city commission. 
(d)  Compensation of trustees. Trustees of the pension plan shall serve without compensation for their services as trustees. 
(e)  Meetings of the board; form. 
(1)  The board shall hold regular meetings at least quarterly, and shall designate the time and place thereof. It shall adopt its own rules and procedures and shall keep a record of its procedure. All regular meetings of the board shall be public. 
(2)  The majority of the board shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the board. Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote at the meeting of the board and at least four concurring votes shall be necessary for decisions of the trustees. 
(f)  Retirement plan officers: 
(1)  The chairperson of the city commission shall be the chairperson of the board and the chairperson pro-tem of the commission shall be the pro-tem of the board. 
(2)  The clerk of the city commission shall act as secretary of the board. 
(3)  The director of finance shall be treasurer of the plan and shall be custodian of the funds. The city manager shall be the plan administrator and shall have the power to finally approve members' or beneficiaries' claims for benefits. The plan administrator's denial of a member or beneficiary's claim for benefits shall be reviewable in accordance with section 2-527(i). 
(4)  The city attorney shall be legal advisor to the board. 
(5)  The board shall employ such professional and clerical services as required for the proper operation of the plan and provide for their compensation. 
(g)  Records; annual report. The treasurer of the plan shall keep or cause to be kept such data as shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities of the plan. The board shall cause to be made an annual audit showing the fiscal transactions of the plan for the preceding fiscal year. The most recent report showing the financial condition of the plan by means of an actuarial valuation of its assets and liabilities shall be attached to the report. The report shall be filed within 90 days following the end of the fiscal budgetary year. 
(h)  Administrative regulations and plan description. The board, after consulting with the advisory committee, may promulgate by resolution written rules and regulations not in conflict with the terms of this division or the Charter to cover the operation of any phase or part of the plan that is defined in this division. Copies of the rules and regulations shall be furnished to any member of the plan upon request and at least one copy thereof shall be kept available in the office of the clerk of the city commission for examination by any interested person at any time during ordinary business hours, otherwise a copy of this division shall fully meet the provisions herein. The provisions of the plan shall be contained in a written plan description. A report of pertinent financial and actuarial information on the solvency and actuarial soundness of the plan shall be kept available in the office of the clerk of the city commission for examination and shall be provided at no cost to the plan members upon their request. The plan description shall be furnished to a member of the plan upon initial employment or participation in the plan. 
(i)  Interpretation of the plan, denial of benefits. The board has the power to construe all rules, conditions and limitations of the plan, and its construction made in good faith shall be final and conclusive. There shall be timely, adequate written notice given to any member or beneficiary whose claim for benefits under the terms of this plan have been denied, setting forth the specific reasons for such denial. If requested by a member or beneficiary who has had his/her claim to benefits denied, the board shall provide for a full and fair review of the denial and its determination shall be final and conclusive. 
(j)  Agents and employees. The board shall have the power to select, employ and compensate, or cause to compensate from time to time such consultants, actuaries, accountants, attorneys, investment counsel, and other agents and employees as they may deem necessary and advisable in the proper and efficient administration of the plan. 
(k)  Other powers and duties. The powers and duties of the board or of any other person as set out herein are not intended to be complete and exclusive but each such body or person shall have powers and duties as they are reasonably implied under the terms of this division. 
(l)  Duties of the secretary. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep minutes and records of the acts of the board under this plan separate and apart from minutes of the city commission meetings, and these shall be maintained in the office of the clerk of the city commission. 
(m)  Membership records. All notices, elections, designations and changes in beneficiary, and similar writings pertaining to the operation of the plan shall be made and preserved in writing on such forms as the board may direct. A service record for each member shall be maintained in the personnel department which shall show, at least: 
(1)  For each active and inactive member of the system, a number or other means of identification, date of birth, sex, date of employment, current address, period of credited service, split, if required, between prior service and current service, and occupational classification; 
(2)  For each active member, compensation for purposes of computing final average earnings, cumulative contributions together with accumulated interest, if credited, age at entry into system, and current rate of contribution; 
(3)  For each inactive member, average final compensation, or equivalent, and age at which deferred benefit is to begin; 
(4)  For each retired member and other beneficiary a number or other means of identification, date of birth, sex, beginning date of benefit, type of retirement and amount of monthly benefit, and type of survivor benefit. 
In order to receive benefits under this plan a member, or beneficiary upon request, shall be required to submit, or authorize the board to secure, any information concerning his/her entitlement to benefits (such as matters pertaining to social security benefits) or other information reasonably related to the operation of the plan. 
(n)  Treasurer. Gifts, bequests, devises or appropriations to the fund shall be received by the treasurer. The treasurer shall be liable for safekeeping of the funds received and appropriated by the city commission under this bond. The treasurer shall promptly deposit funds in banks or savings and loan associations designated by the trustees of the fund or transfer to the trustees or the insurance company all funds received and appropriated by the city commission. The director of finance shall be responsible for making all payments and disbursements from pension funds. 
(o)  Actuary and reports. The board shall employ an actuary who is enrolled under Subtitle C of Title III of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, and who is a member of the Society of Actuaries or the American Academy of Actuaries. The actuary shall prepare and certify regularly scheduled actuarial reports at least every three years. The actuarial report shall consist of, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Adequacy of employer and employee contribution rates in meeting levels of employee benefits provided in the system and changes, if any, needed in the rates to achieve or preserve a level of funding deemed adequate to enable payment of the benefit amounts prescribed by the system, which shall include a valuation of present assets and liabilities of the system, and the extent of unfunded accrued liabilities, if any; 
(2)  A plan to amortize any unfunded liability and a description of actions taken to reduce the unfunded liability; 
(3)  A description of actuarial assumptions; 
(4)  A schedule illustrating the amortization of unfunded liabilities, if any; 
(5)  A comparative review illustrating the actual salary increases granted and the rate of investment return realized over the three-year period preceding the actuarial report with the assumptions used in both the preceding and current actuarial reports; 
(6)  A statement by the enrolled actuary that the report is complete and accurate and that in his opinion the techniques and assumptions used are reasonable and meet the requirements and intent of F.S. Ch. 112, Pt. VII. 
The results of each actuarial report shall be filed with the board within 60 days of certification. Thereafter, the results of each actuarial report shall be made available for inspection upon request. Additionally, a statement of actuarial impact shall be required in conjunction with and prior to, final adoption of a change or amendment in the plan design or benefit structure which results in increased benefits for plan members or beneficiaries. The statement shall indicate whether the proposed changes are in compliance with Section 14, Article X, of the State Constitution and F.S. § 112.64. A copy of each actuarial report or statement to the division of retirement within 60 days of receipt from the actuary shall be furnished. 
(p)  Adoption of tables. In making any actuarial computations provided in this division, the tables, charts, and other statistical information shall be selected by the board from standard sources in common use by other annuity and pension plans, including but not limited to those operated by governmental bodies in the United States of America, or by the United States Internal Revenue Service. 
(q)  Designation of beneficiary required. In order to be entitled to earn any credit for benefits under this division and as a condition precedent to becoming an employee and continuing as an employee of the city such person shall first designate in writing on forms to be provided by the personnel department a beneficiary or beneficiaries. Such written designation shall contain such information as the personnel department may require and shall at all times remain on file in the personnel department. A member may change his/her beneficiary at any time and shall change same when his/her beneficiary dies. 
(r)  Responsibilities of members and beneficiaries. Each member or beneficiary or other interested member shall be responsible for advising the board of his/her current mailing address, and promptly advising the board pertaining to any error, in whosoever's favor, in connection with the payment of benefits or any other payment under or in connection with the plan. 
(s)  Interest on delayed payments. Pension payments, although not promptly paid for any reason, and any other payments to be paid out of the fund, although not paid promptly for any reason, shall not bear interest unless so ordered by the board which shall have the discretion to fix the rate and calculate any such interest, and in such event, the interest to be paid shall not exceed three percent simple interest. 
(t)  Personal liability. The board of trustees and plan officers shall, in the performance of plan duties, discharge their duties with respect to the plan solely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to participants and their beneficiaries and defraying reasonable expenses of administering the plan. The plan may purchase insurance for its fiduciaries to cover liabilities or losses incurred by reason or acts or omissions of the fiduciaries. 
(u)  Filing defined. Where any notice, election, or other instrument is required or permitted by this division to be filed with the board, the same shall be filed with its secretary. 
(v)  Short title designation. For purposes of easy identification the plan provided for in section 2-526 may be known as "Plan A" and the plan provided for in section 2-525 may be known as "Plan B." 
(w)  Investment of funds. The board shall have full power to invest and reinvest all funds within its control and to make investment of all kinds except as otherwise provided by statute or ordinance. Such investments shall not be subject to the limitations and conditions set forth in F.S. § 215.47. 
(x)  Method of making payments. All payments from the fund shall be made according to Charter provisions governing the disbursement of moneys from the city's general fund provided that no payment shall be made from the funds of the plan unless the payment has been previously authorized by the board. All payments shall be made monthly except that payments which would amount to less than $10.00 may be made quarterly, semiannually or annually, as the case may be. 
(y)  Errors. Should any change or error in the records result in any member, retirant, or beneficiary receiving from the plan more or less than he/she would have been entitled had the records been correct, the plan administrator shall correct such error and as far as practical shall adjust the payment of the benefits in such manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the member, retirant, or beneficiary was correctly entitled shall be paid. 
(z)  Reports by trustee or insurance company. Any corporate trustee or insurance company or companies with which a trust agreement or contract or contracts may be entered into for the administration of the pension plan funds shall be required to submit a statement of the conditions of the funds on deposit to the credit of the plan as prescribed by the board but at least once yearly, and may be required to supply copies of the statements to an actuarial consultant designated by the commission. The original shall be retained among the records of the secretary of the board. 
(aa)  Annual audit. The affairs of the pension plan shall be audited annually by an independent certified public accountant selected by the city commission. The report of the auditor shall be submitted to the city commission in writing and shall be made available to the public and to members of the pension plan. 
(bb)  Advisory committee: 
(1)  There shall be an advisory committee composed of three employees participating in the plan who shall be elected by a majority of all city employees participating in the pension plan. The election shall be regularly held on the third Monday in September of every year and the persons elected shall hold office for three years beginning on the third day after their election. The advisory committee is hereby authorized and directed to select and appoint not less than 30 days before the election, from those participating in the pension plan, a committee of five to conduct the election. Any vacancy on the advisory committee shall be filled by a majority vote of all officers and employees participating in the pension plan, cast at a special election called for that purpose; provided, however, that if such a vacancy occurs within three months before a regular election, it shall be within the discretion of the advisory committee as to whether or not a special election shall be called for the purpose of filling the vacancy. 
(2)  The advisory committee may recommend in writing to the board at any time on any matters relating to the plan. The recommendations, though not binding on the board, shall be given full and complete consideration. 
(3)  The terms shall be so arranged that one member will be elected each year to provide for continuity on the committee. The election each year will be to replace only those vacancies of the one member whose term expires or to replace any additional vacancy which may occur. 
(Code 1960, § 20-40.7; Ord. No. 990595, § 3, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 991457, § 4, 6-26-00; Ord. No. 020901, § 1, 4-14-03; Ord. No. 130122, § 6, 9-19-13)  
Sec. 2-528. - Separability and construction. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this division shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not in any manner affect the remaining portions of this division, which shall be, and remain, in full force and effect, as fully as if the portion so adjudicated invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The section headings included in this division shall not be construed to limit the text included thereunder. 
(Code 1960, § 20-40.8)  
Sec. 2-529. - Protection against fraud and deceit. 
Whosoever with intent to deceive shall make or cause to be made any statement, report, certificate, election, notice, claim or other instrument, authorized or required under this division, whether of the enumerated classes or otherwise, which shall be untrue, or shall falsely or cause to be falsified any record comprising a part of the operation or administration of this plan contemplated by this division shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1960, § 20-40.9)  
Sec. 2-530. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Limitations of assignment. None of the benefit distributions under the employees pension plan shall be subject to the claim or to any legal process of any creditor of the member or beneficiary; and neither such member nor beneficiary shall have any right to alienate, commute or assign any of the benefit distributions under this plan. If any member shall attempt to dispose of his/her benefits or the right to receive the benefits, or if there should be an effort to seize the benefits or the right to receive the benefits by attachment, execution, or other legal or equitable process, the right may be transferred, at the discretion of the plan administrator, to one or more beneficiaries, if any, designated by the member, or to the spouse, registered domestic partner, children, or other dependents of the member, in such shares as the plan administrator may appoint. The plan administrator may revoke his/her appointment at any time and make further appointments, which may include the member. 
(b)  Payments to legally incompetent. If any member or beneficiary is a minor, or, in the judgment of the plan administrator is otherwise legally incapable of personally receiving and giving a valid receipt for any payment due him/her, the plan administrator may, unless claim shall have been made by a duly appointed guardian, direct that payments be made to the person's spouse, registered domestic partner, child, parent, brother, or sister, or other person deemed by the plan administrator to have assumed responsibility for the expenses of the member or beneficiary. 
(c)  Disappearance of member or beneficiary. If any member or beneficiary, receiving or entitled to receive benefits under the plan, should disappear and fail to respond within 60 days to a written notice sent by the plan administrator by registered or certified mail informing the member or beneficiary of his/her settlement to receive benefits under the plan, the plan administrator may pay the benefits, or any portion thereof which the plan administrator determines to be appropriate, to the dependents of the member or beneficiary, whichever is applicable, having regard to the needs of the dependents, until the member or beneficiary is located or until the benefits have been paid in full whichever event shall first occur. 
(d)  USERRA. Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, effective as of December 12, 1994, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provide in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, USERRA, and F.S. chs. 175 and 185, as applicable. 
(e)  Use of forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to reduce current or future contributions to the fund. 
(f)  Compliance with federal tax laws. Notwithstanding any other provisions, the benefit of a member shall be reduced to the extent that it exceeds amounts specified in Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, and all distributions from the plan (including the DROP) shall conform to the regulations issued under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code, including the incidental death benefit provision of Section 401(a)(9)(G) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Code 1960, § 20-40.10; Ord. No. 990595, § 4, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 080439, § 2, 11-20-08; Ord. No. 130122, § 7, 9-19-13)  
Sec. 2-531. - Interest in the fund. 
No member, employee, pensioner, beneficiary, or other persons shall have any interest in, or right in or to, the employees pension plan fund or any part thereof, or any assets comprising the same, except only as to the extent expressly provided in this division. 
(Code 1960, § 20-40.11)  
Sec. 2-532. - Payment in case of legal or other disability. 
Whenever a person entitled to payments under this division shall be under legal disability the benefits shall be payable to his/her legal guardian. 
(Code 1960, § 20-40.12)  
Sec. 2-533. - Amendment; termination of the plan. 
(a)  Power to amend: 
(1)  The city commission shall have the right, at any time, to amend any or all of the provisions of the employees pension plan; provided, however, that it is impossible for any part of the corpus or income of the trust fund to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than the exclusive benefit of the plan participants and their beneficiaries. 
(2)  Any plan amendment which changes any benefit accrual rate or vesting schedule under the plan shall not reduce the nonforfeitable amount of any participant's accrued benefit determined as of the later of the date the amendment is adopted or becomes effective. 
(b)  Termination of plan. 
(1)  The board of trustees expects to continue this plan indefinitely, but reserves the right to terminate the plan and its city contributions thereunder at any time. In the event of the termination or partial termination of the plan, or complete discontinuance of contributions under the plan, the rights, if any, of all members to benefits accrued to the date of such termination, partial termination, or discontinuance, to the extent funded as of such date, shall be nonforfeitable. 
(2)  Upon receipt of written notice of termination of the plan, the board shall arrange for the trust fund to be apportioned and distributed after preparing a list of members, showing for each, as of the date of plan termination, the following: 
a.  For each member and beneficiary receiving payment of benefits, the amount and terms of the benefits. 
b.  For each terminated member entitled to a deferred benefit, the amount, commencement date, and terms of payment of the benefit. 
c.  For each active member, the amount of his/her accrued benefit. 
(3)  In the event of termination of the plan, the board shall allocate the assets of the trust fund (available to provide benefits) among the members and their beneficiaries under the plan in the following order: 
a.  Priority Class (A): The portion of members' accrued benefits which is derived from member contributions (if any). 
b.  Priority Class (B): In the case of benefits payable as an annuity, equally among members and beneficiaries whose benefits were in pay status. 
c.  Priority Class (C): Equally, among active members who are eligible for normal retirement, but who have not yet retired. 
d.  Priority Class (D): Equally, between all other vested accrued benefits of both active and terminated members. 
e.  Priority Class (E): All other nonvested accrued benefits under the plan. 
(4)  If the allocated assets are insufficient to provide in full benefits in each priority class the remaining portion of the trust fund shall be distributed to provide in full the benefits in each priority class. If the assets are insufficient to provide the benefits in full for any class, such assets are to be allocated in full to provide a uniform percentage of benefits to the members of that priority class. Any residual assets of the plan may be distributed to the city after all liabilities of the plan to members and their beneficiaries have been satisfied. 
(Code 1960, § 20-40.13; Ord. No. 110370, § 1, 11-17-11)  
Sec. 2-534. - Deferred retirement option program. 
(a)  A deferred retirement option program is hereby created for eligible members whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or before October 1, 2012. 
(b)  A member who is performing eligible service is eligible for participation in the DROP on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the completion of 27 years credited service, including limited participant service, and, if applicable, vesting service for former Gainesville Gas employees, and continuing up to the point in time at which the member has 35 years of regular employment, except as provided in subsection (g) below. Except as otherwise expressly provided for herein, upon entering into the DROP, employees may elect to apply unused sick leave hours (see subsection (p) for special provisions related to "GPD employees") or personal critical leave bank (PCLB) hours to attain the requisite years of credited service for eligibility to enter and for determining their accrued benefit, or may retain some or all of their unused sick leave or personal critical leave, for use during their employment while participating in the DROP. For service earned on or after October 1, 2012, no additional months of service shall be credited for unused sick leave or PCLB hours earned on or after October 1, 2012. In calculating service on or after October 1, 2012, the lesser number of months between the additional months of service credited for unused sick leave or PCLB hours earned on or before September 30, 2012 and months of unused sick leave or PCLB hours available to a member at the time of his or her entry into DROP shall be used. Sick leave and PCLB balances retained upon entry into the DROP and accrued while participating in the DROP shall not count as days or months of credited service when determining the maximum period of participation in the DROP in accordance with subsections (f) and (g) below. Any unused sick leave or PCLB remaining at the expiration of the DROP participation or period will be forfeited. 
(c)  On the date of a member's entry into the DROP, the member's credited service, accrued benefit, and final average earnings shall be calculated as if the member had actually separated from service on that date and retired. There shall be no further member contributions after entry into the DROP, except as a re-employed retiree, if applicable. No additional credited service shall be earned while participating in the DROP. Changes in the plan shall not apply to members in the DROP, except as expressly provided. 
(d)  Beginning with general (COLA) salary increases effective after October 2, 2000, a member must, in order to enter and continue to participate in the DROP, forego receipt of all general (COLA) salary increases effective after the member's entry into the DROP. Beginning with merit or progression through training increases effective after October 2, 2000, a member must, in order to enter and continue to participate in the DROP, forego receipt of all such increases effective after the member's entry into the DROP to the extent such increases would result in the members' base salary exceeding the top of the salary range of the classification the member was in, as it existed when the member entered the DROP, or after the October 2, 2000 general increase, whichever is higher. 
In the case where the members' pay plan does not provide separately for (combines) general and merit increases, beginning with such salary increases effective after October 2, 2000, a member must, in order to enter and continue to participate in the DROP, forego receipt of all such salary increases effective after the member's entry into the DROP to the following extent: First, the amount of any general increase applied to the professional pay plan for the same fiscal year shall be deducted from such DROP participant's otherwise applicable increase. The remaining increase shall be provided, but only to the extent that such increase does not result in the member's base salary exceeding the top of the salary range of the classification the member was in, as it existed when the member entered the DROP, or after the October 2, 2000 increase, whichever is higher. 
Members participating in the DROP remain eligible to receive a promotional increase but subsequent merit and progression through training or combined increases would be limited as described above. 
(e)  The member shall select the retirement options as provided for in subsections 2-526(j) and (k) and shall designate any beneficiary in accordance with plan provisions and practices applicable to normal and delayed retirements. 
(f)  The maximum period of participation in the DROP is 60 months from date of entry. Except as provided in subsection (g), participation in the DROP must cease and employment terminate at the conclusion of a total of 35 years of regular employment with the City of Gainesville and, if applicable, predecessor employers (RTS, Gainesville Gas), or a successor employer (sheriff) under F.S. § 112.0515 (1997). 
(g)  Members who have more than 32 years of credited service, including limited participant service and, if applicable, vesting service for former Gainesville Gas employees, as of October 1, 2000, may participate in the DROP for up to 36 months. In order to take advantage of this "grandfathering" provision, a member otherwise eligible to enter the DROP must enter the DROP between October 1, 2000 and December 29, 2000. Such members (with over 32 years on October 1, 2000) electing to enter the DROP on or after December 30, 2000, shall be governed by the normal eligibility and duration requirements described herein. 
(h)  A member may cease participating in the DROP prior to the expiration of the agreed upon (not to exceed the maximum allowed) DROP period only by terminating regular employment with the city. In the event that a member participating in the DROP fails to terminate regular employment on or before the conclusion of the DROP period, then the member's monthly retirement benefit shall cease to be paid at the conclusion of the DROP period, and any such amount(s) shall be forfeited to the plan until such time as the member terminates regular employment. 
(i)  Effective with the date of DROP participation, the member's initial monthly benefit, including creditable service, final average earnings and the effective date of retirement shall be fixed. A DROP participant's deferred monthly benefit shall accrue in the plan pension fund on behalf of the participant, plus interest. Such interest for members whose DROP participation begins on or before October 1, 2012 shall accrue at an effective annual rate of six percent compounded monthly, on the prior month's accumulated ending balance, up to the month of termination or death. For members whose DROP participation begins on or after October 2, 2012, such interest shall accrue at an effective annual rate of 2.25 percent compounded monthly, on the prior month's accumulated ending balance, up to the month of termination or death. For members whose DROP participation begins on or after May 1, 2016, members shall have a one-time, irrevocable option for such interest to accrue at either (1) an effective annual rate of 2.25 percent compounded monthly, on the prior month's accumulated ending balance, up to the month of termination or death, or (2) a variable annual rate of not less than 0 and not more than 4.5 percent based on the plan's actual return rate for the previous plan year compounded monthly, on the prior month's accumulated ending balance, up to the month of termination or death. Retirement benefits and interest thereon shall continue to accrue in the DROP until the established termination date of the DROP, or until the participant terminates employment or dies prior to such date. Although individual DROP accounts shall not be established, a separate accounting of each participant's accrued benefits under the DROP shall be calculated and provided to participants annually. 
(j)  The terminated DROP participant or, if deceased, such participant's named beneficiary, shall elect to receive payment of the DROP benefits in accordance with one of the options listed in subsection 2-526(n). For a participant or beneficiary who fails to elect a method of payment within 60 days of termination of the DROP, the plan will pay a lump sum, less any required withholding. 
(k)  The decision to participate in the DROP is irrevocable once DROP payments begin. Upon deciding to participate in the DROP, the member shall submit, on forms required by the plan administrator: 
(1)  A written election to participate in the DROP; 
(2)  Selection of the DROP participation and termination dates, which satisfy the limitations stated herein. Such termination date shall be in a binding letter of resignation with the city, establishing a deferred termination date. The member may change the termination date within the limitations stated in subsections (f) and (g) of this section, but only with the written approval of the city; 
(3)  A properly completed DROP application for service retirement as provided in this section; and 
(4)  Any other information required by the plan administrator. 
Once the employee has completed participation in the DROP, his/her regular employment will end and he/she shall be separated from employment; this separation shall be processed as a voluntary resignation. 
(l)  Upon entry into the DROP, a member shall no longer be eligible for disability benefits under the city police officers and firefighters consolidated pension plan or the city employees' disability plan. In the event of death during the DROP period, the member shall be presumed to have retired on a normal or delayed retirement for the purposes of subsection 2-526(e), (g) or (h). 
(m)  Except as provided in subsection (p) below, upon the termination of a member's (who has entered a DROP) regular city employment (for any reason, whether by retirement, resignation, discharge or death), the retirement benefits payable to the member or to the member's beneficiary (if the member selected an optional form of retirement benefit which provides for payments to the beneficiary) shall be paid to the member or beneficiary. Following the termination of a member's regular employment, the balance in the member's DROP account shall be payable in accordance with an option selected by the member. Regardless of the option selected by the member, the board of trustees has the right to accelerate payments in order to comply with Section 401(A)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and the right to defer payments to comply with Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(n)  Nothing herein shall be construed to remove members who have entered the DROP from the scope of Section 8(d), Art. II, of the State Constitution, and F.S. § 112.3173(5)(f) (1999). Members who commit a specified offense while employed will be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits, pursuant to those provisions of law. 
(o)  During DROP participation, a member shall be considered a retiree with deferred receipt of benefits for all plan purposes. For other purposes, except as described in subsection (p) below, the employee shall be considered an active employee of the city entitled to all rights of employment, except as otherwise provided. 
(p)  Members who are employees of the Gainesville Police Department Communications Center at the time the combined communications center is activated, who are hired by the Alachua County Sheriff on or about said date (GPD employees) are eligible to enter and participate in the DROP, described herein, with the following provisos: Upon conclusion of the DROP period or termination of employment with the sheriff, whichever earlier occurs, subsection (j) and (m) of this section and subsection (b) of section 2-535 shall then apply. Only "city" sick leave designated at the time of hire by the sheriff (see Section 4.G of the Interlocal Agreement between the City of Gainesville, the Alachua County Sheriff, and Alachua County for a combined communications center, recorded in Official Record Book 2261, page 1682, of the Public Records of Alachua County) may be utilized for years of service under subsection (b) of this section. Only the equivalent of a maximum of 416 hours of any lump sum payment of vacation leave that the sheriff might allow to be made to the employee while employed by the sheriff and prior to entering the DROP may be included in earnings for purposes of calculating the accrued benefit. 
(q)  Administration of program. The plan administrator shall make such rules and forms as are necessary for the effective and efficient administration of this subsection. The plan administrator shall not be required to advise members of the federal tax consequences of an election related to the DROP but may advise members to seek independent advice. 
(Ord. No. 000051, § 11, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 120218, § 5, 9-10-12; Ord. No. 150213 , § 3, 4-21-16)  
Sec. 2-535. - Cost of living adjustment of benefits; non-eligibility during DROP participation. 
(a)  Cost of living adjustment of benefits. Terminated members whose normal or delayed retirement has been approved shall be entitled to receive increases in the amount of monthly retirement benefits upon meeting the conditions described in one of subsections (1)—(6) below. Only one subsection below shall be applicable to any member. 
(1)  A retired member or beneficiary who was receiving on or before October 1, 2000, a monthly normal or delayed retirement benefit based upon at least 20 years of credited service, including limited participant service, and the member is or would have been at least age 62 on October 1, 2000, shall have his/her monthly retirement benefit increased by two percent beginning with the benefit for the month of October 2000 (which monthly benefit is payable November 1, 2000). Thereafter, the monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be increased by two percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(2)  A retired member or beneficiary who was receiving on or before October 1, 2000, a monthly normal or delayed, or retirement benefit based upon at least 20 years of credited service, including limited participant service, shall, upon the October 1 on or following the date the member would have attained age 62; have his/her monthly retirement benefit increased by two percent, beginning with the benefit for that month of October (which monthly benefit is payable in November). Thereafter, the monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be increased by two percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(3)  A retired member or beneficiary who first receives a monthly normal or delayed retirement benefit for October 2000 or later (first payable November 1, 2000 or later), which benefit is based upon 25 or more years of credited service, including limited participant service, shall, upon the October 1 on or following the date the member attains or would have attained age 60, have his/her monthly retirement benefit increased by two percent, beginning with the benefit for that month of October, if the member has at least 20 years of credited service on or before October 1, 2012. Thereafter, the monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be increased by two percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(4)  A retired member or beneficiary who first receives a monthly normal or delayed retirement benefit for October 2000 or later (first payable November 1, 2000 or later), which benefit is based upon 20 or more years of credited service but less than 25, including limited participant service, shall, upon the October 1 on or following the date the member attains or would have attained age 62, have his/her monthly retirement benefit increased by two percent beginning with the benefit for that month of October, if the member has at least 20 years of credited service on or before October 1, 2012. Thereafter, the monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be increased by two percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(5)  A retired member or beneficiary who first receives a monthly normal or delayed retirement benefit for October 2012 or later (first payable November 1, 2012 or later), which benefit is based upon 25 or more years of credited service, including limited participant service, shall, upon the October 1 on or following the date the member attains or would have attained age 65, have his/her monthly retirement benefit increased by two percent beginning with the benefit for that month of October. Thereafter, the monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be increased by two percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(6)  A retired member whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a permanent or regular employee occurred on or after October 2, 2012 or beneficiary who first receives a monthly normal or delayed retirement benefit for October 2012 or later (first payable November 1, 2012 or later), which benefit is based upon 30 or more years of credited service, including limited participant service, shall, upon the October 1 on or following the date the member attains or would have attained age 65, have his/her monthly retirement benefit increased by two percent beginning with the benefit for that month of October. Thereafter, the monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be increased by two percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(b)  Non-eligibility during DROP participation. While participating in the general employees pension plan DROP, a member shall not have his/her monthly retirement benefit from the general employees pension plan adjusted as described in subsection (a) of this section 2-535. Upon such a member's termination of regular employment during or after conclusion of the DROP period, his/her monthly retirement benefit shall then first be subject to an October adjustment, if and when the conditions described in subsection (a) of this section 2-535 are met. 
(Ord. No. 000051, § 12, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 120218, § 6, 9-10-12)  
Secs. 2-536—2-545. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - DISABILITY PENSION PLAN[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 150193 , § 2, adopted Sept. 3, 2015, repealed §§ 2-547—2-560 of Div. 6 which pertained to the disability pension plan and derived from §§ 20-71—20-84 of the 1960 Code; Ord. No. 980128, § 3, adopted July 27, 1998; Ord. No. 020731, § 1, adopted June 23, 2003; Ord. No. 030094, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 28, 2003; Ord. No. 060863, §§ 1—11, adopted Feb 12, 2007; Ord. No. 110370, § 2, adopted Nov. 17, 2011; Ord. No. 140657 , §§ 5, 6, adopted Feb. 19, 2015; and Ord. No. 140860 , § 3, adopted May 7, 2015. 
 
Sec. 2-546. - Termination of the disability plan. 
(a)  The disability pension plan known as the "City of Gainesville Employees' Disability Plan" (or "disability plan") was closed at 12:00 midnight on February 19, 2015, and, effective at 12:01 a.m. on February 20, 2015, the benefits provided through the disability plan were added to the City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan. Moreover, any existing obligations for disability benefits under the disability plan as of 12:00 midnight on February 19, 2015, as well as the requisite level of assets to satisfy these obligations, as determined by the disability plan actuary, were transferred to the City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan. As such, the disability plan has no remaining members, no possibility of future members, and no current or future obligations to provide benefits. All benefit obligations of the disability plan have been satisfied. Therefore, the disability plan is terminated. 
(b)  There are no further assets to be allocated to satisfy remaining disability benefit obligations. Thus, any remaining assets in the disability plan trust will be returned to the city and the trust will be terminated. 
(Code 1960, § 20-70; Ord. No. 140657 , § 4, 2-19-15; Ord. No. 140860 , § 2, 5-7-15; Ord. No. 150193 , § 1, 9-3-15)  
Secs. 2-547—2-575. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
State Law reference— Government employees' deferred compensation program, F.S. § 112.215. 
 
Sec. 2-576. - Establishment; eligibility. 
Pursuant to applicable general and special law, the city hereby establishes a deferred compensation program as contemplated by F.S. § 112.215 under the International City Management Association Retirement Corporation or other qualified providers. 
(Code 1960, § 20-101; Ord. No. 951232, § 6, 4-8-96)  
Sec. 2-577. - Administrative officials designated. 
The mayor of the city, or his/her designee, is hereby designated as the appropriate city official to administer the deferred compensation plan authorized in this division. The city commission hereby finds that, under current law, it is satisfied that the compensation deferred and/or the investment products purchased pursuant to the plan authorized will not be included in the employee's taxable income under federal or state law until it is actually received by the employee under the terms of the plan, and that the compensation will nonetheless be deemed compensation for the purposes of Social Security coverage, and for the purposes of any other applicable retirement, pension or benefit program lawfully established. 
(Code 1960, § 20-102; Ord. No. 980128, § 4, 7-27-98)  
Sec. 2-578. - Contents of plan; procedures for formal adoption. 
(a)  Except as provided in this division, the contents of the plan authorized by this division shall be those specified in the contractual agreement or agreements herein required when executed by the city. 
(b)  In order to formally activate the provisions of this division, the city commission must, by resolution, authorize the execution of the necessary contractual agreements between the city, the International City Management Association Retirement Corporation or other qualified provider and the individual employee involved. 
(Code 1960, § 20-103; Ord. No. 951232, § 7, 4-8-96)  
Sec. 2-579. - Employee's and city's approval of employee's participation and plan required. 
(a)  In order to activate the provisions of this division the individual eligible employees must elect to proceed with the plan by stating such intention in writing to the city manager (or in the case of the city manager, to the mayor). Employees hired after April 23, 1996, shall not be eligible to have employer contributions made to a deferred compensation program established under this division. All employees (as defined in the plan document(s)) may request to have a portion of their salary contributed (salary reductions) to the plan. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision of this division to the contrary, the city commission shall not be bound to enter into any agreements herein authorized unless it determines, in its discretion, that the best interests of the city will be served by such agreement. Such determination by the city commission shall be final and not subject to review. The commission may condition its approval upon the happening of any event, or the waiver by the employee of any benefit, and the commission may give consideration to monies contributed by the city or by the employee into the city's pension plans. The commission shall consider each employee's request on an individual basis, and the commission's action on one individual shall not be binding precedent on any later action the commission may choose to take with regards to another employee. In addition, the financial liability of the city under the plan authorized by this division shall in all events be limited to the value of its contributions into such plans. 
(Ord. No. 3075, § 1, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 951232, § 8, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 980128, § 5, 7-27-98)  
Sec. 2-580. - Investment limitations. 
All provisions of the State Constitution and general or special acts of the legislature (including section 31.2.1 of the Charter [section no longer exists] limiting the investment of municipal pension and retirement funds shall be equally applicable to investments made by the International City Management Association Retirement Corporation under the provisions of this division or any other contractual agreements executed hereunder. 
(Code 1960, § 20-105)  
Secs. 2-581—2-595. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - CONSOLIDATED POLICE OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS RETIREMENT PLAN[28] 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; police, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Municipal firefighters pension trust funds, F.S. Ch. 175; municipalities having their own pension plans for firefighters, F.S. § 175.351; municipal police officers retirement trust funds, F.S. Ch. 185; municipalities having their own pension plans for policemen, F.S. § 185.35. 
 
Sec. 2-596. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases used in this division shall have the meanings set forth below, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context: 
Accrued benefit shall mean, as of the date of termination or entry into the DROP, whichever is earlier, the member's monthly retirement benefit in an amount equal to 2.5 percent or 2.625 percent of final average earnings times credited service. Except as otherwise provided herein, credited service attributable to service prior to October 1, 2005 shall be multiplied by 2.5; credited service attributable to service from October 1, 2005 on, shall be multiplied by 2.625. For members who are police officers, credited service attributable to service prior to October 1, 2005 shall be multiplied by 2.5, credited service attributable to service from October 1, 2005 to June 30, 2013 shall be multiplied by 2.625, and credited service attributable to service from July 1, 2013 on, shall be multiplied by 2.5. For members who are firefighters, credited service attributable to service prior to October 1, 2005 shall be multiplied by 2.5, credited service attributable to service from October 1, 2005 to December 31, 2013 shall be multiplied by 2.625, and credited service attributable to service from January 1, 2014 on, shall be multiplied by 2.5. 
Actuarial-equivalent or equivalent actuarial value shall mean a benefit of equivalent value to the benefit which otherwise would have been provided to the member, based on the 1994 Group Annuity Mortality Basic Table-Unisex 50/50 and an interest rate of 9.5 percent, unless otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
Enrolled actuary shall mean an actuary who is enrolled under Subtitle C of Title III of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 and who is a member of the Society of Actuaries or the American Academy of Actuaries. 
Beneficiary shall mean a person, or persons designated to receive benefits payable in the event of a member's death. 
Benefit determination date shall mean the date(s) upon which calculations of benefits are based when determining final average earnings and credited service. 
Deferred retirement option program means an optional program of the City of Gainesville's retirement systems or plans for deferring retirement income while remaining in the active employ of the City. This shall also be known as a regular DROP or reverse DROP. 
Earnings shall mean only base pay (which shall include all paid leaves), all overtime pay (which shall include time paid at time-and-a-half, double-time, and double-time-and-a-half), working out of classification pay, longevity pay, State of Florida city firefighters supplemental education incentive payments, State of Florida police officer educational salary incentive payments, police security ("billable" overtime), special assignment pay, special duty assignment pay, paramedic certification pay, stand-by pay, call-back pay, acting out of classification pay, and termination vacation pay or for members entering a DROP any lump sum payment of some or all such member's vacation balance upon entering the DROP, except as may be otherwise expressly provided for herein or in collective bargaining agreements. To calculate earnings for service earned on or after July 1, 2013 by members who are police officers, no more than 300 hours of overtime pay (including "billable" overtime) per year earned on or after July 1, 2013 shall be included, nor shall termination vacation pay or any lump sum payment of a member's vacation balance upon entering DROP earned on or after July 1, 2013 be included. To calculate earnings for service earned on or after January 1, 2014 by members who are firefighters, no more than 300 hours of overtime pay (including "billable" overtime) per year earned on or after January 1, 2014 shall be included, nor shall termination vacation pay or any lump sum payment of a member's vacation balance upon entering DROP earned on or after January 1, 2014 be included. For any person who first becomes a member in any plan year beginning on or after January 1, 1996, compensation for any plan year shall not include any amounts in excess of the Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(17) limitation (as amended by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993), which limitation of $150,000.00 shall be adjusted as required by federal law for qualified government plans and shall be further adjusted for changes in the cost of living in the manner provided by Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(17)(b). For any person who first became a member prior to the first plan year beginning on or after January 1, 1996, the limitation on compensation shall be not less than the maximum compensation amount that was allowed to be taken into account under the plan as in effect on July 1, 1993, which limitation shall be adjusted for changes in the cost of living since 1989 in the manner provided by Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(17)(1991). 
Effective date shall mean the date on which the operation of the plan is to commence. 
Eligible employee shall mean any full-time regular employee who is certified as a firefighter as a condition of employment in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 633.35, and whose duty it is to extinguish fires, to protect life, and to protect property, or any full-time regular employee who is certified or required to be certified as a law enforcement officer in compliance with F.S. § 943.14, who is vested with authority to bear arms and make arrests, and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of the penal, criminal, traffic, or highway laws of the state. This definition includes all certified, supervisory, and command personnel whose duties include, in whole or in part, the supervision, training, guidance, and management responsibilities of full-time law enforcement officers or firefighters, part-time law enforcement officers or firefighters, or auxiliary law enforcement officers or firefighters, but does not include part-time law enforcement officers or firefighters or auxiliary law enforcement officers or firefighters. Employees whose work is primarily secretarial or clerical are not classified as eligible employees. An otherwise eligible employee may elect to waive, in accordance with section 2-579, certain claims/rights arising under this plan, and become an ineligible employee as described in subsection 2-598(c)(1)a. Based on October 17, 2005 advice from the municipal members and firefighters trust funds office, a non-certified police officer or firefighter may be an eligible employee and earn credited service in the plan under the following circumstances: A non-certified employee that is hired in a firefighter or police officer position should be enrolled in the plan upon hire and earn credited service while so employed. If the employee fails to meet the certification requirements under F.S. chs. 633 or 943 within one year, then the employee's contributions should be refunded and the employee would be removed from the plan and would not receive credited service in the plan for that period of time. Such non-certified employee may not leave his/her contributions in the plan, nor later repay such refunded contributions for the purpose of obtaining credited service for that period, nor purchase credited service for such period pursuant to subsection 2-600(n). 
Final average earnings shall mean: 
(1)  The average of a member's monthly earnings for the 36 consecutive months which produces the highest average, as of the date of benefit determination, except as otherwise expressly provided herein. Final average earnings shall be determined by dividing the total earnings earned and received by the member during the applicable 36-month period by 36. 
(2)  For a member whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a police officer occurred on or after July 1, 2013, the average of a member's monthly earnings for the 48 consecutive months which produces the highest average, as of the date of benefit determination. Final average earnings shall be determined by dividing the total earnings earned and received by such member during the applicable 48-month period by 48. 
(3)  If a member has been absent from work (performs no duties) due to an injury claimed to be compensable under F.S. Ch. 440 during the period of time which would be utilized to determine his/her final average earnings, then such period of absence shall not be considered months of employment for the purposes of this section. The months of employment immediately preceding the absence shall be deemed to be consecutive with the months of employment, if any, earned after his/her return to work. 
Firefighter shall mean any eligible employee who is certified as a firefighter as a condition of employment in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 633.35, and whose duty it is to extinguish fires, to protect life, and to protect property. This definition includes all certified, supervisory, and command personnel whose duties include, in whole or in part, the supervision, training, guidance, and management responsibilities of full-time firefighters, part-time firefighters, or auxiliary firefighters, but does not include part-time firefighters or auxiliary firefighters. 
Gross pay shall mean those types of compensation which as of July 1, 1999, have member contributions deducted therefrom. Types of compensation created, or first applied to members after July 1, 1999 may, at the discretion of the city, have member contributions deducted therefrom provided that, unless otherwise agreed to, such types of compensation shall also thereafter be included in earnings effective upon the date contributions are deducted therefrom. 
Member shall mean any eligible employee who participates in the plan pursuant to section 2-598. 
Normal form of benefit shall be a monthly annuity, payable for the lifetime of the member, in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
Plan shall mean the consolidated police officers and firefighters retirement plan, as set forth in this division, and as it may from time to time in the future be amended. 
Plan year shall mean a twelve-month period beginning on October 1 and ending on September 30. 
Police officer shall mean any eligible employee who is certified or required to be certified as a law enforcement officer in compliance with F.S. § 943.14, who is vested with authority to bear arms and make arrests, and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of the penal, criminal, traffic, or highway laws of the state. This definition includes all certified supervisory and command personnel whose duties include, in whole or in part, the supervision, training, guidance, and management responsibilities of full-time law enforcement officers, part-time law enforcement officers, or auxiliary law enforcement officers, but does not include part-time law enforcement officers or auxiliary law enforcement officers as the same are defined in F.S. § 943.10(6) and (8), respectively. 
Retiree shall mean a former employee who has entered retirement status. A member who enters the DROP shall be considered a retiree for all purposes of the plan. 
Retirement or retire shall mean a member's separation from city employment as an eligible employee with immediate eligibility for receipt of benefits under the plan. For purposes of the plan, "retire" also means the date a member commences the DROP. 
Service credit rules shall mean the following: 
(1)  Day of service shall mean each day for which a member is: 
a.  Paid, or entitled to payment, by the city for performance of duties; 
b.  Paid, or entitled to payment, by the city on account of a period of time during which no duties are performed (e.g., vacation, holiday, illness, incapacity, layoff, jury duty, military duty or approved leave of absence); 
c.  Each day for which back pay, irrespective of mitigation or damages, has been either awarded to or agreed to by the city; provided, however, that the same day shall not be credited as a day of service more than once. 
(2)  Month of service shall mean a one-month period beginning on the day of the month corresponding to a member's date of employment, during which the member has earned at least ten days of service; provided however, that ten days of service will be deemed to have been earned in each month of service in which occurs: 
a.  An approved leave of absence, not to exceed 90 days, authorized by the city, in accordance with a uniform policy applied on a nondiscriminatory basis to all members similarly situated; or 
b.  Voluntary or involuntary service in the Armed Forces of the United States for a period not greater than five years of the time spent in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be added to the years of actual service, if: 
1.  The member is in the city's active employ as an eligible employee prior to such service and leaves such position for the purpose of voluntary or involuntary service in the Armed Forces of the United States. 
2.  Such member is entitled to reemployment under the provisions of the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act. 
3.  The member returns to his or her employment as an eligible employee within one year from the date of his or her release from such active service. 
(3)  A member shall not earn any days or months of service for any purpose under the plan after entering in a DROP, except as a re-employed retiree, if applicable. 
(4)  If the employment of a member is terminated, and such former member is subsequently reemployed by the city, the member's date of employment, for purposes of determining additional months of service, shall be reestablished as his/her date of reemployment. 
(5)  Credited service shall mean the aggregate number of months of service with the city as an eligible employee, expressed in terms of full and fractional year, subject to the following: 
a.  Additional months of service shall be credited for unused sick leave credits, assigning one day of service for each day of unused sick leave, unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, in applicable personnel policies, collective bargaining agreements, or DROP provisions. For service earned on or after July 1, 2013 by members who are police officers, no additional months of service shall be credited for unused sick leave earned on or after July 1, 2013. In calculating credited service on or after July 1, 2013, the lesser number of months between the additional months of service credited for unused sick leave earned on or before June 30, 2013 and months of unused sick leave available to members who are police officers at the time of their retirement shall be used. For service earned on or after January 1, 2014 by members who are firefighters, no additional months of service shall be credited for unused sick leave earned on or after January 1, 2014. In calculating credited service on or after January 1, 2014, the lesser number of months between the additional months of service credited for unused sick leave earned on or before December 31, 2013 and months of unused sick leave available to members who are firefighters at the time of their retirement shall be used. Additional months of service and fractions thereof, as determined by the city, shall be credited to members for periods of employment while a CETA employee. Additional months of service attributable to public safety and military service prior to employment may be credited pursuant to subsection 2-600(n). 
b.  No member will receive credit for years or fractional parts of years of service if he or she has withdrawn his or her contributions to the fund for those years or fractional parts of years of service, unless the member repays into the fund the amount he or she has withdrawn, plus interest as determined by the board. The multiplier applied to such service, and interest payments associated with the repayment, shall utilize the multiplier in effect at the time repayment is made. The member shall have 90 days after his or her re-employment to make repayment, except if re-employed after March 1, 2004, but prior to June 12, 2007, in which case the member shall have three years and six months after his or her re-employment to make repayment. 
c.  A member may voluntarily leave his or her contributions in the fund for a period of five years after ceasing to be an eligible employee, pending the possibility of his or her being rehired as an eligible employee, without losing credit for the time he or she has participated actively as a member. If he or she is not re-employed as an eligible employee within five years, his or her contributions shall be returned to him or her without interest. 
(6)  Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, effective as of December 12, 1994, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, USERRA and F.S. chs. 175 and 185, as applicable. 
Trust fund shall mean the cash and other assets accumulated, held and maintained by the board of trustees of the consolidated plan in accordance with this division, including individual accounts authorized under the DROP and the Supplemental Retirement Program for Police Officers. 
(Code 1960, § 20-110.1; Ord. No. 3075, § 3, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 3127, §§ 1, 2, 5-13-85; Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. 3439, §§ 1—5, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 3528, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-89; Ord. No. 3545, §§ 1—3, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 3867, § 2, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 950189, § 3, 6-26-95; Ord. No. 970591, §§ 1, 2, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 981266, §§ 1—9, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 000050, § 1, 6-26-00; Ord. No. 020202, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 070012, § 1, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 120680, § 1, 6-20-13; Ord. No. 130203, § 1, 9-19-13; Ord. No. 130411, § 1, 12-5-13) 
Editor's note— Section 27 of Ord. No. 981266 states: "Sections 1 and 2 of this ordinance are effective on July 1, 1999, provided, however, that the elimination of the Social Security offset to pension payments shall apply prospectively only, commencing with the July 1999 monthly benefit (payable August 1, 1999)." 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-597. - Establishment. 
(a)  Declaration of plan. There is hereby created for the police officers and firefighters of the city, a pension plan to be known as the "City of Gainesville Police Officers and Firefighters Consolidated Retirement Plan," also referred to in this division as the "plan" or "consolidated plan." The creation and maintenance of the assets of the plan, the benefits provided for and the administration of the plan shall be in accordance with the provisions of this division. Neither the city nor the board of trustees shall authorize or permit any part of the trust fund to be diverted for purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of members and their beneficiaries. 
(b)  Incorporation of predecessor plans: 
(1)  The predecessor retirement plans, known as the firemen's pension trust fund and police officers' retirement fund, are hereby revoked, except that all retired members and beneficiaries under such repealed sections as of the effective date, shall continue to receive such benefits as provided for in the predecessor plans. The trustees of the predecessor retirement plans shall, by appropriate resolution, turn over to the board of trustees, for placement in the plan's trust fund, all cash, investments, and other assets held by them. 
(2)  Participation of police officers and firefighters (referred to as "eligible employees") in the employees pension plan is hereby revoked, and such employees are no longer eligible to participate in the employees retirement plan. Benefits for these eligible employees will be based entirely upon the provisions of the plan described in this division. The trustees of the employees pension plan shall turn over to the board of trustees, for placement in the plan's trust fund, all cash, investments, and other assets held by them for purposes of providing benefits to the active eligible employees transferring to the consolidated plan. All retired police officers and firefighters (and their beneficiaries), who have retired on or before the effective date, shall remain in the employees pension plan and continue to receive retirement benefits as provided in that plan. 
(3)  Participation of police officers and firefighters in the City of Gainesville Employees Disability Plan, as described in division 6 of this article is hereby revoked except for police officers and firefighters who have made the election/request described in section 2-598(c)(1)a.2. Disability benefits for eligible employees shall be provided under the terms and conditions of the consolidated plan described in this division. Members who enter a DROP shall thereafter not be eligible for disability benefits under the City of Gainesville Employees Disability Plan or this plan. Any employees currently receiving benefits from the disability plan will continue to receive benefits from that plan under its terms and conditions. No assets will be transferred from the disability plan to the consolidated plan. 
(4)  The officers of the former boards of trustees and other city officials are hereby authorized to execute any documents considered appropriate in order to effect the complete transfer of all assets, as provided for above, to the trust fund created by this division. 
(Code 1960, § 20-110.2; Ord. No. 3075, § 5, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 981266, § 10, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 130203, § 2, 9-19-13)  
Sec. 2-598. - Eligibility and participation. 
(a)  Eligibility. Each individual in the employ of the city shall become eligible to participate in the plan on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date of his/her appointment as an eligible employee. 
(b)  Participation. All eligible employees who, as of the effective date, were participating in predecessor retirement plans will become members of the plan as of the effective date. Each other eligible employee shall automatically become a member in the plan on the first day of the month following (or coinciding with) date he/she becomes eligible. Participation in the plan shall not give a member the right to be retained in the employ of the city, nor, upon dismissal, to have any interest in the trust fund other than as provided herein. 
(c)  Limited participation. 
(1)  Definitions: 
a.  Ineligible employee shall mean: 
1.  An employee of the city who is not an eligible employee. 
2.  An eligible employee who elects/requests in accordance with section 2-579 to have future employer contributions made to the ICMA program instead of this plan shall be considered to have become an ineligible employee. 
b.  Limited participant shall mean a member of the plan who, during part of his/her employment with the city, is an eligible employee, and, during other parts of his/her employment with the city is an ineligible employee. 
c.  Limited participant service shall mean, in the case of a limited participant, credited service as defined in the plan, but including service during all times of his/her employment with the city, whether as an eligible employee or an ineligible employee. 
d.  Eligible service shall mean, in the case of a limited participant, credited service as defined in the plan, during the part or parts of his/her employment during which he/she is an eligible employee. 
(2)  A member shall become a limited participant as of the date he/she becomes an ineligible employee. 
(3)  For the purpose of determining a limited participant's credited service for any purpose of this plan, except for the purpose of determining his/her accrued benefit, his/her credited service shall mean his/her limited participant service. 
(4)  For the purpose of determining a limited participant's accrued benefit, his/her credited service shall mean only his/her eligible service and calculation of final average earnings shall be based upon his/her eligible service earnings. 
(d)  Termination of participation. If the employment of a member is terminated for any reason except his/her retirement, separation after entering a DROP, disability or death, termination benefits, if any, shall be provided according to the provisions of section 2-600(e). 
(e)  DROP participants. Except as provided in (f) below, for all plan purposes, the credited service of an employee entering a DROP shall remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement (beginning of DROP period) of participation in the DROP. The participant shall not earn or be credited with any additional credited service under the plan, and service after the effective date of commencement in the DROP shall not be recognized by the plan or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the plan. After the effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP, a member shall be considered a retiree for all plan purposes, and for the period of his/her participation in the DROP to have deferred receipt of retirement benefits into his/her DROP account, while remaining an employee of the City of Gainesville. 
(f)  Re-employed retirees and recipients of termination benefits. A former employee of the City of Gainesville receiving retirement or termination benefits from the City of Gainesville Employees Disability Plan, the City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan, or retirement benefits or monthly termination benefits from this plan may, upon becoming re-employed by the City of Gainesville become a member of this plan, earn credited service, and become entitled to receive an additional retirement benefit subject to the following conditions. 
(1)  Such member shall re-satisfy the eligibility requirements for participation in this plan. 
(2)  Such member shall not be entitled to disability benefits under this plan or the City of Gainesville Employees Disability Plan, or entitled to any other disability pension benefit payable from a retirement system or plan of the City of Gainesville. 
(3)  No service for which credit was received, or which remained unclaimed, at retirement or termination may be claimed or applied toward service credit earned following renewed membership. 
(4)  Such re-employed member shall not be entitled to purchase additional credit for service performed prior to re-employment for which retirement or termination benefits are being received. 
(Code 1960, § 20-110.3; Ord. No. 3075, § 2, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 3127, § 3, 5-13-85; Ord. No. 981266, §§ 11, 12, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 070012, § 2, 7-9-07)  
Sec. 2-599. - Contributions. 
(a)  Member contributions. 
(1)  Except as provided herein, effective the first full pay period following October 1, 1999, members, except members who have entered a DROP, will have a fixed employee contribution rate of 7½ percent of gross pay. Effective the first full pay period following January 1, 2014, members who are firefighters, except members who have entered a DROP, will have a fixed employee contribution rate of nine percent of gross pay. There shall be no member contributions deducted from a member's compensation after entering a DROP, except as a re-employed retiree, if applicable. Employee contributions made after the effective date of commencement of participation in a reverse DROP shall be returned without interest. 
(2)  Effective January 1, 1998, the contributions made by each member to the plan shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to I.R.C. section 414(h) of 1986. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the member's gross income for federal income tax purposes. For all other purposes of the plan, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
(3)  The city manager shall cause contributions provided for in subsection (a)(1) to be deducted from the compensation of each member on each and every payroll, for each and every payroll, so long as each member is performing eligible service, and has not entered a regular DROP. A member's contribution provided for herein shall be made notwithstanding that the minimum compensation provided by law for any members shall be changed thereby. Each member shall be deemed to consent and agree to the deduction made and provided for in this section and payment of his/her compensation less such deduction shall be full and complete discharge of all claims and demands whatsoever for the service rendered by the member during the period covered by such payment, except as to the benefits provided by this plan. The city manager shall cause the amount to be deducted from the compensation of each member for each and every payroll as authorized by this division and when deducted shall be paid into the fund of the plan and shall be credited to the individual member from whose compensation such deduction was made. 
(b)  Tax levies. There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied, on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer, now or hereafter engaged in or carrying on the business of property insurance or casualty insurance, an excise or license tax, as authorized by F.S. §§ 175.101, 185.08, as amended, as follows: 
(1)  One and eighty-five hundredths percent of the gross amount of receipts or premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city. In the case of multiple-peril policies with a combined premium for both the property and casualty coverage, 70 percent of the premium shall be used as the basis for the tax specified above. 
(2)  Eighty-five hundredths percent of the gross amount of receipts or premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city. In the case of multiple-peril policies with a single premium for both property and casualty coverage, 30 percent of such premium shall be used as the basis for the tax specified above. 
(3)  The base amount for determining extra benefits is $1,139,280.00. Subsequent annual premium tax receipts in excess of this base amount must be reserved for "extra benefits." 
Such tax shall be payable annually on the first day of March each year. 
(c)  City contributions. 
(1)  The city manager or his/her designee shall transfer to the plan's trust fund all funds appropriated by the city commission as soon as practicable after they are authorized or received and in any event at least quarterly. The net proceeds of the tax levies imposed by subsection (b) above, as authorized by F.S. §§ 175.101 and 185.08, shall be deposited in the plan's trust fund immediately upon receipt, where they shall become an integral part of the fund, and in no event more than five days after receipt. Employee contributions will be deposited in the fund immediately after each pay period. 
(2)  The city shall contribute to the plan each year an amount which, together with the assets of the predecessor plans, employee contributions, and the tax revenues placed in the fund, will be sufficient, as determined by the city's actuary, to meet the normal cost of the plan and to fund the actuarial deficiency, if any, over a period not longer than 40 years. For the purpose of securing these additional funds, the city commission is hereby authorized to levy such taxes as may be necessary to fulfill the contribution requirements. 
(3)  No city contributions shall be required or attributable to members during their participation in the DROP, or during any period subsequent to the conclusion of the DROP period when the member is not earning credited service. 
(Code 1960, § 20-110.4; Ord. No. 3127, §§ 5, 6, 5-13-85; Ord. No. 3439, §§ 6—8, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 3500, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 970591, § 3, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 981266, § 13, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 000050, § 2, 6-26-00; Ord. No. 070012, § 3, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 130411, § 2, 12-5-13)  
Sec. 2-600. - Retirement dates and benefits. 
(a)  Normal retirement. Normal retirement under the plan is retirement from the employ of the city on the normal retirement date. In the event of normal retirement, a member shall have a non-forfeitable right to his/her benefit, and payment of the retirement benefit shall be governed by the following provisions: 
(1)  Normal retirement date. The normal retirement date of a member shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the completion of 20 years of credited service at any age, the date the member has both completed at least ten years of credited service and attained age of 55, or has attained a combination of years of credited service and age that equals 70, unless otherwise expressly provided for herein. For members whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a police officer occurred on or after July 1, 2013, the normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the completion of 25 years of credited service at any age, the date the member has both completed at least ten years of credited service and attained age of 55, or has attained a combination of years of credited service and age that equals 70. For members whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a firefighter occurred on or after January 1, 2014, the normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the completion of 25 years of credited service at any age, the date the member has both completed at least ten years of credited service and attained age of 55, or has attained a combination of years of credited service and age that equals 70. 
(2)  Benefit amounts. The monthly normal retirement benefit payable to a member shall be equal to his/her accrued benefit, except as provided in section 2-601, as defined in section 2-596, determined as of his/her normal retirement date. 
(3)  Benefit payments. The monthly retirement income payable in the event of normal retirement will be payable on the first day of each month. The first payment will be made on the member's normal retirement date, or on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the member's actual retirement, if later, and the last payment will be the payment due next preceding the member's death; except that, in the event the member dies after retirement but before receiving retirement benefits for a period of ten years, the same monthly benefit will be paid to the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) as designated by the member for the balance of such ten-year period, or, if no beneficiary is designated, to the estate of the member, as provided in section 2-606. If a member continues in the service of the city beyond his or her normal retirement date and dies prior to the date of actual retirement, without an option made pursuant to section 2-601 being in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made for a period of ten years to a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by the member as if the member had retired on the date on which death occurred, or, if no beneficiary is designated, to the estate of the member, as provided in section 2-606. A member may modify the amount and conditions of payments by electing an option in accordance with section 2-601, in which event the retirement benefit shall be paid in accordance with the terms of such option. 
(b)  Early retirement. Early retirement under the plan is retirement from the employ of the city, as of the first day of any calendar month which is prior to the member's normal retirement date but subsequent to the date as of which the member has both attained the age of 50 years and completed ten years of credited service. In the event of early retirement, payment of retirement income will be governed as follows: 
(1)  The early retirement date shall be the first day of the calendar month coincident with or immediately following the date a member retires from the service of the city under the provisions of this section prior to his or her normal retirement date. 
(2)  The monthly amount of retirement income payable to a member who retires prior to his or her normal retirement date under the provisions of this section shall be his or her accrued benefit, taking into account his or her credited service to the date of actual retirement and his or her final average earnings as of such date, such amount of retirement income to be actuarially reduced to take into account the member's younger age and the earlier commencement of retirement income payments. In no event shall the early retirement reduction exceed three percent for each year by which the member's age at retirement preceded age 55. 
(3)  The retirement income payable in the event of early retirement will be payable on the first day of each month. The first payment will be made on the member's early retirement date and the last payment will be the payment due next preceding the retired member's death; except that, in the event the member dies before receiving retirement benefits for a period of ten years, the same monthly benefit will be paid to the beneficiary(ies) designated by the member for the balance of such ten-year period, or, if no designated beneficiary is surviving, the same monthly benefit for the balance of such ten-year period shall be payable as provided in section 2-606. 
(c)  Disability retirement. Except for employees who have entered into a DROP, or are re-employed pursuant to subsection 2-598(f), a member who has met the eligibility requirements for disability retirement may retire under the plan if he/she becomes totally and permanently disabled, as defined herein. In the event of disability retirement, payment of disability benefits shall be governed by subsections (1) through (8) of this section, except as provided below. Employees making the election/request described in subsection 2-598(c)(1)a.2. shall not be eligible for disability retirement under this section, but shall instead be eligible for disability retirement under article VII, division 6 of this chapter. 
(1)  Eligibility for disability benefits. 
a.  Line of duty. 
(i)  A member who becomes totally and permanently disabled, as defined in (2)(a) below, while in the line of duty, as defined by the board and in (ii) below, shall be eligible for a disability benefit. For the purposes of this subsection (a), a member shall be eligible for a disability benefit on his/her first day of service. 
(ii)  Any condition or impairment of health of any and all police officer members caused by tuberculosis, hypertension, heart disease, or hardening of the arteries, resulting in total or partial disability or death, shall be presumed to be accidental and suffered in line of duty unless the contrary be shown by competent evidence. Any condition or impairment of health caused directly or proximately by exposure, which exposure occurred in the active performance of duty at some definite time or place without willful negligence on the part of the police officer member, resulting in total or partial disability, shall be presumed to be accidental and suffered in the line of duty, provided that such member shall have successfully passed a physical examination upon entering such service, which physical examination including electrocardiogram failed to reveal any evidence of such condition. Any condition or impairment of health of a firefighter member caused by tuberculosis, hypertension, or heart disease resulting in total or partial disability or death shall be presumed to have been accidental and suffered in the line of duty unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence, provided that such firefighter member shall have successfully passed a physical examination before entering into such service, which examination failed to reveal any evidence of such condition. 
b.  Not in line of duty. 
(i)  A member who becomes totally and permanently disabled, as defined in subsection (2)(a) below, while not in the line of duty, having ten or more years of credited service on the commencement of disability, shall be eligible for a disability benefit. 
(ii)  A member who becomes totally and permanently disabled as described in subsection (2)(b) below, while not in the line of duty, having at least five years, but less than ten years, of credited service on commencement of disability shall be eligible for a disability benefit. 
(iii)  A member who becomes totally and permanently disabled as described in subsection (2) below, while not in the line of duty, having less than five years of credited service as of the commencement of the disability, shall not be eligible for a disability benefit. 
(2)  Total and permanent disability. 
a.  A member shall be considered totally and permanently disabled by a disability incurred in the line of duty if, in the opinion of the board, he/she is wholly prevented from rendering useful and efficient service as a police officer or firefighter, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment and the member is likely to remain so disabled continuously and permanently. 
b.  A member shall be considered totally and permanently disabled by a disability suffered while not in the line of duty if, in the opinion of the board, he/she is wholly prevented from rendering useful and efficient service as a police officer or firefighter or wholly prevented from rendering useful and efficient service in a vacant position for which he/she is qualified and in which he/she may be placed anywhere in the city as approved by the city manager, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment and the member is likely to remain so disabled continuously and permanently. 
c.  The decision of the board of these questions shall be final and binding subject to the claims procedure set forth in the "administration of the plan" section. 
(3)  Nonadmissible causes of disability. A member shall not be entitled to receive disability benefits if the disability is the result of any of the following: 
a.  Excessive and habitual use by the member of drugs, intoxicants, or narcotics; 
b.  Injury or disease sustained by the member while willfully participating in acts of violence, riots, civil insurrections, or while committing a felony. 
c.  Injury or disease sustained by the member while serving in any armed forces or as a result of warfare. 
d.  Injury or disease sustained by a member after his/her employment has terminated. 
e.  Intentional, self-inflicted injury. 
f.  Injury or disease sustained by the member while working for anyone other than the city, including self-employment, and arising out of such employment. 
(4)  Determination of eligibility. No member shall be permitted to retire under the provisions of this section until examined by a duly qualified physician or surgeon, to be selected by the board of trustees for that purpose, and is found to be disabled in the degree and in the manner specified in this section. Any member retiring under this section may be examined periodically by a duly qualified physician or surgeon or board of physicians and surgeons to be selected by the board of trustees for that purpose, to determine if such disability has ceased to exist. 
(5)  Amount of disability benefit. The benefit payable to a member who retires from the service of the city with a total and permanent disability as a result of a disability is the monthly income payable for ten years certain and life for which, if the member's disability occurred in the line of duty, his or her monthly benefit shall be the accrued benefit, but shall not be less than 42 percent of his or her final average earnings as of the member's disability retirement date. If the disability is other than in the line of duty, the member's monthly benefit, if any, shall be the accrued benefit, but shall not be less than 25 percent of his or her average monthly compensation as of the member's disability retirement date. 
(6)  Benefit payments. The monthly retirement income for a member in the event of his or her disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board of trustees determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date the board determines such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the first payment. The last payment will be, if the member recovers from the disability, the payment due next preceding the date of such recovery or, if the member dies without recovering from his or her disability, the payment due next preceding death or the 120th monthly payment, whichever is later. In lieu of the benefit payment as provided in this subsection, a member may select an optional form as provided in section 2-601. Any monthly retirement income payments due after the death of a disabled member shall be paid to the member's designated beneficiary (or beneficiaries) as provided in section 2-606 and subsection 2-600(d). 
(7)  Termination of disability benefit. If the board of trustees finds that a member who is receiving a disability retirement income is no longer disabled, as provided herein, the board of trustees shall direct that the disability retirement income be discontinued. Recovery from disability as used herein shall mean the ability of the member to render useful and efficient service as an eligible employee, or in the case of disability benefit awarded pursuant to subsection (c)(2)b, other city employment. 
(8)  If the member recovers from disability and reenters the service of the city as an eligible employee, his or her service will be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month for which the member received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date he or she reentered the service of the city may not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the plan. 
(d)  Death prior to retirement; refunds of contributions or payment of death benefits. 
(1)  If an eligible employee dies before being eligible to retire, the heirs, legatees, beneficiaries, or personal representatives of such deceased member shall be entitled to a refund of 100 percent, without interest, of the contributions made to the plan by such deceased member. 
(2)  If an eligible employee having at least ten years of credited service dies prior to retirement, his or her beneficiary is entitled to the benefits otherwise payable to the member at early or normal retirement age, based upon his or her accrued benefit at time of death. 
(e)  Termination of employment. A member whose employment with the city terminates prior to the completion of at least ten years of credited service, for any reason other than his/her disability shall not be entitled to any benefits under the plan, provided, however, that, except as provided in subsection (6) below, amounts contributed by members shall be paid without interest to the member or, as applicable, the member's beneficiary. A member whose employment with the city terminates after the completion of at least ten years of credited service shall be entitled to a termination benefit, or if s/he elects return of contributions without interest. A member whose employment as a police officer terminated with the city prior to July 9, 2007 after the completion of at least ten years of credited service may elect at any time before he/she receives any termination benefit a return of his/her contributions without interest in lieu of any benefits under the plan. Payment of the termination benefit shall be governed by the following provisions of this section: 
(1)  A member who has at least ten years of credited service and elects to leave his or her contributions in the trust fund may, upon attaining age 50 years or more, may then receive at the actuarial equivalent of the amount of such retirement income otherwise payable to him or her, as provided in section 2-600(b), or, upon attaining age 55 years, may then receive the retirement income as provided in subsection 2-600(a). 
(2)  Reemployed members. In the event employment of a member, entitled to a termination benefit pursuant to subsection (1) above, is terminated, and he/she is subsequently reemployed as an eligible employee by the city prior to receiving a termination benefit, he/she shall continue to be entitled to the credited service he/she had previously earned, and shall again participate in the plan and accrue benefits after such date of reemployment, in accordance with the terms of the plan. A member who has had the amount, if any, he/she contributed to this plan repaid without interest, shall no longer be a member of the plan and shall not be entitled to receive any benefits under the plan. If such member is subsequently reemployed as an eligible employee by the city, he/she may recoup his/her previous credited service to which he/she was previously entitled, as described in section 2-596, Credited service. 
(3)  Reemployment within five years. If a member was not entitled to a termination benefit, he or she may voluntarily leave his or her contributions in the fund for a period of five years after ceasing to be an eligible employee, pending the possibility of being rehired as such, without losing credit for the time he or she has participated actively as an eligible employee. If the firefighter or police officer is not so reemployed within five years, his or her contributions shall be returned without interest. 
(f)  Limitation of benefits. Members receiving benefits from sources funded in whole or in part by city contributions, such as workers' compensation indemnity benefits, Social Security benefits, and retirement benefits from the consolidated pension plan, which when totaled exceed 100 percent of the member's average weekly wage used for the purpose of computing workers' compensation benefits, shall have their workers' compensation indemnity benefits and, if necessary, plan benefits reduced, so as to provide for a combined total of benefits not exceeding 100 percent of the member's average weekly wage. Any lump sum workers' compensation payment shall be converted to the monthly equivalent of the weekly rate upon which the lump sum was based and paid until such time as the lump sum would be exhausted at the monthly equivalent rate. Such limitations, are based upon the initial amount of retirement benefits and Social Security benefits, and are not affected by subsequent increases in workers' compensation supplemental benefits, Social Security or plan benefits. In applying offsets necessary to limit combined benefits to 100 percent, workers' compensation benefits shall be reduced first, pursuant to F.S. § 440.15(9), then if necessary, retirement plan benefits shall be reduced. The above-described limitations on plan benefits shall not, however, operate to lower the> retiree's monthly benefit below two percent of each year of credited service multiplied by final average earnings. 
(g)  Restriction. No member of the plan shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to Social Security benefits or federal benefits under 10 U.S.C. Chapter 1223 2006. 
(h)  Maximum benefit limitation. 
(1)  The maximum annual benefit payable under the plan shall be limited to $205,000.00, subject to adjustment for increases in the cost of living in accordance with the following sentence. As of the first day of January of each calendar year, the maximum dollar limitation shall be adjusted automatically to an amount determined by the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service in accordance with Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code effective for that calendar year and shall apply only to that calendar year. 
Retirees in payment status whose benefits were limited in any year by the application of this limitation shall have their benefits adjusted automatically in subsequent years to take into account the then current dollar limit. 
(2)  In the event a member has earned a benefit which during a previous limitation year has met all the requirements of I.R.C. section 415, and if the member's accrued benefit exceeds the limitation of I.R.C. section 415 for the current limitation year, the member's maximum annual benefit, as described in subsection (1) of this section, shall not be less than the accrued benefit allowable under such previous limitation year. 
(3)  If the retirement benefit is payable in a form other than a straight-life annuity or a joint-and-survivor annuity with the spouse as joint annuitant, the annual benefit limitation in any year shall be the actuarial equivalent (as defined in subsection (5) of this section) of the maximum annual benefit for that year (payable in the form of a straight-life annuity), as described above. 
(4)  In the event payment of a retirement benefit under the plan to a member commences after the date the member attains age 65, the maximum benefit limitation shall be adjusted to be not more than the actuarial equivalent (as defined in subsection (5), below) of the then current dollar limit commencing at age 65 for the purpose of applying the benefit limit described in subsection (1). 
For years subsequent to the payment commencement year, benefits payable shall be limited to the actuarial equivalent determined as of the benefit commencement date, of the subsequent year's dollar limit assumed to commence at age 65. 
(5)  For the purpose of adjusting benefits in accordance with this section, actuarial equivalent shall be determined using the 1994 Group Annuity Mortality Table (50/50 Unisex) and an interest rate of 9.5 percent for adjustments under subsections (3), and (4). For adjustment under subsections (3) and (4), no cost-of-living adjustment shall be taken into account before the year for which such adjustment first takes effect. 
(6)  If a retirement benefit is payable to a member who has less than ten years of plan participation, the limitation described in subsection (1), shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the member's years of plan participation and the denominator of which is ten. 
(i)  Distribution rules. Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan to the contrary, a form of retirement income payable from this plan after November 24, 1997, shall satisfy the following conditions: 
(1)  If any retirement income is payable before the member's death: 
a.  It shall either be distributed or commence to the member not later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ years or the calendar year in which he retires. 
b.  The distribution shall commence not later than the calendar year defined in subsection a. and (1) shall be paid over the life of the member or over the lifetimes of the member and his spouse, issue or dependent, or (2) shall be paid over the period extending not beyond the life expectancy of the member and his spouse, issue or dependent. 
Where a form of retirement income payment has commenced in accordance with the preceding paragraphs and the member dies before his entire interest in the plan has been distributed, the remaining portion of such interest in the plan shall be distributed no less rapidly than under the form of distribution in effect at the time of the member's death. 
(2)  If the member's death occurs before the distribution of his or her interest in the plan has commenced, his or her entire interest in the plan shall be distributed within five years of his or her death, unless it is to be distributed in accordance with the following rules: 
a.  The member's remaining interest in the plan is payable to his or her spouse, issue or dependent; 
b.  The remaining interest is to be distributed over the life of the spouse, issue, or dependent; and 
c.  Such distribution begins within one year of the member's death unless the member's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary, in which case the distribution need not begin before the date on which the member would have attained age 70½, and if the member's spouse dies before the distribution to the spouse begins, this section shall be applied as if the spouse were the member. 
(j)  Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions. 
(1)  General. Notwithstanding any provisions of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(2)  Definitions. 
Direct rollover. A direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. Effective as of January 1, 2008, a non-spouse beneficiary may make a direct rollover only to an "inherited" individual retirement account as described in Section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
Distributee. A distributee includes an employee, or a former employee, a surviving spouse as described in I.R.C. Section 402(c)(9), or designated beneficiary. Effective as of January 1, 2008, an employee's or former employee's non-spouse beneficiary is a distributee with regard to the interest of the employee or former employee. 
Eligible rollover distribution. An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for life (or life expectancy) of the distributee, or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under I.R.C. Section 401(a)(9); and the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income, i.e., member contributions made prior to 1998. 
Eligible retirement plan. An eligible retirement plan as defined in I.R.C. Section 402(c)(8)(B), an individual eligible retirement account described in I.R.C. Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in I.R.C. Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in I.R.C. Section 403(a), an annuity contract described in I.R.C. Section 403(b), a qualified trust described in I.R.C. Section 401(a) that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution, or an eligible deferred compensation plan described in I.R.C. Section 457(b) maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan. 
(k)  Deferred retirement option program. 
(1)  A deferred retirement option program is hereby created for eligible employees. 
(2)  A member who is an eligible employee is eligible for participation in the DROP on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the completion of 25 years of limited participant service, or meeting the rule of 70 including limited participant service, and continuing up to 30 years of service as a regular employee, except as provided in subsections (7) and (17) below. In the case of a reverse DROP, such requirement must be met as of the effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP, including if applicable the lesser of the sick leave balances described below. Except as otherwise expressly provided for herein, upon entering into a regular DROP, members may elect to apply unused sick leave hours to attain the requisite years of credited service for eligibility to enter and for determining their accrued benefit, or retain some or all of their unused sick leave for use during their employment while participating in the regular DROP. For service earned by members who are police officers on or after July 1, 2013, upon entering regular or reverse DROP, no additional months of service shall be credited for unused sick leave earned on or after July 1, 2013. In calculating service earned by members who are police officers on or after July 1, 2013, the lesser number of months between the additional months of service credited for unused sick leave earned on or before June 30, 2013 and months of unused sick leave available to a member at the time of his or her entry into DROP shall be used. For service earned by members who are firefighters on or after January 1, 2014, upon entering regular or reverse DROP, no additional months of service shall be credited for unused sick leave earned on or after January 1, 2014. In calculating service earned by members who are firefighters on or after January 1, 2014, the lesser number of months between the additional months of service credited for unused sick leave earned on or before December 31, 2013 and months of unused sick leave available to a member at the time of his or her entry into DROP shall be used. Sick leave hours used in computing cash outs of sick leave balances upon retirement are considered already "used" and may not be converted to credited service, or used as sick leave during participation in the regular DROP. Sick leave balances retained upon entry into the regular DROP and accrued while participating in the regular DROP shall not count as days or months of credited service when determining the maximum period of participation in the DROP, in accordance with subsections (6) and (7) below. Any unused sick leave remaining at the expiration of the regular DROP participation or period will be forfeited. Except as otherwise expressly provided for herein, in the case of a reverse DROP, members may utilize the lesser of the vacation and sick leave balances in existence on the effective date of commencement of participation or the balances in existence 90 days after declaration of intention to enter the reverse DROP. Any cash outs shall be included in the FAE calculations for the month prior to the effective date of commencement of participation in the reverse DROP, at the member's base pay rate on that date. 
(3)  On the date of a member's entry into the DROP or date of deemed entry into a reverse DROP, the member's credited service, accrued benefit, and final average earnings shall be calculated as if the member had actually separated from service on that date and retired. There shall be no further member contributions after entry into the DROP, except as a re-employed retiree, if applicable, and employee contributions made after the effective date of commencement of participation in a reverse DROP shall be returned without interest. No additional credited service shall be earned after entering the DROP, except as re-employed retiree, if applicable. Any changes in plan benefits shall not apply to members in the DROP, unless otherwise applicable to retired members of the plan. 
(4)  Members otherwise eligible to receive longevity pay and who are eligible to and who elect to enter a DROP must, in order to enter and to continue to participate in the DROP, make an irrevocable election upon entry into the DROP as hereinafter provided. The member may (1) continue to receive longevity payments and merit increases (assuming merit increases are provided and applicable), but forego receipt of all future general (COLA) salary increases, or (2) continue to receive general (COLA) salary increases and merit increases (assuming merit increases are provided and applicable) but become ineligible for future receipt of longevity pay, or (3) in the case where the applicable pay plan does not provide separately for general and merit increases, the member may forego either future receipt of longevity payments, or any and all future salary increases. In those cases where the member elects to forego receipt of future longevity payments, entry into the DROP shall be treated as separation from service for the purposes of section 2-484. This subsection does not apply to members in a reverse DROP. 
(5)  The member shall select the retirement option as provided for in section 2-601 and shall designate any beneficiary in accordance with plan provisions and practices applicable to normal and delayed retirements. 
(6)  The maximum period of participation in the DROP is 60 months from date of entry, or in the case of a reverse DROP 60 months from the effective date of commencement of participation. Except as provided in subsections (7) and (17), participation in the DROP must cease at the conclusion of a total of 30 years of regular employment with the City of Gainesville and, if applicable, a successor employer under F.S. § 112.0515 (1997). In the case of a reverse DROP, the end of the DROP period, and termination of employment, must occur at no later than a total of 30 years of regular employment with the City of Gainesville and, if applicable, a successor employer under F.S. § 112.0515 (1997). 
(7)  Members who have more than 27 years of limited participant service in the plan as of October 1, 1999, shall have until December 30, 1999 to elect to enter into the DROP, on or before February 1, 2000, and to then be eligible to participate for a maximum of 36 months from the date of entry. Such members making an election on or after December 31, 1999, to enter into the DROP shall be governed by normal eligibility and duration requirements described herein. 
(8)  A member may cease participating in the regular DROP prior to the expiration of the agreed upon (not to exceed the maximum allowed) DROP period only by terminating regular employment with the city. In the event that a member participating in the DROP fails to terminate regular employment on or before the conclusion of the DROP period, then the member's monthly retirement benefit shall cease at the conclusion of the DROP period until such time as the member terminates regular employment. In the case of a reverse DROP, a member's employment terminates simultaneously with commencement of participation in the reverse DROP, which is 90 days after the member makes a declaration of his/her intention to enter the reverse DROP. 
(9)  For members entering the regular DROP prior to July 10, 2007, during such member's participation in the DROP, an amount equal to the member's monthly retirement benefit shall be transferred to an account within the plan designated by the member for investment. Such members may direct their DROP money to any of the investment options offered by the third party administrator approved by the board. Monthly retirement benefits paid into DROP accounts shall be adjusted to take into account any retiree cost-of-living adjustments available under the plan to retired members. There shall be no guaranteed rate of investment return on these DROP accounts. Upon transfer of the DROP money to the account designated by the member, neither the city nor the board shall have any obligation to the member concerning investment gains or losses. Transfers between accounts shall be in accordance with the rules of the third party administrator. 
(10)  Members entering a regular DROP or declaring his/her entry into a reverse DROP on or after July 10, 2007 and before July 1, 2013 shall have his/her monthly benefits accrue in the fund on behalf of the member, plus interest at 5.5 percent compounded monthly on the prior months accumulated ending balance up to the month of termination, or death, or established termination date, whichever occurs first. If the plan's 2006—2007 assumed rate of return of 8.5 percent changes, then the interest rate will be prospectively adjusted from the date of the change to 65 percent of the plan's new assumed rate of return compounded monthly on the prior months accumulated ending balance up to the month of termination, or death, or established termination date, whichever occurs first. A separate accounting of each participant's accrued benefits shall be calculated and provided to the participants annually. Monthly retirement benefits paid into DROP accounts shall be adjusted to take into account any retiree cost-of-living adjustments available under the plan to retired members. 
(11)  Members who are police officers entering a regular DROP or declaring his/her entry into a reverse DROP on or after July 1, 2013 shall have his/her monthly benefits accrue in the fund on behalf of the member, plus interest at 4.5 percent compounded monthly on the prior months accumulated ending balance up to the month of termination, or death, or established termination date, whichever occurs first, except as otherwise expressly provided for herein. Members who are police officers with 25 years of limited participant service on or before July 1, 2013 and declare entry into a reverse DROP on or after July 1, 2013 shall have his/her monthly benefits accrue in the fund on behalf of the member, plus interest at 5.5 percent compounded monthly on the prior months accumulated ending balance up to the month of termination, or death, or established termination date, whichever occurs first so long as the effective date of the reverse DROP is on or before July 1, 2013. 
(12)  The decision to participate in the regular DROP is irrevocable once DROP payments begin. Once the employee has completed participation in the DROP, his/her regular employment will end and he/she shall be separated from employment; this separation shall be processed as a voluntary resignation. 
(13)  Upon entry into the DROP, a member shall no longer be eligible for disability benefits under the plan or the City of Gainesville Employees Disability Plan. In the event of death during the DROP period or thereafter, the member shall be presumed to have retired on a normal or delayed retirement upon entry into the DROP for the purposes of subsection 2-600(a)(3). Distribution from the DROP account shall be made to the member, or in the case of the member's death, to the member's designated beneficiary. 
(14)  Upon the termination of a member's (who has entered a DROP) regular city employment (for any reason, whether by retirement, resignation, discharge or death), the retirement benefits payable to the member or to the member's beneficiary (if the member selected an optional form of retirement benefit which provides for payments to the beneficiary) shall be paid to the member or beneficiary and shall not be deposited into the member's deferred retirement option account or continue to accrue in the plan. Following the termination of a member's regular employment, the balance in the member's DROP account shall be payable in accordance with options made available by the third party administrator, or in the case of accounts accruing within the plan, distributed in accordance with the rules of the plan. Regardless of the option selected by the member, the board of trustees has the right to accelerate payments in order to comply with Section 401(A)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and the right to defer payments to comply with Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(15)  Nothing herein shall be construed to remove members who have entered the DROP from the scope of § 8(d), Art. II of the State Constitution, and F.S. § 112.3173(5)(f). Members who commit a specified offense while employed will be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits, pursuant to those provisions of law. 
(16)  During regular DROP participation, a member shall be considered a retiree with deferred receipt of benefits for all plan purposes. A member who fails to terminate regular employment during or at the conclusion of the regular DROP period shall be considered a retiree for all plan purposes, except that the member shall not be entitled to receive, or defer receipt of, monthly retirement benefits while continuing to remain employed as a regular employee. For other purposes, the employee shall be considered an active employee of the city entitled to all rights of employment, except as otherwise provided. 
(17)  Effective March 1, 2015, members whose limited participant service includes vested service in the City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan (or "limited participant vested service") are eligible for participation in the DROP on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the completion of 25 years of limited participant vested service and continuing up to 35 years of service as a regular employee, subject to the following limitations. Members entering DROP based on their limited participant vested service must do so prior to completing 25 years of service in the consolidated plan and are not eligible for a reverse DROP. In addition, the maximum period of participation in the DROP is 60 months from date of entry or must cease at the conclusion of a total of 35 years of limited participant vested service, whichever first occurs. Except for the limitations provided in this paragraph, members making an election to enter into the DROP based on limited participant vested service shall be governed by the requirements described herein. 
(l)  Lump-sum payment of small retirement income. Notwithstanding any provisions of the plan to the contrary, if the monthly retirement income payable to any person entitled to benefits hereunder is less than $100.00, or if the single-sum value of the accrued retirement income is less than $5,000.00 for a firefighter or $2,500.00 for a member, as of the date of retirement or termination of service, whichever is applicable, the board of trustees, in the exercise of its discretion, may specify that the actuarial equivalent of such retirement income be paid in a lump sum. 
(m)  Rollovers to IRA's. A mandatory distribution in excess of $1,000.00 made pursuant to subsection 2-600(l), or an involuntary return of employee contributions in excess of $1,000.00, shall be paid in a direct rollover to an IRA designated by the plan administrator if, after notice, the member does not elect to either receive the distribution directly or have it paid in a direct rollover to an eligible retirement plan. In addition, such payments shall be made only upon a written request by the participant in a form and manner determined by the board of trustees. 
(n)  Public safety and military service prior to employment. Members who are regular employees actively employed after July 9, 2007, and not then participating in the regular DROP, may have the year(s) that the member served as a police officer or firefighter, as defined in subsections (8) and (9), and years of military service, prior to initial employment with the city, added to his or her years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund an actuarially determined amount so that crediting of the purchased service does not result in any cost to the plan. The multiplier applied to purchased credited service shall correspond to the multiplier in effect at the time the purchase is completed. The plan shall absorb the cost of professional services for obtaining one actuarial estimate for a member. Any subsequent estimates shall be paid for in advance by the requesting member. 
(2)  Purchase of credited service for service as a police officer or firefighter, or military service, prior to employment, shall be in increments of one or more whole years, except where the remaining service available to be purchased is less than one year. Lump sum purchases may not be made more frequently than once every 12 months. Such purchase of service may be made during 2007 and during the months of November, December and January each year thereafter. "Financed" purchases may be arranged during 2007 and during the months of November, December and January each year thereafter. Failure to complete a "financed" purchase shall preclude any future "financed" purchases by the member. Lump sum purchase of service and complete payment of "financed" service must occur prior to entry into a regular DROP and prior to declaration of intention to enter a reverse DROP. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount may be made in one lump sum payment or "financed" at the plans assumed rate of interest as follows: Four to five years may be paid for over a maximum 60-month period from the date purchase is first arranged (subsection 2 above); three plus years—48 month maximum; two plus years—36 month maximum, one plus year—24 month maximum. Outstanding balances shall be charged interest compounded monthly at the plan's assumed rate of return for that month, thus the total "financed" payment, and required monthly payments will change. In no event shall any credit be given until total payment is completed. Failure to complete payment within the prescribed period shall result in amounts paid being then returned without interest and no credit given. 
(4)  The maximum credit purchased under this subsection (n) shall be five years, provided that no more than four years of prior military service may be purchased. 
(5)  Credited service purchased pursuant to this subsection (n) shall count for all purposes under the plan. 
(6)  Members may pay for prior service as provided in subsections (2) and (3) above; however, credit for such shall not be granted unless and until the member has otherwise earned ten years of credited service. A member who has paid for such service and whose employment terminates prior to the completion of ten years of credited service shall have the amount paid returned without interest to the member, or as applicable to the member's beneficiary, including as provided in subsection 2-606. 
(7)  A member may not obtain a benefit, nor base the amount of benefit received, upon service purchased under this subsection (n) if such service is claimed for retirement purposes under any other federal, state, or local retirement or pension system where "length of service" is a factor in determining the eligibility for, or the amount of compensation received, except where credit for such service has been granted in a pension system providing retired pay for non-regular service in the Armed Forces of the United States as provided in 10 U.S.C. Chapter 1223. Any member claiming credit under this subsection (n) must certify on a form prescribed by the plan that credit for such service has not and will not be claimed for retirement purposes under any other federal, state, or local retirement or pension system where "length of service" is a factor in determining the eligibility for, or the amount of compensation received, except where credit for such service has been granted in a pension system providing retired pay for non-regular service in the Armed Forces of the United States as provided in 10 U.S.C. Chapter 1223. Such certification shall also include written authorization for the plan to have access to information from any above-described pension systems to confirm that the requirements of this subsection are being complied with. If the member dies prior to retirement, the member's beneficiary must make the required certification before credit may be claimed. If such certification is not made by the member or the member's beneficiary, credit for prior police officer, firefighter, or military service shall not be allowed. If it is determined that a benefit based upon such service leave has been claimed in violation of this section, no credit for such service will be allowed under this plan, which may effect the eligibility for, or amount of, any benefit provided under this plan, and amounts contributed for purchase of such service shall be forfeited. 
(8)  Except as provided in subsection (9) below, the following words and phrases as used in this subsection (n) shall have the respective meanings set forth: 
a.  Military service means active duty in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily, and honorably or under honorable conditions. 
b.  Police officer means any person who was elected, appointed, or employed full time by any municipality, in the State of Florida who is certified or required to be certified as a law enforcement officer in compliance with F.S. § 943.1395, who is vested with authority to bear arms and make arrests, and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement officer of the penal, criminal, traffic, or highway laws of the state. This definition includes all certified supervisory and command personnel whose duties included, in whole or in part, the supervision, training, guidance, and management responsibilities of full-time law enforcement officers, part-time law enforcement officers, or auxiliary law enforcement officers, but does not include part-time law enforcement officers or auxiliary law enforcement officers as the same are defined in F.S. § 943.10(6) and (8), respectively. Police officer also includes a person who meets the above requirements and who was responsible for performing both police and fire services (public safety officer). 
c.  Firefighter means any person employed solely by a constituted fire department of any municipality or special fire control district in the State of Florida who was certified as a firefighter as a condition of employment in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 633.35, and whose duty it was to extinguish fires, to protect life, or to protect property. 
(9)  To the extent allowed by law, the board of trustees may permit purchase of credited service based upon service prior to employment with the city as a firefighter, certified in accordance with F.S. § 633.35, (2006), when the prior service was for a county, or state agency, of the State of Florida. To the extent allowed by law, the board of trustees may permit purchase of credited service based upon service prior to employment with the city as a law enforcement officer, as defined in F.S. § 943.10, (2006), when the prior service was for a county, or state agency, of the State of Florida. The purchase of prior service as described in this subsection (9) shall be in accordance with, and subject to the limitations of, the procedures set forth in this subsection (n), as if the prior service was based upon prior service as a firefighter or police officer described in subsections (8)(b) and/or (c). 
Provided further that in the event that the City of Gainesville or the board of trustees is notified by a regulatory agency, such as the department of management services of the State of Florida, that permitting purchase of credited service as described in this subsection (9) is unlawful, or that such makes the plan non-compliant with applicable statutory or regulatory requirements, then the city may unilaterally, after meeting and conferring with certified bargaining representatives of employees who are members of the plan, direct the board that further implementation of this subsection (9) cease, and amend the plan to eliminate this subsection (9). Upon such direction, those members not yet retired who have availed themselves of the opportunity to purchase or arrange for purchase of credited service under this subsection (9) shall have any payments made returned without interest and shall receive no credited service for any service sought to be purchased under this subsection (9). 
(o)  Sources of funds for purchase of credited service. The plan will accept cash, direct rollover contributions, direct transfers and/or direct cash rollovers of distributions for the purchase of credited service under the plan, as follows: 
(1)  Direct rollovers or transfers from other plans. The plan will accept a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a member contribution of an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in section 403(a) of the Code or an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Code, cash, or a direct transfer from a 401(a) qualified plan, or from an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Code that is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state. 
(2)  Member rollover contribution from section 401(a) plans and IRAs. The plan will accept a member rollover contribution of the portion of a distribution from a qualified plan described in section 401(a) of the Code, or from an individual retirement account or annuity described in section 408(a) of the Code, that is eligible to be rolled over and would otherwise be includible in the member's gross income. 
(Code 1960, § 20-110.5; Ord. No. 3075, § 4, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 3127, §§ 7—16, 5-13-85; Ord. No. 3439, §§ 9—14, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 3528, §§ 3, 4, 3-27-89; Ord. No. 3545, §§ 4—8, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 3867, § 3, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 950189, § 4, 6-26-95; Ord. No. 970591, §§ 4—7, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 981266, §§ 14, 15, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 000050, §§ 3, 4, 6-26-00; Ord. No. 002186, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 020202, § 2, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 050595, § 2, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 070012, § 4, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 120680, § 2, 6-20-13; Ord. No. 130203, § 3, 9-19-13; Ord. No. 130411, §§ 2, 3, 12-5-13; Ord. No. 140571 , § 1, 6-18-15)  
Sec. 2-601. - Optional forms of retirement income. 
(a)  (1)  In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable in the event of normal or early retirement as specified in section 2-600, a member, upon written request to the board of trustees, submitted at least three months prior to the date of benefit commencement, and subject to the approval of the board of trustees, may elect to receive a retirement income or benefit of equivalent actuarial value payable in accordance with one of the following options: 
a.  A retirement income of larger monthly amount, payable to the member for his or her lifetime only. 
b.  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the member during the joint lifetime of the member and a joint annuitant designated by the member, and following the death of either of them, 100 percent, 75 percent, 66 2/3 percent, or 50 percent of such monthly amount payable to the survivor for the lifetime of the survivor. 
c.  A reduced monthly retirement benefit which shall be payable during the joint lifetime of the member and his/her beneficiary, with two-thirds of such reduced annuity amount continuing after the death of the member during the lifetime of the beneficiary. If the beneficiary predeceases the member, 100 percent of the reduced benefit will continue to be received by the member. 
d.  Such other amount and form of retirement payments or benefit as, in the opinion of the board of trustees, will best meet the circumstances of the retiring member. 
(2)  The member upon electing any option of this section must designate the joint annuitant or beneficiary to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the plan in the event of the member's death, and may change such designation only twice, but any such change shall be deemed a new election and is subject to approval by the board. Such designation must name a joint annuitant or one or more primary beneficiaries where applicable. If a member has elected an option with a joint annuitant or beneficiary and his or her retirement income benefits have commenced, he or she may change the designated joint annuitant or beneficiary but only if allowed by law and if the board of trustees consents to such change and if the joint annuitant last previously designated by the member is alive when he or she files with the board of trustees a request for such change. Except as otherwise required by law, the consent of a member's joint annuitant or beneficiary to any such change is not required. To the extent allowed by law, the board of trustees may request such evidence of the good health of the joint annuitant that is being removed and to the extent allowed by law, the amount of the retirement income payable to the member upon the designation of a new joint annuitant shall be actuarially redetermined taking into account the age and gender of the former joint annuitant, the new joint annuitant, and the member. Each designation must be made in writing on a form prepared by the board of trustees, and filed with the board of trustees. If no designated beneficiary survives the member, such benefits as are payable in the event of the death of the member subsequent to his or her retirement shall be paid as provided in section 2-606. Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, a retired member may change his or her designation of joint annuitant or beneficiary up to two times as provided herein without the approval of the board or the current joint annuitant or beneficiary. Under such circumstances, the retiree is not required to provide proof of the good health of the joint annuitant or beneficiary being removed, and the joint annuitant or beneficiary being removed need not be living. 
(b)  Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  If a member dies prior to his or her normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first occurs, no benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under subsection 2-600(d). 
(2)  If the designated beneficiary or joint annuitant dies before the member's retirement under the plan, the option elected is canceled automatically and a retirement income of the normal form and amount is payable to the member upon his or her retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the member before his or her retirement and within 90 days after the death of the beneficiary. 
(3)  If both the retired member and the designated beneficiary die before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period certain and life thereafter, made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a)(1)c. of this section, the board of trustees may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be paid in a lump sum and in accordance with section 2-606. 
(4)  If a member continues beyond his or her normal retirement date and dies prior to actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to the provisions of this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made, or a retirement benefit will be paid, under the option to a beneficiary designated by the member in the amount or amounts computed as if the member had retired under the option on the date on which death occurred. 
(c)  No member may make any change in his or her retirement option within three months prior to benefit commencement, except that for a period of 90 days after adoption of Ordinance No. 070012 a member may change his or her retirement option any time prior to benefit commencement. 
(Code 1960, § 20-110.6; Ord. No. 3076, § 1, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 3439, § 15, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 3545, § 9, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 970591, § 8, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 981266, § 16, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 070012, § 5, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 130203, § 4, 9-19-13)  
Sec. 2-602. - Administration of the plan. 
(a)  General supervision. The general supervision of the plan shall be the responsibility of a board of trustees established in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Board of trustees. There is hereby created a board of trustees whose duty shall be to administer, manage and operate the plan, carrying into effect its provisions. The board of trustees shall consist of five members, two of whom, unless otherwise prohibited by law, shall be legal residents of the city who shall be appointed by the city commission. One member of the board shall be a full-time firefighter as defined in F.S. § 175.032, and may be a participant in the DROP, and one member of the board shall be a full-time police officer as defined in F.S. § 185.02, respectively elected by a majority of the active firefighters or police officers who are members of the plan. Retirees, including those members who have entered the DROP are not considered "active firefighters or police officers" for the purposes of the preceding sentence. The fifth member shall be chosen by a majority of the previous four members and shall be appointed, as a ministerial duty, by the city commission. 
(c)  Terms of office. The members of the board of trustees shall hold office for two-year terms, unless they lose their qualifications sooner, and they may succeed themselves in office. 
(d)  Officers and compensation. The trustees shall, by majority vote, elect a chairperson and a secretary. The trustees shall not receive any compensation for such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by law. 
(e)  Meetings of the board; form. 
(1)  The board shall hold regular meetings at least quarterly, and shall designate the time and place thereof. It shall adopt its own rules and procedures and shall keep a record of its procedure. All regular meetings of the board shall be public. 
(2)  The majority of the board shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the board. Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote at the meeting of the board and any and all acts and decisions shall be effectuated by a vote of a majority of the members of the board. 
(f)  Plan officers. 
(1)  The director of the department of finance may be treasurer of the plan and custodian of the fund. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  The board shall employ such professional and clerical services as required for the proper operation of the plan and provide for their compensation. 
(4)  The board may sue or be sued as an entity. 
(g)  Records; annual report. The treasurer of the plan shall keep or cause to be kept such data as shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities of the plan. The board shall cause to be made an annual audit showing the fiscal transactions of the plan for the preceding fiscal year. The most recent report showing the financial condition of the plan by means of an actuarial valuation of its assets and liabilities shall be attached to the report. The report shall be filed within 90 days following the end of the fiscal budgetary year. 
(h)  Administrative regulations and plan description. The board, after consulting with the advisory committee, may promulgate, by resolution, written rules and regulations not in conflict with the terms of this division or the requirements of law to cover the operation of any phase or part of the plan that is defined in this division. Copies of such rules and regulations shall be furnished to any member of the plan upon request and at least one copy thereof shall be kept available in the office of the clerk of the city commission for examination by any interested person at any time during ordinary business hours, otherwise a copy of this division shall fully meet the requirements of this subsection. The material provisions of the plan shall be contained in a written plan description. The plan description shall be furnished to members upon their initial employment or participation and, thereafter, upon the request of the member. 
(i)  Interpretation of the plan; denial of benefits. The board has the power to construe all rules, conditions and limitations of the plan, and its construction made in good faith shall be final and conclusive. There shall be timely, adequate written notice given to any member or beneficiary whose claim for benefits under the terms of this plan have been denied. The notice shall set forth, in a manner calculated to be understood by the claimant, the following: 
(1)  Specific reason(s) for the denial; 
(2)  Specific reference to plan provisions on which the denial is based; 
(3)  A description of any materials or information necessary to perfect the claim and why they are necessary; 
(4)  An explanation of the review procedure of the plan. 
A claimant shall have 60 days to appeal a denial of a claim for benefits to the board. A claimant or his/her duly authorized representative must request an appeal in writing to the board, and shall be allowed to review pertinent documents and submit issues and comments in writing. The board shall afford the claimant a full and fair review of his/her claim for benefits, and shall make a decision on review as promptly as possible, but in no event later than 60 days following the written request for review. The decision on review shall be in writing and shall include specific reasons for the decision and specific references to plan provisions on which the decision is based, and shall be written in a manner calculated to be understood by the claimant. 
(j)  Agents and employees. The board shall have the power to select, employ and compensate, or cause to compensate, from time to time such consultants, accountants, actuaries, attorneys, investment counsel, and other agents and employees as they may deem necessary and advisable in the proper and efficient administration of the plan. The board may authorize one or more of its members or any agent to make any payment in its behalf, or to execute or deliver any instrument, including a requisition for funds for benefit payments. 
(k)  Other powers and duties. The powers and duties of the board or of any other person as set out herein are not intended to be complete and exclusive but each such body or person shall have powers and duties as they are reasonably implied under the terms of this division. 
(l)  Duties of the secretary. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep minutes and records of the acts, proceedings or hearings of the board under this plan separate and apart from minutes of the city commission meetings. The secretary of the board of trustees shall keep a record of all persons receiving retirement payments under the provisions of this chapter, in which shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the pension shall cease to be paid. In this record, the secretary shall keep a list of all police officers and firefighters employed by the municipality. The record shall show the name, address, and time of employment of such police officer or firefighter and when he or she ceases to be employed by the municipality. 
(m)  Membership records. All notices, elections, designations and changes in beneficiary, and similar writings pertaining to the operation of the plan shall be made and preserved in writing on such forms as the board may direct. A service record for each employee shall be maintained in the office of the personnel department which shall show date of birth, date of employment, earnings for each year of service under the plan, and any other such information as is necessary for complete determination of his/her status under the plan. In order to receive benefits under this plan a member, upon request, shall be required to submit, or authorize the board to secure, any information concerning his/her entitlement to benefits (such as matter pertaining to social security benefits) or other information reasonably related to the operation of the plan. 
(n)  Deposits and disbursements. Predecessor plan assets, gifts, bequests, devises and appropriations to the fund shall be received by the director of the department of management and financial services, who shall be liable for the safekeeping of the funds under his/her bond. The director of the finance department shall transfer to the pension fund all pension funds appropriated by the city commission. City contributions shall be deposited in the plan fund as soon as practicable after they are received, provided, however, that in no event shall the contributions be deposited in the plan fund later than 30 days after the close of the budget or fiscal year of the plan. The director of the finance department shall be responsible for making all payments and disbursements from pension funds. 
(o)  Professionally qualified independent consultant. 
(1)  At least once every three years, the board of trustees shall retain a professionally qualified independent consultant who shall evaluate the performance of any existing professional money manager and shall make recommendations to the board of trustees regarding the selection of money managers for the next investment term. These recommendations shall be considered by the board of trustees at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The date, time, place, and subject of this meeting shall be advertised in the same manner as for any meeting of the board. 
(2)  For the purpose of this subsection, the term "professionally qualified independent consultant" means a consultant who, based on education and experience, is professionally qualified to evaluate the performance of professional money managers, and who, at a minimum: 
a.  Provides services on a flat-fee basis. 
b.  Is not associated in any manner with the money manager of the pension fund. 
c.  Makes calculations according to the American Banking Institute method of calculating time-weighted rates of return. All calculations must be made net of fees. 
d.  Has three or more years of experience working in the public sector. 
(p)  Adoption of tables. If any actuarial computations are authorized by the board, the tables, charts, and other statistical information shall be selected by the board or its actuary, provided that the valuation must be on basis and methods not less conservative than those set forth by the department of insurance. 
(q)  Personal liability. The board and its members and agents thereof shall each be fully protected in relying on the advice of the city attorney or his/her assistant or any other attorney employed by the city or the board or either of them insofar as legal matters are concerned, and any accountant similarly employed insofar as accounting matters are concerned, and any actuary similarly employed insofar as actuarial matters are concerned to the extent it is prudent to do so. The board may purchase fiduciary insurance to cover liability or losses incurred by an act or omission of the board or its agents. 
(r)  Filing. Where any notice, election, claim or other instrument is required or permitted by this division to be filed with the board, the same shall be filed with the secretary, on forms prescribed by the board. In the case of claims for benefits, such requests shall instead be filed with the secretary of the advisory committee for the committee's review and recommendation. 
(s)  Investment of funds. The trustees shall, in acquiring, investing, reinvesting, exchanging, retaining, selling and managing property for the benefit of the City of Gainesville Consolidated Police Officers' and Firefighters' Retirement Plan, exercise the judgment and care under the circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not in regard to speculation but in regard to the permanent disposition of their funds, considering the probable income as well as the probable safety of their capital. The foregoing standard of care shall not apply to, nor shall the board be responsible for, account investment options selected by the third party administrator or the gains or losses resulting from DROP participants' selections from among those options. Within the limitations of the foregoing standard, the trustees are authorized to acquire and retain all types of investments permitted by F.S. Chs. 175 and 185 and additionally may invest in the stocks, preferred or common, of any company regardless of the rating or lack thereof, assigned by a major rating service, which persons of prudence, discretion, and intelligence acquire or retain for their own account. Anything the contrary notwithstanding, the board of trustees shall not invest more than 70 percent of the fund at market value in equities. If at any time the market value of equities exceeds 70 percent of the total fund, the fund shall be adjusted to be in compliance with the 70 percent allocation within a reasonable and prudent period of time. Individual DROP accounts established prior to July 10, 2007 shall not be considered part of the "total fund" when evaluating percentages or types of investments in the fund. 
(t)  Method of making payments. Except as otherwise provided in the plan, all payments from the fund shall be made according to charter provisions governing the disbursement of moneys from the city's general fund provided that no payment shall be made from the funds of the plan unless the payment has been previously authorized by the board. All payments shall be made monthly except that payments which would amount to less than $100.00 may be made quarterly, semiannually or annually, as the case may be. The board of trustees may, upon written request by the retiree of the plan, or by a dependent, when authorized by the retiree or the retiree's beneficiary, authorize the plan administrator to withhold from the monthly retirement payment those funds that are necessary to pay for the benefits being received through the city, including payments to the Retiree Health Insurance Trust Fund, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the governmental entity, and to make any payments for child support or alimony. A member who is retired pursuant to section 2-600(b) or (c) and has separated as an eligible employee may then elect to have some or all of the annuity she or he receives as a result of normal or disability retirement distributed directly to an accident or health insurance plan, as payment of qualified health insurance premiums for her or him and her or his spouse and dependents, to the extent such distribution complies with the requirements of Section 402(1) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(u)  Errors; interest on delayed payment. If any error results in a member or beneficiary's receiving a greater or lesser amount of benefit than he/she is entitled to receive, the committee shall correct the error, and, as far as is practicable, shall adjust any future benefit payments in such manner as to provide for the member the actuarial equivalent of the total benefits to which the member was correctly entitled. If benefit payments are delayed, the committee, in its discretion, may authorize interest, at a rate not to exceed seven percent per annum, to take into account the period of time over which the payments were delayed. 
(v)  Reports by the trustee or insurance company. Any corporate trustee or insurance company or companies with which a trust agreement or contract may be entered into for the administration of the trust funds shall be required to submit a statement of the condition of the funds on deposit to the credit of the plan as prescribed by the board but at least once yearly, and may be required to supply copies of the statements to an actuarial consultant designated by the commission. The original shall be retained among the records of the secretary of the board. 
(Code 1960, § 20-110.7; Ord. No. 3342, §§ 1—5, 6-1-87; Ord. No. 3528, §§ 5—7, 3-27-89; Ord. No. 3976, § 1, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 980281, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 981266, § 17, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 000050, §§ 5—7, 6-26-00; Ord. No. 020202, § 3, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 070012, § 6, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 130203, § 5, 9-19-13)  
Sec. 2-603. - Separability and construction. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this division shall be held to be invalid, ineffective, or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not in any manner affect the remaining portions of this division which shall be and remain in full force and effect as fully as if the portion so adjudicated invalid, ineffective or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
(Code 1960, § 20-110.8; Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 2-604. - False, misleading, or fraudulent statements made to obtain public retirement benefits prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly make, or cause to be made, or to assist, conspire with, or urge another to make, or cause to be made, any false, fraudulent, or misleading oral or written statement or withhold or conceal material information to obtain any benefit available under this plan. 
(b)  (1)  A person who violates subsection (a) commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, as provided in F.S. §§ 175.195 and 185.185, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
(2)  In addition to any applicable criminal penalty, upon conviction for a violation described in subsection (a), a participant or beneficiary of this plan may, in the discretion of the board of trustees, be required to forfeit the right to receive any or all benefits to which the person would otherwise be entitled under this plan. For purposes of this paragraph, "conviction" means a determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld. 
(Code 1960, § 20-110.9; Ord. No. 000050, § 8, 6-26-00)  
Sec. 2-605. - Amendment; termination of plan. 
(a)  Power to amend. 
(1)  The city commission shall have the right, at any time, to amend any or all of the provisions of the plan; provided, however, that it is impossible for any part of the corpus or income of the trust fund to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than the exclusive benefit of the plan participants and their beneficiaries. 
(2)  Any plan amendment which changes any benefit accrual rate or vesting schedule under the plan shall not reduce the nonforfeitable amount of any participant's accrued benefit determined as of the later of the date such amendment is adopted or becomes effective. 
(b)  Termination of plan. 
(1)  The board of trustees expects to continue this plan indefinitely, but reserves the right to terminate the plan and its city contributions thereunder at any time. In the event of the termination or partial termination of the plan, or complete discontinuance of contributions under the plan, the rights, if any, of all members to benefits accrued to the date of the termination, partial termination, or discontinuance, to the extent funded as of that date, shall be nonforfeitable. 
(2)  Upon receipt of written notice of termination of the plan, the board shall arrange for the trust fund to be distributed in accordance with the following procedure: 
a.  The board shall determine the date of distribution and the asset value required to fund all the nonforfeitable benefits after taking into account the expenses of such distribution. The board shall inform the city if additional assets are required, in which event the city shall continue to financially support the plan until all nonforfeitable benefits have been funded. 
b.  The board shall determine the method of distribution of the asset value, whether distribution shall be by payment in cash, by the maintenance of another or substituted trust fund, by the purchase of insured annuities, or otherwise, for each member entitled to benefits under the plan as specified in section 2-605(b)(2)c. 
c.  The board shall distribute the asset value as of the date of termination in the manner set forth herein, on the basis that the amount required to provide any given retirement income is the actuarially computed single-sum value of such retirement income, except that if the method of distribution determined under section 2-605(b)(2)b. involves the purchase of an insured annuity, the amount required to provide the given retirement income is the single premium payable for such annuity. The actuarial single-sum value may not be less than the employee's accumulated contributions to the plan, with interest if provided by the plan, less the value of any plan benefits previously paid to the employee. 
d.  If there is asset value remaining after the full distribution specified in section 2-605(b)(2)c., and after the payment of any expenses incurred with such distribution, such excess shall be returned to the city, less return to the state of the state's contributions, provided that, if the excess is less than the total contributions made by the city and the state to date of termination of the plan, such excess shall be divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the city and the state. 
e.  The board shall distribute, in accordance with section 2-605(b)(2)b., the amounts determined under section 2-605(b)(2)c. 
(Code 1960, § 20-110.10; Ord. No. 110452, § 1, 12-1-11; Ord. No. 130203, § 6, 9-19-13)  
Sec. 2-606. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Beneficiaries. 
(1)  Each member shall, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board of trustees, designate a choice of one or more persons, named sequentially or jointly, as his or her beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the event of the member's death, and to the extent allowed, each designation may be revoked by such member by signing and filing with the board of trustees a new designation or beneficiary form. 
(2)  If no beneficiary is named in the manner provided by subsection (1), or if no beneficiary designated by the member survives him or her, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the plan with respect to such deceased member shall be paid by the board of trustees to the estate of such deceased member, provided that in any of such cases the board of trustees, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income payments be paid in a lump sum. Any payment made to any person pursuant to this subsection shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the plan with regard to such deceased member and beneficiaries and shall not be subject to review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the surviving spouse of any pension participant member killed in the line of duty shall not lose survivor retirement benefits if the spouse remarries. 
(b)  Exemption from execution. The pensions, annuities, or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under this plan and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the funds created under this plan are hereby exempted from any state, county, or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution or attachment or to any legal process whatsoever, and shall be unassignable. 
(c)  Payments to legally incompetent. If any member or beneficiary is a minor, or, in the judgment of the board of trustees is otherwise legally incapable of personally receiving and giving a valid receipt for any payment due him/her, the board of trustees may, unless claim shall have been made by a duly appointed guardian, direct that payments be made to the person's spouse, registered domestic partner, child, parent, brother, or sister, or other person deemed by the board to have assumed responsibility for the expenses of the member or beneficiary. 
(d)  Disappearance of member or beneficiary. If any member or beneficiary, receiving or entitled to receive benefits under the plan, should disappear and fail to respond within 60 days to a written notice sent by the board of trustees by registered or certified mail informing the member or beneficiary of his/her settlement to receive benefits under the plan, the board of trustees may pay the benefits, or any portion thereof which the board determines to be appropriate, to the dependents of the member or beneficiary, whichever is applicable, having regard to the needs of the dependents, until the member or beneficiary is located or until the benefits have been paid in full, whichever event shall first occur. 
(Code 1960, § 20-110.11; Ord. No. 000050, § 9, 6-26-00; Ord. No. 070012, § 7, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 080439, § 3, 11-20-08)  
Sec. 2-607. - Cost of living adjustment of benefits. 
(a)  A retired member who was receiving on or before October 1, 1999, a monthly normal, delayed or disability retirement benefit and is age 62 or older on or before October 1, 1999, shall have his/her monthly retirement benefit adjusted by two percent beginning with the benefit for the month of October, 1999 (which monthly benefit is payable November 1, 1999). The monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be adjusted by two percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(b)  A retired member who was receiving on or before October 1, 1999, a monthly normal, delayed, or disability retirement benefit shall, upon the attainment of age 62 on or before October 1, have his/her monthly retirement benefit adjusted by two percent, beginning with the benefit for the month of October (which monthly benefit is payable in November) next following or coincident with (October 1 birthday) the retiree's attainment of age 62. The monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be adjusted by two percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(c)  Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, a retired member who first receives a monthly normal or delayed (including DROP participants) retirement benefit for October, 1999, or later (first payable November 1, 1999, or later) which benefit is based upon 25 or more years of credited service shall, upon the attainment of age 55 on or before October 1, have his/her monthly retirement benefit adjusted by two percent, beginning with the benefit for the month of October next following or coincident with (October 1 birthday) the retiree's attainment of age 55. The monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be adjusted by two percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(d)  Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, a retired member who first receives a monthly normal or delayed retirement benefit for October, 1999, or later (first payable November 1, 1999, or later) which benefit is based upon 20 or more years of credited service but less than 25, or by retiring under the "Rule of 70" with less than 20 years of service, shall, upon the attainment of age 62 on or before October 1, have his/her next monthly retirement benefit adjusted by two percent beginning with the benefit for the month of October next following or coincident with (October 1 birthday) the retiree's attainment of age 62. The monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be adjusted by two percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(e)  A retired member who first receives a monthly disability retirement benefit on or after October 1, 1999, shall, upon the attainment of age 62 on or before October 1, have the next monthly retirement benefit adjusted by two percent beginning his/her benefit for the month of October next following or coincident with (October 1 birthday) the retiree's attainment of age 62. The monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be adjusted by two percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(f)  A retired member who was a police officer with less than 20 years of credited service on or after July 1, 2013 or whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a police officer occurred on or after July 1, 2013 who first receives a monthly normal or delayed retirement benefit (including DROP participants) for July 2013, or later (first payable August 1, 2013, or later) which benefit is based upon 25 or more years of credited service shall, upon the attainment of age 55 on or before October 1, have his/her monthly retirement benefit adjusted by one percent, beginning with the benefit for the month of October next following or coincident with (October 1 birthday) the retiree's attainment of age 55. The monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be adjusted by one percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(g)  A retired member who was a police officer with less than 20 years of credited service on or after July 1, 2013 or whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a police officer occurred on or after July 1, 2013 who first receives a monthly normal or delayed retirement benefit (including DROP participants) for July, 2013, or later (first payable August 1, 2013, or later) which benefit is based upon 25 or more years of credited service shall, upon the attainment of age 62 on or before October 1, have his/her next monthly retirement benefit adjusted by two percent beginning with the benefit for the month of October next following or coincident with (October 1 birthday) the retiree's attainment of age 62. The monthly benefit payable to the retired member or the retired member's beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be adjusted by two percent each October thereafter for the duration of the annuity. 
(h)  A retired member who was a police officer with less than 20 years of credited service on or after July 1, 2013 or whose most recent appointment to employment with the city as a police officer occurred on or after July 1, 2013 shall not receive a cost of living adjustment if such a member retired under the "Rule of 70" on or after July 1, 2013 or if the member receives a retirement benefit based upon less than 25 years of credited service. 
(Ord. No. 981266, § 18, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 070012, § 8, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 120680, § 3, 6-20-13)  
Sec. 2-608. - Supplemental retirement program for police officers. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases used in this section shall have the meanings set forth below, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context: 
(1)  Additional premium tax revenues means the premium tax revenues received from the state pursuant to F.S. § 185.10, in plan years 2001 through and including 2006 that exceeded $485,156.16 annually; and premium tax revenues received from the state pursuant to F.S. § 185.10, in plan years 2007 and thereafter that exceed $558,361.13 annually. 
(2)  Annual allocation means the pro rata amount for each share eligible member, calculated on an annual basis, of premium tax revenues received from the state in plan years 2013 and thereafter pursuant to F.S. § 185.10, that exceed $558.361.13, plus prior plan year forfeited balances. 
(3)  Effective date means July 1, 2013, the date on which this supplemental share program shall take effect. 
(4)  Forfeiture means the termination of a member's account, or eligibility for annual or initial allocations, pursuant to F.S. § 112.3173, section 2-604, section 2-608(d)(3), or other forfeiture required by law, and reversion of such funds to the plan. 
(5)  Initial allocation means the pro rata amount for each share eligible member, calculated on an annual basis, of premium tax revenues received from the state in each plan year 2001 through and including 2006 that exceeded $485,156.16, premium tax revenues received from the state in each plan year 2007 through and including 2012 that exceeded $558,361.13. Based on the foregoing, the premium tax revenues available for pro rata distribution for plan years 2001 through and including 2012 shall be as follows: 
2001: $47,489.07 
2002: $92,473.27 
2003: $128,534.50 
2004: $113,964.78 
2005: $122,126.39 
2006: $147,619.49 
2007: $55,989.29 
2008: $83,458.87 
2009: $109,443.49 
2010: $55,897.01 
2011: $51,242.95 
2012: $41,547.90 
Sum total: $1,049,787.01 
(6)  Member means any police officer who was or is in the regular, full-time employ of the city on or after October 1, 2000. 
(7)  Premium tax revenue means the revenues received by the city from the tax assessed on premiums collected on casualty insurance policies pursuant to section 2-599(b)(2). Said tax is collected on policies issued in a calendar year within the city and remitted to the state. Following an annual review and approval of the consolidated plan by the state, said tax, less state fees, is provided to the board, in approximately August or September of the following calendar year. 
(8)  Retired means any member who is receiving a retirement benefit under sections 2-600(a), (b), or (c), a member who met the conditions set forth in section 2-601(b)(4) regardless of the form of benefit, or a member who died in the line of duty, as defined and determined by the board, consistent with F.S. § 185.34, regardless of years of credited service, or months of credited service in the plan year prior to death. A member eligible for re-employment under USERRA who died while performing qualified military services as defined in USERRA shall be deemed to have retired on the day before he died regardless of years of credited service at time of death. Members who are employed by the city and participants in the deferred retirement option program (DROP) under the consolidated plan are not considered retired for purposes of this section. 
(9)  Service credit rules shall mean the following: 
a.  Day of service shall mean each day for which a member is: 
i.  Paid, or entitled to payment, by the city for performance of duties as a police officer; 
ii.  Paid, or entitled to payment, by the city on account of a period of time during which no duties are performed as a police officer (e.g., vacation, holiday, illness, incapacity, layoff, jury duty, military duty or approved leave of absence); 
iii.  Each day for which back pay as a police officer, irrespective of mitigation or damages, has been either awarded to or agreed to by the city; provided, however, that the same day shall not be credited as a day of service more than once. 
b.  Month of service shall mean a one-month period beginning on the day of the month corresponding to a member's most recent date of employment with the city as a police officer, during which the member has earned at least ten days of service; provided however, that ten days of service will be deemed to have been earned in each month of service in which occurs: 
i.  An approved leave of absence, not to exceed 90 days, authorized by the city, in accordance with a uniform policy applied on a nondiscriminatory basis to all members similarly situated; or 
ii.  Voluntary or involuntary service in the Armed Forces of the United States for a period not greater than five years of the time spent in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be added to the years of actual service, if: the member is in the city's active employ as an eligible employee prior to such service and leaves such position for the purpose of voluntary or involuntary service in the Armed Forces of the United States; such member is entitled to re-employment under the provisions of the USERRA; and the member returns to his or her employment as a police officer as an eligible employee within one year from the date of his or her release from such active service. 
c.  A member shall earn days or months of service for purposes of calculating benefits due under the share program after entering in a DROP. 
d.  If the employment of a member as a police officer with the city is terminated, and such former member is subsequently re-employed by the city as a police officer, the member's date of employment, for purposes of determining credited service, shall be based on the member's subsequent re-employment date as a police officer. 
e.  Credited service shall mean the aggregate number of months of service with the city as a police officer, expressed in terms of full and fractional year, subject to the following: 
i.  No additional months of service shall be credited for unused sick leave. 
ii.  No member shall receive credit for years or fractional parts of years of service if he or she has withdrawn his or her contributions to the consolidated plan for those years or fractional parts of years of service, even if the member repays into the consolidated plan the amount he or she has withdrawn, plus interest as determined by the board. 
(10)  Share eligible member means a member of the program who meets the eligibility criteria set forth in section 2-608(c). 
(11)  Supplemental share program, share program, or program means the Supplemental Retirement Program for Police Officers, as set forth in this section, and as it may be amended from time to time in the future. 
(b)  Establishment. There is hereby created for the police officers of the city a program to be known as the "Supplemental Retirement Program for Police Officers," also referred to in this section as the "program," "supplemental share program," or "share program." The creation and maintenance of the assets of the program, the benefits provided for and the administration of the program shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Eligibility. 
(1)  Eligibility to receive the initial allocation. 
a.  For members retired on or before the effective date to be eligible to receive the initial allocation for each plan year from 2001 to 2012, an individual must be a member of the program and must have: 
i.  Retired and terminated employment in connection therewith; 
ii.  Been employed by the city as a police officer for the entire plan year. 
b.  For members employed by the city after the effective date to be eligible to receive the initial allocation for each plan year from 2001 to 2012, an individual must be a member of the program and must have been employed by the city as a police officer for the entire plan year. 
(2)  Eligibility to receive the annual allocation. 
a.  For retired members to be eligible to receive the annual allocation, an individual must be a member of the program and must have: 
i.  Retired and terminated employment in connection therewith prior to the actual receipt of premium tax revenues by the board for the plan year; and 
ii.  Been employed by the city as a police officer for the entire plan year. 
b.  For members employed by the city to be eligible to receive the annual allocation, an individual must be a member of the program and must have: 
i.  Been employed on the date the premium tax revenues are received by the board for the plan year; and 
ii.  Been employed by the city as a police officer for the entire plan year. 
(3)  Forfeiture. Members whose retirement benefits have been forfeited pursuant to F.S. § 112.3173, section 2-604, or any other law, and members who terminate their employment with the city as a police officer prior to the completion of at least ten years of credited service are not eligible for any distributions or allocations under the share program. 
(4)  Re-employed retirees and recipients of termination benefits. A former employee of the city receiving retirement or termination benefits from the City of Gainesville Employees Disability Plan, the City of Gainesville Employees Pension Plan, or retirement benefits or monthly termination benefits under the consolidated plan may, upon becoming re-employed by the city become a member of the share program, earn credited service, and become entitled to receive a supplemental retirement benefit subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such member shall re-satisfy the eligibility requirements for participation in this program. 
b.  No service for which credit was received, or which remained unclaimed, at retirement or termination may be claimed or applied toward service credit earned following renewed membership. 
c.  Such re-employed member shall not be entitled to purchase additional credit for service performed prior to re-employment for which retirement or termination benefits are being received. 
(d)  Funding and benefits. 
(1)  Allocation of additional premium tax revenues. 
a.  Initial allocation. 
i.  The board shall distribute the initial allocation to each share program eligible member as described in section 2-608(e) based upon his or her status as a share eligible member for each plan year additional premium tax revenues were received by the board from plan years 2001 to 2012. 
ii.  The board shall make the initial allocation within 90 days of the effective date. 
b.  Annual allocation. 
i.  The board shall distribute the annual allocation to each share program eligible member as described in section 2-608(e) based upon his or her status as a share eligible member for each plan year additional premium tax revenues are received by the board in plan years 2013 and thereafter. If the board receives no additional premium tax revenues or the administrative fees and expenses exceed the additional premium tax revenues received, there shall be no annual allocation to share eligible members. 
ii.  The board shall make the annual allocation no later than 90 days after its receipt of such additional premium tax revenues. 
(2)  City's contributions to the program. The city shall not be required to levy any additional taxes on its residents or make any contributions to the supplemental share program. 
(3)  Forfeiture. Members whose retirement benefits have been forfeited pursuant to F.S. § 112.3173, section 2-604, or any other law, and members who terminate employment with the city as a police officer prior to the completion of at least ten years of credited service shall not be deemed a share eligible member for the purposes of any allocation or distribution under this section and any amounts of additional premium tax revenues which otherwise would be allocated shall revert to the plan and, after final resolution of all claims, be included in the next annual allocation. 
(4)  Payment of costs, expenses and fees. All costs, expenses and fees of developing and administering the supplemental share program shall be paid from the assets of the share program in such fashion as the board shall reasonably determine. Any direct distribution and any allocation to a share eligible member's account shall be net of such member's pro rata portion of the share program's costs, expenses and fees of administering the share program. 
(e)  Accounts; distributions. 
(1)  Distributions to employee members. 
a.  For share eligible members who are employed by the city on or after the effective date, initial and annual allocations shall be transferred to individual accounts on behalf of the member in accordance with this section. Members' share accounts shall annually be credited or debited with gains or losses equal to the overall market rate of return on investments of the consolidated plan, less any fees or expenses related to administration of the share program, on or before December 31. Upon termination of a member's employment with the city as a police officer and becoming retired under the consolidated plan in connection therewith, the balance of the member's account shall be paid to the member or member's beneficiaries in a single lump sum or a member may elect a direct rollover as allowed in section 2-600(j). Failure to make an election will result in the payment being made in a lump sum. 
b.  After the completion of at least ten years of credited service, share eligible members who are employed by the city may make a one-time, irrevocable election, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to transfer the balance of their account to another account within the plan designated by the member for investment. Such members may direct their share money to any of the investment options offered by the third party administrator approved by the board. There shall be no guaranteed rate of investment return on these accounts. Upon transfer of the share money to the account designated by the member, neither the city nor the board shall have any obligation to the member concerning investment gains or losses. Transfers between accounts shall be in accordance with the rules of the third party administrator. 
c.  Members who terminate their employment with the city as a police officer prior to the completion of at least ten years of credited service shall forfeit their share of any annual or initial allocation, shall not be eligible for any distribution under this section, and their share shall revert to the plan for pro rata allocation to eligible members during the following plan year. 
(2)  Distributions to retired members. For share eligible members who are no longer employed by the city at the time the board makes allocations, such members or members' beneficiaries shall be paid in a single lump sum or a member may elect a direct rollover as allowed in section 2-600(j). Failure to make an election will result in the payment being made in a lump sum. 
(f)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  City's responsibilities. The city shall have no responsibility for the operation of the share program except those specified herein and shall bear no expense in connection therewith. 
(2)  USERRA. Notwithstanding any provision of the program to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service shall be provided in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 120680, § 4, 6-20-13)  
Sec. 2-609. - Supplemental retirement program for firefighters. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases used in this section shall have the meanings set forth below, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context: 
(1)  Additional premium tax revenues means the premium tax revenues received from the state pursuant to F.S. § 175.101, in plan years 1999 through and including 2006 that exceeded $310,569.70 annually; and premium tax revenues received from the state pursuant to Section 175.101, Florida Statutes, in plan years 2007 and thereafter that exceed $580,918.87 annually. 
(2)  Annual allocation means the pro rata amount for each share eligible member, calculated on an annual basis, of premium tax revenues received from the state in plan years 2016 and thereafter pursuant to F.S. § 175.101, that exceed $580,918.87, plus prior plan year forfeited balances. 
(3)  Effective date means February 1, 2017, the date on which this supplemental share program shall take effect. 
(4)  Forfeiture means the termination of a member's account, or eligibility for annual or initial allocations, pursuant to F.S. § 112.3173, section 2-604, section 2-609(d)(3), or other forfeiture required by law, and reversion of such funds to the plan. 
(5)  Initial allocation means the pro rata amount for each share eligible member, calculated on an annual basis, of premium tax revenues received from the state in each plan year 1999 through and including 2006 that exceeded $310,569.70, premium tax revenues received from the state in each plan year 2007 through and including 2015 that exceeded $580,918.87. Based on the foregoing, the premium tax revenues available for pro rata distribution for plan years 1999 through and including 2015 shall be as follows: 
1999: $29,907.09 
2000: $54,481.26 
2001: $76,261.69 
2002: $94,392.76 
2003: $110,331.08 
2004: $168,037.44 
2005: $228,947.65 
2006: $58,129.99 
2007: $72,672.13 
2008: $5,543.40 
2009: $0.00 
2010: $0.00 
2011: $0.00 
2012: $0.00 
2013: $35,811.35 
2014: $16,687.50 
2015: $0.00 
Sum Total: $951,203.44 
(7)  Member means any firefighter who was or is in the regular, full-time employ of the city on or after October 1, 1998. 
(8)  Premium tax revenue means the revenues received by the city from the tax assessed on premiums collected on casualty insurance policies pursuant to section 2-599(b)(2). Said tax is collected on policies issued in a calendar year within the city and remitted to the state. Following an annual review and approval of the consolidated plan by the state, said tax, less state fees, is provided to the board, in approximately August or September of the following calendar year. 
(9)  Retired means any member who is receiving a retirement benefit under sections 2-600(a), (b), or (c), a member who met the conditions set forth in section 2-601(b)(4) regardless of the form of benefit, or a member who died in the line of duty, as defined and determined by the board, regardless of years of credited service, or months of credited service in the plan year prior to death. A member eligible for re-employment under USERRA who died while performing qualified military services as defined in USERRA shall be deemed to have retired on the day before he died regardless of years of credited service at time of death. Members who are employed by the city and participants in the deferred retirement option program (DROP) under the consolidated plan are not considered retired for purposes of this section. 
(10)  Service credit rules shall mean the following: 
a.  Day of service shall mean each day for which a member is: 
i.  Paid, or entitled to payment, by the city for performance of duties as a firefighter; 
ii.  Paid, or entitled to payment, by the city on account of a period of time during which no duties are performed as a firefighter (e.g., vacation, holiday, illness, incapacity, layoff, jury duty, military duty or approved leave of absence); 
iii.  Each day for which back pay as a firefighter, irrespective of mitigation or damages, has been either awarded to or agreed to by the city; provided, however, that the same day shall not be credited as a day of service more than once. 
b.  Month of service shall mean a one-month period beginning on the day of the month corresponding to a member's most recent date of employment with the city as a firefighter, during which the member has earned at least ten days of service; provided however, that ten days of service will be deemed to have been earned in each month of service in which occurs: 
i.  An approved leave of absence, not to exceed 90 days, authorized by the city, in accordance with a uniform policy applied on a nondiscriminatory basis to all members similarly situated; or 
ii.  Voluntary or involuntary service in the Armed Forces of the United States for a period not greater than five years of the time spent in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be added to the years of actual service, if: the member is in the city's active employ as an eligible employee prior to such service and leaves such position for the purpose of voluntary or involuntary service in the Armed Forces of the United States; such member is entitled to re-employment under the provisions of the USERRA; and the member returns to his or her employment as a firefighter as an eligible employee within one year from the date of his or her release from such active service. 
c.  A member shall earn days or months of service for purposes of calculating benefits due under the share program after entering in a DROP. 
d.  If the employment of a member as a firefighter with the city is terminated, and such former member is subsequently re-employed by the city as a firefighter, the member's date of employment, for purposes of determining credited service, shall be based on the member's subsequent re-employment date as a firefighter. 
e.  Credited service shall mean the aggregate number of months of service with the city as a firefighter, expressed in terms of full and fractional year, subject to the following: 
i.  No additional months of service shall be credited for unused sick leave. 
ii.  No member shall receive credit for years or fractional parts of years of service if he or she has withdrawn his or her contributions to the consolidated plan for those years or fractional parts of years of service, even if the member repays into the consolidated plan the amount he or she has withdrawn, plus interest as determined by the board. 
(11)  Share eligible member means a member of the program who meets the eligibility criteria set forth in section 2-609(c). 
(12)  Supplemental share program, share program, or program means the supplemental retirement program for firefighters, as set forth in this section, and as it may be amended from time to time in the future. 
(b)  Establishment. There is hereby created for the firefighters of the city a program to be known as the "supplemental retirement program for firefighters," also referred to in this section as the "program," "supplemental share program," or "share program." The creation and maintenance of the assets of the program, the benefits provided for and the administration of the program shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Eligibility. 
(1)  Eligibility to receive the initial allocation. 
a.  For members retired on or before the effective date to be eligible to receive the initial allocation for each plan year from 1999 to 2015, an individual must be a member of the program and must have: 
i.  Retired and terminated employment in connection therewith: and 
ii.  Been employed by the city as a firefighter for the entire plan year. 
b.  For members employed by the city after the effective date to be eligible to receive the initial allocation for each plan year from 1999 to 2015, an individual must be a member of the program and must have been employed by the city as a firefighter for the entire plan year. 
(2)  Eligibility to receive the annual allocation. 
a.  For retired members to be eligible to receive the annual allocation, an individual must be a member of the program and must have: 
i.  Retired and terminated employment in connection therewith prior to the actual receipt of premium tax revenues by the board for the plan year; and 
ii.  Been employed by the city as a firefighter for the entire plan year. 
b.  For members employed by the city to be eligible to receive the annual allocation, an individual must be a member of the program and must have: 
i.  Been employed on the date the premium tax revenues are received by the board for the plan year; and 
ii.  Been employed by the city as a firefighter for the entire plan year. 
(3)  Forfeiture. Members whose retirement benefits have been forfeited pursuant to F.S. § 112.3173, section 2-604, or any other law, and members who terminate their employment with the city as a firefighter prior to the completion of at least ten years of credited service and have not received a disability retirement or have withdrawn their contributions from the plan after termination of employment are not eligible for any distributions or allocations under the share program. 
(4)  Re-employed retirees and recipients of termination benefits. A former employee of the city receiving retirement or termination benefits from the City of Gainesville Employees Disability Plan, the City of Gainesville Employees' Pension Plan, or retirement benefits or monthly termination benefits under the consolidated plan may, upon becoming re-employed by the city become a member of the share program, earn credited service, and become entitled to receive a supplemental retirement benefit subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such member shall re-satisfy the eligibility requirements for participation in this program. 
b.  No service for which credit was received, or which remained unclaimed, at retirement or termination may be claimed or applied toward service credit earned following renewed membership. 
c.  Such re-employed member shall not be entitled to purchase additional credit for service performed prior to re-employment for which retirement or termination benefits are being received. 
(d)  Funding and benefits. 
(1)  Allocation of additional premium tax revenues. 
a.  Initial allocation: 
i.  The board shall distribute the initial allocation to each share program eligible member as described in section 2-609(e) based upon his or her status as a share eligible member for each plan year additional premium tax revenues were received by the board from plan years 1999 to 2015. 
ii.  The board shall make the initial allocation within 90 days of the effective date. 
b.  Annual allocation: 
i.  The board shall distribute the annual allocation to each share program eligible member as described in section 2-609(e) based upon his or her status as a share eligible member for each plan year additional premium tax revenues are received by the board in plan years 2016 and thereafter. If the board receives no additional premium tax revenues or the administrative fees and expenses exceed the additional premium tax revenues received, there shall be no annual allocation to share eligible members. 
ii.  The board shall make the annual allocation no later than 90 days after its receipt of such additional premium tax revenues. 
(2)  City's contributions to the program. The city shall not be required to levy any additional taxes on its residents or make any contributions to the supplemental share program. 
(3)  Payment of costs, expenses and fees. All costs, expenses and fees of developing and administering the supplemental share program shall be paid from the assets of the share program in such fashion as the board shall reasonably determine. Any direct distribution and any allocation to a share eligible member's account shall be net of such member's pro rata portion of the share program's costs, expenses and fees of administering the share program. 
(e)  Accounts; distributions. 
(1)  Distributions to employee members. 
a.  For share eligible members who are employed by the city on or after the effective date, initial and annual allocations shall be accounted for in individual accounts on behalf of the member in accordance with this section. Members' share accounts shall annually be credited or debited with gains or losses equal to the overall market rate of return on investments of the consolidated plan net of investment related expenses and less any fees or expenses related to administration of the share program, on or before December 31 each year. Upon termination of a member's employment with the city as a firefighter and becoming retired under the consolidated plan in connection therewith, the balance of the member's account shall be paid to the member or member's beneficiaries in a single lump sum or a member may elect a direct rollover as allowed in section 2-600(j). Failure to make an election will result in the payment being made in a lump sum. 
b.  Members who terminate their employment with the city as a firefighter prior to the completion of at least ten years of credited service and have not received a disability retirement shall forfeit their share of any annual or initial allocation, shall not be eligible for any distribution under this section, and their share shall revert to the plan for pro rata allocation to eligible members during the following plan year. 
c.  For members who terminate their employment after the completion of ten years of credited service but prior to retirement eligibility (early or normal), there will be no additional shares earned and the share plan balance will be distributed upon electing the receipt of the vested benefit. A member who withdraws their accumulated contribution after vesting, shall not be eligible to receive a share plan distribution. 
(2)  Distributions to retired members. For share eligible members who are no longer employed by the city at the time the board makes allocations, such members or members' beneficiaries shall be paid in a single lump sum or a member may elect a direct rollover as allowed in section 2-600(j). Failure to make an election will result in the payment being made in a lump sum. 
(f)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  City's responsibilities. The city shall have no responsibility for the operation of the share program except those specified herein and shall bear no expense in connection therewith. 
(2)  USERRA. Notwithstanding any provision of the program to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service shall be provided in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 170591 , § 1, 1-18-18)  
ARTICLE VIII. - REGISTERED DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS 
 
Sec. 2-610. - Definitions. 
Committed relationship means a family relationship, intended to be of indefinite duration, between two individuals characterized by mutual caring and the sharing of a mutual residence. 
Declaration of registered domestic partnership means the document that is filed with the clerk of the commission's office according to the procedures established in section 2-611. 
Dependent is a person who resides within the household of a registered domestic partnership and is: 
1.  A biological, adopted, or foster child of a registered domestic partner; or 
2.  A dependent as defined under IRS regulations; or 
3.  A ward of a registered domestic partner as determined in a guardianship or other legal proceeding. 
Mutual residence means a residence shared by the registered domestic partners; it is not necessary that the legal right to possess the place of residence be in both of their names. Two people may share a mutual residence even if one or both have additional places to live. Registered domestic partners do not cease to share a mutual residence if one leaves the shared place but intends to return. 
Registered domestic partnership means a committed relationship between two persons who consider themselves to be a member of each other's immediate family and have registered their partnership in accordance with section 2-611. 
(Ord. No. 051224, § 1, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 2-611. - Registration, amendment, termination and administration procedures. 
(a)  Registration. 
(1)  Declaration of registered domestic partnership. A declaration of registered domestic partnership shall be filed with the clerk of the commission and shall contain the names and addresses of the applicants who shall swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that each partner: 
a.  Is at least 18 years old and competent to contract; 
b.  Is not married to, or a member of another registered domestic partnership or civil union, with anyone other than the co-applicant. 
c.  Agrees to share the common necessities of life and to be responsible for each other's welfare. 
d.  Considers the mutual residence to be his or her primary residence. 
e.  Considers himself or herself to be a member of the immediate family of the other partner; and 
f.  Agrees to mutually support the other by contributing in some fashion, not necessarily equally, to maintain and support the registered domestic partnership. 
g.  Are not related by blood to one another in any way which would prohibit legal marriage in the State of Florida. 
(2)  Each partner agrees to immediately notify the clerk of the commission, in writing, if the terms of the registered domestic partnership are no longer applicable or one of the domestic partners wishes to terminate the domestic partnership. 
(b)  Amendment. Registered domestic partners may amend a registered domestic partnership previously filed with the clerk of the commission to show a change in his or her household address or to add or delete dependents. Amendments shall be signed by both members of the registered domestic partnership under penalty of perjury. 
(c)  Termination. 
(1)  Termination statement. A registered domestic partner may terminate the registered domestic partnership by filing a termination statement with the clerk of the commission. The person filing the termination statement shall swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that: 
a.  The registered domestic partnership is to be terminated; and 
b  If the termination statement is not signed by both registered domestic partners, a copy of the termination statement shall be served, by certified or registered mail, on the other registered domestic partner, and proof of service shall be filed with the clerk of the commission, and/or other good faith efforts are made to notify the other registered domestic partner, as described in an affidavit filed with the clerk of the commission. 
(2)  Effective date. The termination shall become effective on the date of filing of the termination statement signed by both registered domestic partners or if the termination statement is not signed by both parties, on the date proof of service or a good faith efforts affidavit is filed with the clerk of the commission pursuant to subsection (c)(1)(b) above. 
(3)  Automatic termination. A registered domestic partnership shall automatically terminate upon the following events: 
a.  One of the domestic partners marries; 
b.  One of the domestic partners dies; 
c.  One of the domestic partners enters into a civil union with someone other than his or her registered domestic partner; or 
d.  Registers with another domestic partner. 
(d)  Administration. 
(1)  Forms. The clerk of the commission shall provide forms for the establishment, amendment, and termination of registered domestic partnerships, and otherwise be responsible for implementing and interpreting the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Certificate of registered domestic partnership. The clerk of the commission shall issue to the registered domestic partners a certificate of registered domestic partner no later than ten business days after the declaration of registered domestic partnership is filed. 
(3)  Maintain records. The clerk of the commission shall maintain copies of the declaration of registered domestic partnerships, any and all amendments thereto, certificates of registered domestic partnership, and termination statements filed by registered domestic partners. 
(Ord. No. 051224, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 080219, § 1, 9-4-08)  
Sec. 2-612. - Rights and legal effect of registered domestic partnership. 
To the extent not superseded or preempted by federal, state, or county law or ordinance, or contrary to rights conferred by contract or separate legal instrument, registered domestic partners shall have the following rights: 
(1)  Health care facility visitation. The term "health care facility" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, convalescent facilities, walk-in clinics, doctor's offices, mental health care facilities, and other short and long term facilities located within, or under the jurisdiction of, the city. All health care facilities operating within the city shall allow a registered domestic partner the same visitation rights as a spouse (or parent, if the patient is a dependent of the registered domestic partnership) of the patient. A dependent of a registered domestic partner shall have the same visitation rights as a patient's child. 
(2)  Funeral/burial decisions. Following the death of a registered domestic partner, the surviving partner shall have the same rights to make decisions with regard to funeral/burial decisions and disposition of the decedent's body as a surviving spouse. The surviving partner shall retain these rights notwithstanding the automatic termination provision of subsection 2-611(c)(3)b. 
(3)  Notification of family members. In any situation providing for mandatory or permissible notification of family members, including, but not limited to, notification of family members in an emergency, or when permission is granted to inmates to contact family members, "notification of family" shall include registered domestic partners, provided the domestic partner has notified the person, entity or agency of such request. 
(4)  Preneed guardian designation. Any person who is registered as a registered domestic partner pursuant to this article shall have the same right as any other individual to be designated as a pre need guardian pursuant to F.S. § 744.3045, and to serve in such capacity in the event of his or her declarant registered domestic partner's incapacity. A registered domestic partner shall not be denied or otherwise be defeated in serving as the plenary guardian of his or her registered domestic partner or the partner's property, under the provisions of F.S. Ch. 744, to the extent that the incapacitated partner has not executed a valid preneed guardian designation, based solely upon his or her status as the domestic partner of the incapacitated partner. 
(5)  Correctional facility visitation rights. The term "correctional facility" includes, but is not limited to, holding cells, jails, and juvenile correction centers of any kind, located within or under the jurisdiction of the city. A registered domestic partner shall have the same visitation rights at all correctional facilities operating within the city as a spouse (or parent, if the person in custody is a dependent of the registered domestic partnership) of a person in custody. A dependent shall have the same visitation rights afforded to the child of a person in custody. 
(6)  Participation in education. A registered domestic partner shall have the same rights to participate in the education of a dependent of the registered domestic partnership as a parent to participate in the education of their child, in all educational facilities located within or under the jurisdiction of the city. This includes the right of a registered domestic partner to participate in the home schooling of a dependent in accordance with Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 051224, § 1, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 2-613. - Rights and legal effect of registered domestic partnership. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to alter, affect, or contravene county, state, or federal law, or apply to county, state, or federal agencies, or officers or employees thereof, when acting in their official capacities. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as recognizing or treating a registered domestic partnership as a marriage. 
(c)  All rights, privileges, and benefits extended to registered domestic partnerships registered pursuant to this article shall also be extended to all persons legally partnered in another jurisdiction. 
(d)  A registered domestic partner may enforce the rights under section 2-612 by filing a private action against a person or entity in any court of competent jurisdiction for declaratory relief, injunctive relief, or both. 
(Ord. No. 051224, § 1, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 2-614. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - LIVING WAGE REQUIREMENTS[29] 

Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 080755, §§ 1, 2, repealed art. IX and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former art. IX, §§ 2-615—2-617, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 020663, §§ 1—3, adopted March 17, 2003, and Ord. No. 030168, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 2003. 
 
Sec. 2-615. - Definitions. 
[The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context:] 
City means the City of Gainesville Municipal Corporation. 
Cooperative purchasing agreement "is materials, equipment or services purchased under the terms and conditions of another local, state, federal, or other public agency's bid or cooperative bids put together by agencies. 
Covered employee means an employee of a service contractor/subcontractor, as further defined in this article, that is directly involved in providing covered services pursuant to the service contractor's/subcontractor's contract with the city, during the period of time he or she is providing the covered services. The term "covered employee" shall not include a person described in 29 USC 213(a)(3) (seasonal employee), a student enrolled in a degree program who is employed under the auspices of the educational institution, a person who is employed by the service contractor/subcontractor through an ongoing written job training program, a worker with a disability as defined in 29 CFR 525.3, or employees hired or leased for temporary assignments of less than one year such as short-term projects, substituting for an absent employee, or substituting while a vacant position is being filled. 
Covered services are the following services purchased by the city under a single contract over $100,000.00: 
(1)  Food preparation and/or distribution; 
(2)  Custodial/cleaning; 
(3)  Refuse removal; 
(4)  Maintenance and repair; 
(5)  Recycling; 
(6)  Parking services; 
(7)  Painting/refinishing; 
(8)  Printing and reproduction services; 
(9)  Landscaping/grounds maintenance; 
(10)  Agricultural/forestry services; 
(11)  Construction services; 
except when such services are services provided under a cooperative purchasing agreement, or services provided by service contractors/subcontractors located within the City of Gainesville enterprise zone. 
Health benefits are any plan, fund, or program established or maintained by the service contractor/subcontractor for the purpose of providing for its participants or beneficiaries, through the purchase of insurance or otherwise, medical, surgical, or hospital care or benefits. 
Payroll records include name, address, the covered employee's correct classification, rate of pay, daily and weekly number of hours worked, deductions made and actual wages paid and, if applicable, those records necessary to determine whether health benefits, as described herein, are being provided or offered to covered employees. 
Service contractor/subcontractor is a for-profit individual, business entity, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture, or similar business, providing a covered service, who or which employs 50 or more persons, but not including employees of any subsidiaries, affiliates or parent businesses. The calculation of number of employees is made as of the date of execution of the contract for covered services. 
(Ord. No. 080755, § 1, 4-2-09)  
Sec. 2-616. - Amount of living wage. 
(a)  Living wage paid. A service contractor/subcontractor shall pay to all of its covered employees a living wage of no less than $8.70 per hour (health benefit wage) and offer health benefits as described in this section, or otherwise $9.95 per hour (non-health benefit wage). 
(b)  Health benefits. For a service contractor/subcontractor to comply with the living wage provision by choosing to pay the lower wage scale available when the service contractor/subcontractor also offers health benefits, such health benefits shall cost an average of $1.25 per hour per employee towards the provision of health benefits. The requirement may be satisfied by a cafeteria plan, which includes health benefits, towards which the service contractor/subcontractor makes a contribution of at least $1.25 per hour for each covered employee. If the health benefit program of a service contractor/subcontractor requires an initial period of employment for a new employee to be eligible for health benefits (eligibility period), such service contractor/subcontractor may pay the health benefit living wage scale for up to six months of a new employee's initial eligibility period. In this event, upon six months of employment, the new employee will be paid the non-health benefit wage until such time as the new employee is offered or provided health benefits. 
(c)  Adjustment. The living wage (health benefit wage) specified in subsection (a) above is based on the federal poverty guidelines for a family of four as determined by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), and published in the Federal Register February 14, 2002. It will be adjusted annually as of the first day of the second month following the month of publication of the new federal poverty guidelines by the DHHS, the non-health benefit wage will be adjusted the same amount, and the adjusted rates will be applied to contracts for which bids/proposals are solicited, or extensions/amendments of existing contracts entered into, after the effective date of the adjustment. Provided further, however, that in no event shall the health benefit wage exceed the lowest hourly base rate of pay of any regular, full-time city employee in effect at the time bids/proposals for contracts are solicited, or in the case of extensions/amendments of then existing contracts, the rate in effect at the time such extension/amendment is entered into. The applicable living wage shall be noted in all solicitations for covered services, and disclosed during negotiations for extensions/amendments of contracts for covered services. 
(d)  Certification. Prior to executing any contract with the city or service contractor for a covered service the service contractor/subcontractor, as applicable, shall certify to the contractor administrator (city) that it will pay each of its covered employees a living wage as herein defined, during the period of time they are directly involved in providing covered services under the contract. Upon execution, the certification shall become an obligation under the contract. The certification must also include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number of the service contractor/subcontractor and a local contact person; 
(2)  The specific project for which the service contract is sought; 
(3)  The amount of the contract and the department contract administrator; 
(4)  An agreement to comply with the terms of this article as part of its contractual obligations. 
(e)  Posting. A copy of the living wage rate shall be kept posted by the employer in a prominent place where it can easily be seen by the covered employees and shall be supplied to any covered employee upon request. In addition, it is the responsibility of the service contractors/subcontractors to make any person submitting a bid for a subcontract providing covered services aware of the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 080755, § 1, 4-2-09)  
Sec. 2-617. - Application; enforcement. 
(a)  Procurement specifications. The living wage shall be required for new contracts for covered services solicited, and extensions or amendments of existing contracts for covered services with service contractors/subcontractors entered into, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. This article shall be implemented in a fashion consistent with otherwise applicable city purchasing policies and procedures. 
(b)  Each contracting department shall include the following clause in each of its contracts for covered services (and extensions/amendments to existing contracts if not included in the original contract): 
During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows: 
(1)  The contractor shall comply with the provisions of the City of Gainesville's living wage requirements, as applicable. Failure to do so shall be deemed a breach of contract and shall authorize the city to withhold payment of funds until the living wage requirements have been met. 
(2)  The contractor will include the provision of (1) above in each subcontract for covered services with a service contractor/subcontractor, as defined herein, so that the provisions of (1) above will be binding upon each such service contractor/subcontractor. The contractor will take such action with respect to any such subcontract as may be directed by the contract administrator as a means of enforcing such provisions; provided, however, the city shall not be deemed a necessary or indispensable party in any litigation between the contractor and a subcontractor concerning compliance with living wage requirements. 
(c)  A person who claims that this article applies or applied to him or her as a covered employee and that the service contractor/subcontractor is or was not complying with the requirements of this article has a right to file a written complaint. Each charter officer shall establish administrative procedures for the filing, processing and resolution of written complaints under this ordinance for their respective areas of responsibility(s) of the city. A covered employer may be required to produce payroll and other records deemed relevant to the investigation of a complaint. Remedies set forth in any administrative procedures will not be exclusive or in any way meant to prohibit any relief afforded by a court of law or otherwise prohibit the city from terminating a contract, filing a complaint, or taking legal action for noncompliance. 
(d)  Retaliation and discrimination unlawful. It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 1-9 of this Code for an employer to discharge, reduce the compensation of, or otherwise discriminate against any employee for filing a written complaint or otherwise asserting his or her rights under this ordinance, participating in any of its proceedings or using any available remedies to enforce his or her rights under the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 080755, § 1, 4-2-09)  
Sec. 2-618. - City employees. 
The city will set an example by providing a living wage, as described in section 2-616(a)—(c), to the city's regular employees as determined consistent with budgetary, pay plan and bargaining considerations and obligations. The requirements of sections 2-616(d) and (e) and section 2-617 do not apply to the city. 
(Ord. No. 140296 , § 1, 7-2-15)  
Sec. 2-619. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - LOCAL PREFERENCE POLICY 
 
Sec. 2-620. - Findings of fact. 
The city annually spends significant amounts on purchasing personal property, materials, and contractual services and in constructing improvements to real property or to existing structures. The dollars used in making those purchases are derived, in large part, from taxes, fees, and utility revenues derived from local businesses in the corporate city limits of Gainesville, and the city commission has determined that funds generated in the community should, to the extent possible, be placed back into the local economy. Therefore, the city commission has determined that it is in the best interest of the city to give a preference to local businesses in the corporate city limits of Gainesville in making such purchases whenever the application of such a preference is reasonable in light of the dollar-value of proposals received in relation to such expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 001261, § 1, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 050896, § 1, 3-27-06)  
Sec. 2-621. - Definition. 
"Local business" means the vendor has a valid business tax receipt, issued by the City of Gainesville at least six months prior to bid or proposal opening date, to do business in said locality that authorizes the business to provide the goods, services, or construction to be purchased, and a physical business address located within the limits of said locality, in an area zoned for the conduct of such business, from which the vendor operates or performs business on a day-to-day basis. Post office boxes are not verifiable and shall not be used for the purpose of establishing said physical address. In order to be eligible for local preference, the vendor must provide a copy of the business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 001261, § 2, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 050896, § 1, 3-27-06; Ord. No. 070022, § 1, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 2-622. - Local preference in purchasing and contracting. 
In bidding of, or letting contracts for procurement of, supplies, materials, equipment and services, as described in the purchasing policies, the city commission, or other purchasing authority, may give a preference to local businesses in making such purchase or awarding such contract in an amount not to exceed five percent of the local business' total bid price, as described below, and in any event the cost differential should not exceed $25,000.00. Total bid price shall include not only the base bid price but also all alterations to that base bid price resulting from alternates which were both part of the bid and actually purchased or awarded by the city commission or other authority. In the case of requests for proposals, letters of interest, best evaluated bids, qualifications or other solicitations and competitive negotiation and selection in which objective factors are used to evaluate the responses, local businesses are assigned five percent of the total points of the total evaluation points. 
(Ord. No. 001261, § 3, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 050896, § 1, 3-27-06)  
Sec. 2-623. - Exceptions to local preference policy. 
The preference set forth in this article X shall not apply to any of the following purchases or contracts: 
(1)  Good or services provided under a cooperative purchasing agreement; 
(2)  Contracts for professional services procurement of which is subject to the Consultants' Competitive Negotiation Act (F.S. § 287.055) or subject to any competitive consultant selection policy or procedure adopted or utilized by the city commission or charter officer; 
(3)  Purchases or contracts which are funded, in whole or in part, by a governmental entity and the laws, regulations, or policies governing such funding prohibit application of that preference; or 
(4)  Purchases made or contracts let under emergency or noncompetitive situations, or for litigation related legal services, etc., as such are described in the city's purchasing policies; 
(5)  Purchases with an estimated cost of $50,000.00 or less; 
(6)  Application of local preference to a particular purchase, contract, or category of contracts for which the city commission is the awarding authority may be waived upon written justification and recommendation of the charter officer and approval of the city commission. The preferences established herein in no way prohibit the right of the city commission or other purchasing authority to compare quality or fitness for use of supplies, materials, equipment and services proposed for purchase and compare qualifications, character, responsibility and fitness of all persons, firms, or corporations submitting bids or proposals. Further, the preferences established herein in no way prohibit the right of the city commission or other purchasing authority from giving any other preference permitted by law in addition to the preference authorized herein. 
(Ord. No. 001261, § 4, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 050896, § 1, 3-27-06)  
Sec. 2-624. - Application, enforcement. 
The local preference shall apply to new contracts for supplies, materials, equipment and services first solicited after October 1, 2004. This article shall be implemented in a fashion consistent with otherwise applicable city purchasing policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 001261, § 5, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 050896, § 1, 3-27-06)  
Secs. 2-625—2-629. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[30] 

Footnotes: 
--- (30) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 080155, § 2, adopted Sept. 4, 2008 and effective January 1, 2009, repealed Art. XI, §§ 2-630—2-638, which pertained to the retiree health insurance program and trust fund and derived from Ord. No. 050527, § 1, adopted Feb. 27, 2006; and Ord. No. 070012, § 9, adopted July 9, 2007. See Art. XII of this chapter for current retiree health insurance program and trust fund provisions. 
 
Secs. 2-630—2-639. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - RETIREE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM AND TRUST FUND[31] 

Footnotes: 
--- (31) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions contained in this article, and the repeal of former Art. XI of this chapter, are effective January 1, 2009. 
 
Sec. 2-640. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the retiree health insurance program and trust fund is to accumulate, invest and manage the funds described in section 2-642 that are necessary to meet the premium costs of providing health insurance to eligible retirees and their eligible dependents and beneficiaries through the program of self insurance and/or insurance provided by the City of Gainesville. This is accomplished pursuant to a trust, which trust assets are dedicated to providing benefits to eligible retirees and their eligible dependents through the payment of health insurance premiums, and which trust assets are protected from the creditors of the city. The program encourages use of other health care systems, such as Medicare. 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08)  
Sec. 2-641. - Definitions. 
City shall mean the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
City group health plan shall mean the group insurance or self insurance plan(s) maintained by the city to provide health coverage for eligible employees, retirees and dependents. 
Credited service shall mean service with the city upon which the retirement benefit the retiree is receiving (or will be receiving in the case of delayed retirement) is based, or would be based in the case of an "ICMA" retiree. 
Current premium costs shall mean the payment of the current months premium owed or owing to the city group health plan for such month's retiree health insurance coverage as of the effective date of the termination of the plan pursuant to section 2-652(b). 
DROP means a deferred retirement option program as set forth in the city firefighters retirement plan. 
Participant means a retiree or dependent as defined in the city group health plan. 
Premium shall mean the monthly amount(s) the city charges for retiree health insurance coverage, including, if applicable, under a Medicare supplement plan, as established by the city manager. 
Retiree shall mean: 
(1)  A former employee, who is a member of the city employees pension plan or a member of the consolidated police officers and firefighters retirement plan and received, immediately after separation from employment, a monthly annuity pursuant to an application for normal or early retirement, in accordance with the provisions of these pension plans; or 
(2)  A former employee upon whose behalf employer contributions were made to the ICMA deferred compensation program and/or 401(a) plan and who, at the time of their separation from the city, would have met the age and/or service requirements for normal or early retirement under the city employee pension plan or the consolidated police officers and firefighters retirement plan as applicable to the classification they held at the time of their separation, and would have been entitled to the immediate receipt of a monthly annuity; or 
(3)  A former employee, who is a member of the consolidated police officers and firefighters retirement plan and is receiving a monthly annuity pursuant to an approved application for disability retirement in accordance with the provisions of that pension plan; or 
(4)  A former employee of the city receiving a monthly benefit pursuant to an approved application for disability retirement under the city employee's disability plan or disability benefit under the city employees pension plan. 
Retiree health insurance program shall mean the retiree health insurance program established pursuant to this article as further described herein to pay a portion of the premium costs of the city group health plan for eligible retirees of the city and then eligible dependents, and as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08; Ord. No. 170102 , § 1, 7-6-17)  
Sec. 2-642. - Trust fund established; contributions. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby created a trust fund to be known as the retiree health insurance trust fund (the "trust fund"). the creation and maintenance of the trust fund's assets shall be in accordance with and for the benefit of the retiree health insurance program, described in this article. The trust fund shall initially consist of an amount equal (i) all trust assets of the retiree health insurance trust fund described in article XI of this chapter, which retiree health insurance program and trust fund, all liabilities having been satisfied, is being terminated by the ordinance from which this article derives, except for the principal and all earnings derived from the issuance by the City of Gainesville, Florida, Taxable and Other Post Employment Benefits Obligations Bonds - Series 2005 (retiree health plan), and (ii) such other amount transferred from the assets of such terminated program and trust as is necessary to fund the retiree health insurance program created by this article, as determined by an actuarial valuation performed by the city, which amounts shall be irrevocably transferred to said trust fund after adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives. Any remaining assets of the terminated trust shall be returned to the city, where they may be used for any lawful purpose. 
(b)  Contributions. In addition to premium payments made by retirees, gifts to the fund accepted by the city, and earnings, the city manager shall irrevocably transfer and/or deposit in the fund sum(s), which together with the other sources of income to the fund shall be sufficient to pay for the premium for health insurance benefits of the participants, including both the normal costs of such benefits and those necessary to amortize the unfunded liability (excluding that resulting from any implicit subsidy) for such benefits over a period of not longer than 40 years. For the purpose of securing the necessary funds, the city commission is hereby authorized to levy such taxes and generate such other revenues as may be necessary to provide the appropriate level of city contributions. 
(c)  Disbursements. Monies in this fund may be disbursed only to the city group health plan for the payment of premiums for retiree health insurance for participants of the city group health plan and for the costs associated with managing, administering, and operating the retiree health insurance program and the retiree health insurance trust fund and any appropriate transfers as described herein. 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08)  
Sec. 2-643. - City contributions for future retirees. 
For persons retiring, or applying for retirement, as applicable, after the dates set forth in this section, the city contribution towards a monthly premium shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Normal or early retirement. Subject to the provisions contained herein, the amount that the city will contribute towards the required premium for persons first retired effective after August 31, 2008, under normal or early retirement, will be calculated in accordance with the following formula: 
Ten dollars × number of years of credited service and portion thereof of: 
a.  Plus $5.00 × number of years of age and portion thereof over 65, on the date that retiree first accesses (enters) the retiree health insurance program; or 
b.  Minus $5.00 × number of years of age and portion thereof under 65, on the date that retiree first accesses (enters) the retiree health insurance program. 
(2)  DROP service. Employees who have entered a regular DROP after August 31, 2008, or who declare their intention to reverse DROP after August 31, 2008, shall not have the period of employment while in regular DROP, or the period of employment after the effective date of commencement of participation in the (reverse) DROP, count as credited service under subsection (a) above. 
(3)  Disability retirees. The amount that the city will contribute towards the required premium, for persons who became retirees based upon an application for disability retirement submitted after August 31, 2008, will be: 
a.  For approved "in-line-of-duty" disabilities under the consolidated police officers and firefighters retirement plan, the city employees disability plan, or the city employees pension plan, the city will contribute towards an individual premium an amount equal to 80 percent of the individual premium of the least costly (lowest premium) city group health insurance plan option being offered at the time the disability retirement is approved. 
b.  For approved "in-line-of-duty" disabilities under the consolidated police officers and firefighters retirement plan, the city employees disability plan, or the city employees pension plan, the city will contribute towards any other (than described in subsection a. above) tier of coverage an amount equal to 150 percent of the individual premium of the least costly (lowest premium) city group health insurance plan option being offered at the time the disability retirement is approved. 
c.  For approved disabilities other than "in-line-of-duty", the city will contribute 50 percent of the amount described in subsections a. and b. above. 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08; Ord. No. 170102 , § 2, 7-6-17)  
Sec. 2-644. - City contribution for current retirees. 
For persons retiring or applying for retirement, as applicable, before the dates set forth in this section, the city contribution towards a premium shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Normal or early retirement. Subject to the provisions contained herein, the amount that the city will contribute towards the required premium for persons first retired effective before September 1, 2008, under normal or early retirement will be calculated in accordance with the following formula: 
Ten dollars × number of years of credited service and portion thereof of: 
a.  Plus $5.00 × number of years of age and portion thereof over 65, on the date that retiree first accessed (enters) the retiree health insurance program or January 1, 2009, whichever is later; or 
b.  Minus $5.00 × number of years of age and portion thereof under 65, on the date that retiree first accesses (enters) the retiree health insurance program or January 1, 2009, whichever is later. 
(2)  DROP service. Employees who have entered a regular DROP before September 1, 2008, or who have declared their intention to reverse DROP before September 1, 2008, shall have the period of employment while in the regular DROP, or the period of employment after the effective date of commencement of participation in the (reverse) DROP, added to credited service for purposes of the calculation under subsection (1) above. 
(3)  Disability retirees. 
a.  The amount that the city will contribute towards the required premium, for persons who became retirees based upon application for disability retirement submitted before September 1, 2008, will be an amount equal to 80 percent of the individual premium of the least costly (lowest premium) city group health plan option being offered at that time. 
b.  The city will contribute towards any other (than described in subsection a. above) tier of coverage of an amount equal to 150 percent) of the individual premium of the least costly (lowest premium) city group plan option being offered at that time. 
(4)  Retirees at least 65 years of age January 1, 2009. For current retirees age 65 years or older on January 1, 2009, the amount the city will contribute towards the required Premium will be the greater of the amount contributed for the month of August 2008 or the amount determined under the provisions of this article. Said amount shall however be subject to the limitations and adjustments described in sections 2-646 and 2-647. 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08)  
Sec. 2-645. - Opting-out and re-entry; rehired retirees. 
(a)  A retired participant may exercise a one-time opt-out and re-enter the city group health plan or Medicare supplement plan in the future. The retiree and any dependents covered at the time of the opt-out will be able to re-enter the city group health plan, subject to eligibility requirements of the of the city group health plan, without pre-existing condition waiting periods applying to such retirees and dependent(s). In addition, a retiree/participant may choose to not exercise his/her initial enrollment opportunity and this will not count as his/her one-time opt-out. Also, an employee non-participant who was eligible to apply for coverage during the most recent annual enrollment period (and any dependents who would have been eligible for coverage at that time) who does not elect to enter the plan at the time of retirement (initial enrollment) will also not have this count as his/her one-time opt-out. 
Opt-out means the retiree's ability to terminate coverage with the city group health plan after becoming a retiree as defined by the city group health plan. 
(1)  The opt-out applies to: 
a.  Termination of the contract 
b.  Dependents can be terminated subject to enrollment provisions of the city group health plan. 
(2)  Termination of the contract effective date: 
a.  If during open enrollment period, end of the plan year 
b.  If voluntary, end of the month in which the election is made. 
(3)  Termination of dependent coverage effective date: 
a.  When eligibility ends as defined by the city group health plan. 
b.  If voluntary, end of the month in which the election is made. 
(b)  Opting-out and its effect on the city contribution. The intent of the opt-out provisions is to give the retiree an opportunity to decline or terminate coverage under the city's group health plan one-time without foregoing the benefit (eligibility to participate in the city group health plan) in the future. The benefit to the city is the transfer of premium cost and claims risk to another health plan during the opt-out period. Except as provided below, the city will recalculate the city's contribution based on the retiree's age upon re-entry into the city group health plan or the Medicare supplement plan, if applicable. This will potentially increase the city's contribution towards the retiree's monthly health insurance premium. 
(c)  The retiree's city contribution shall be recalculated upon re-entry to the city group health plan or Medicare supplement plan when opting-out results in a transfer of claims risk from the city group health plan. A retiring employee (participant or not) might elect to not enroll initially, or opt-out later when: 
(1)  Retiree choosing coverage with a successor employer. 
(2)  Retiree becomes a covered dependent under a non-city-employee spouse's health plan. 
(3)  Retiree is covered under an individual policy. 
(4)  Retiree elects not to carry health insurance. 
(5)  Retiree elects to participate in a city sponsored Medicare supplement plan. 
(d)  The retiree's city contribution shall not be recalculated when the opt-out does not result in a transfer of claims risk from the city group health plan. examples of this would be: 
(1)  Retiree transfers coverage to a city employee spouse's plan. In this case the spouse would be an active city employee. 
(2)  Rehired retiree (see rehired retiree provision below). 
In the cases immediately above, the retiree's city contribution will be frozen at the initial city contribution (not recalculated upon re-entry but subject to adjustment per section 2-647) because decreasing the age reduction would be inconsistent with the transfer of risk policy. Upon re-entry, the city contribution would be based on calculation described in sections 2-643(a) and 2-644(a) when the retiree first entered the plan, or was first eligible to enter the plan. 
(e)  Opting-In (other than initial enrollment period) Effective Date of Coverage. The effective date of coverage upon re-entry to the City Group Health Plan (opting-in) will be the first day of the month following the election to opt-in. 
(f)  Rehired Retirees. In the event a retiree is rehired by the City of Gainesville as a regular employee, the rehired retiree is treated as an active employee for the purposes of benefits during such period or re-employment. This includes participation in the City Group Health Plan. If the rehired retiree continues health insurance with the City of Gainesville, the retiree is considered an active employee and will pay the premium associated with an active employee in the same tier. Credited service earned as a rehired retiree shall not count as credited service under section 2-643(1) and section 2-644(2). Upon re-entry to the retiree health insurance program, the rehired retiree's benefit will not be recalculated based upon age at re-entry (see subsection (d) above). 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08)  
Sec. 2-646. - Limitations on contributions. 
(a)  Except as may be required by the application of section 2-644(4), in no event shall the city's contribution toward a required premium exceed the amount of the premium the city contributes for active employees for the least costly (lowest premium) city group health plan option being offered at that time, for the applicable tier of coverage involved. In the event that the eligible retiree has elected to participate in the city sponsored, if any. Medicare supplement plan in lieu of participating in the city group health plan(s), the city's contribution shall not exceed the amount of the premium for the Medicare supplement plan. 
(b)  Retiree and dependents participating in the city group health plan or Medicare supplement plan will be required to authorize payment of premiums from RHS accounts or pension annuities, where sufficient funds are reasonably available for such purposes, in order to remain eligible to receive contributions from the city towards the premium. 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08)  
Sec. 2-647. - Annual adjustments. 
Subject to section 2-646, limitations on contributions, the city's contribution towards the required Premium will be adjusted annually at rate of 50 percent of the annual percentage change in the individual premium for the least costly (lowest premium) city group health plan option being offered, compared to the premium of the least costly (lowest premium) option offered the prior plan year. 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08)  
Sec. 2-648. - Administration of the program. 
(a)  General supervision. The general supervision of the retiree health insurance program shall be the responsibility of a board of trustees established in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Board of trustees. There is hereby created a board of trustees whose duty shall be to administer, manage and operate the retiree health insurance program carrying into effect its provisions. The members of the board of trustees shall be the members of the city commission. 
(c)  Trustees' term. Members of the city commission shall serve as trustees of the program during their term of office as members of the city commission. 
(d)  Compensation of trustees. Trustees of the program shall serve without compensation for their services as trustees. 
(e)  Meetings of the board; form. 
(1)  The board shall hold meetings as required, and shall designate the time and place thereof. It shall adopt its own rules and procedures and shall keep a record of its procedure. All meetings of the board shall be public. 
(2)  The majority of the board shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the board. Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote at the meeting of the board and at least four concurring votes shall be necessary for decisions of the trustees. 
(f)  Retirement program officers: 
(1)  The mayor of the city commission shall be the chair of the board and the mayor pro-tem of the commission shall be the chair pro-tem of the board. 
(2)  The clerk of the city commission shall be the secretary of the board. 
(3)  The director of finance shall be the treasurer of the program and shall be custodian of the funds. The city manager shall be the program administrator and shall have the power to finally approve members' or beneficiaries' claims for benefits, to issue rules, and otherwise interpret the program. 
(4)  The city attorney shall be legal advisor to the board. 
(5)  The program administrator shall employ such professional and clerical services as required for the proper operation of the program and provide for their compensation. 
(g)  Actuarial evaluation; annual report. The treasurer of the program shall keep or cause to be kept such data as shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities of the program. On a periodic basis, at least once every two years, the retiree health insurance program shall be subject to an actuarial evaluation which shall determine the adequacy of the payments into the fund to meet premium requirements and shall determine the changes in contributions, if any, needed in such to achieve the funding through premiums, earnings, and other sources of income that is deemed adequate to enable payment through the indefinite future of the retiree health insurance program described herein. As may be required, an actuarial report shall be prepared which shall include a description of the current total premium, current retiree premium payment, and current city contributions; a valuation of present assets based upon statement value and prospective assets and liabilities of the retiree health insurance program fund and the extent of unfunded liabilities; a plan to amortize any unfunded liabilities; a description of actions taken to reduce unfunded liabilities; a description and explanation of actuarial assumptions, a schedule illustrating amortization of any unfunded liabilities; a comparative review illustrating the level of funds available to the plan from premiums, investment income, and other sources realized over the period covered by the report with the assumptions used; and a statement by the actuary that the report is complete and accurate and that in his opinion the techniques and assumptions used are reasonable and meet the requirements and intent of this article. The board shall cause to be made an annual audit showing the fiscal transactions of the program for the preceding fiscal year. The most recent report showing the financial condition of the program by means of an actuarial valuation of its assets and liabilities shall be attached to the report. 
(h)  Administrative regulations. The program administrator may promulgate regulations not in conflict with the terms of this division to cover the operation of any phase or part of the retiree health insurance program that is defined in this division. Copies of the rules and regulations shall be furnished to any eligible retiree or dependent participant upon request and at least one copy thereof shall be kept available in the office of the clerk of the city commission for examination by any interested person at any time during ordinary business hours. The most current report of pertinent financial and actuarial information on the solvency and actuarial soundness of the retiree health insurance program shall be kept available in the office of the clerk of the city commission for examination and shall be provided at no cost to the program members upon their request. 
(i)  Interpretation of the retiree health insurance program, denial of benefits. The board and administrator have the power to construe the provisions and terms of the retiree health insurance program, and their construction made in good faith shall be final and conclusive. There shall be timely, adequate written notice given to any whose claim for eligibility under the terms of the retiree health insurance program have been denied, setting forth the specific reasons for such denial and the program administrator shall provide procedures for appeals of such decisions. 
(j)  Agents and employees. The program administrator shall have the power to select, employ and compensate, or cause to compensate from time to time such consultants, actuaries, accountants, investment counsel, and other agents and employees as the retiree health insurance program administrator may deem necessary and advisable in the proper and efficient administration of the program. The city attorney shall have the power to select, employ and compensate, or cause to compensate, from time to time an attorney as the city attorney may deem necessary and advisable in the proper and efficient administration of the retiree health insurance program. 
(k)  Other powers and duties. The powers and duties of the board or of any other person as set out herein are not intended to be complete and exclusive but each such body or person shall have powers and duties as they are reasonably implied under the terms of this article. 
(l)  Duties of the secretary. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep minutes and records of the acts of the board under this program separate and apart from minutes of the city commission meetings and these shall be maintained in the office of the clerk of the city commission. 
(m)  Membership records. All notices, elections, designations and changes in beneficiary, and similar writings pertaining to the operation of the program shall be made and preserved in writing on such forms as the administrator may direct. A service record for each member shall be maintained in the risk management department which shall show, at least: 
(1)  For each participant of the system, a number or other means of identification, date of birth, sex, date of employment, current address, period of credited service; 
(2)  Beginning date of participation, date and type of retirement and amount of monthly benefit, and type of survivor benefit. In order to receive benefits under this program, the participant or beneficiary, upon request, shall be required to submit, or authorize the administrator to secure, any information concerning his/her entitlement to eligibility and contributions or other information reasonably related to the operation of the program. 
(n)  Fiduciary duties. The board of trustees and retirement program officers shall, in the performance of program duties, discharge their duties with respect to the program solely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to participants and their beneficiaries and defraying reasonable expenses of administering the program. The program may purchase insurance for its fiduciaries to cover liabilities or losses incurred by reason or acts or omissions of the fiduciaries. 
(o)  Investment of funds. The program administrator shall have full power to invest and reinvest all funds within its control and to make investments of all kinds except as otherwise provided by statute or ordinance or policy direction of the board of trustees. 
(p)  Errors. Should any change or error in the records result in any participant or beneficiary contributing to the program more or less than he/she would have been entitled had the records been correct, the program administrator shall correct such error and as far as practical shall adjust the contributions in such manner that so as to correct such error or underpayment within a reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08)  
Sec. 2-649. - Separability and construction. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not in any manner affect the remaining portions of this article, which shall be, and remain, in full force and effect, as fully as if the portion so adjudicated invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The section headings included in this article shall not be construed to limit the text included thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08)  
Sec. 2-650. - Protection against fraud and deceit. 
Whosoever with intent to deceive shall make or cause to be made any statement, report, certificate, election, notice, claim or other instrument, authorized or required under this article, whether of the enumerated classes or otherwise, which shall be untrue, or shall falsely or cause to be falsified any record comprising a part of the operation or administration of this program contemplated by this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08)  
Sec. 2-651. - Limitations of assignment. 
None of the assets shall be subject to the claim or to any legal process of any creditor of the participant or the city. No participant or other persons or entity shall have any interest in, or right in or to, the trust fund or any part thereof, or any assets comprising the same, except only as to the extent expressly provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08)  
Sec. 2-652. - Amendment; termination of the program. 
(a)  Power to amend. The city commission shall have the right, at any time, to amend any or all of the provisions of the retiree health insurance program; provided, however, that no such amendment shall authorize or permit any part of the trust fund to be diverted for purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of retirees and their dependents and beneficiaries. 
(b)  Termination of program. The city commission expects to continue the retiree health insurance program indefinitely, but reserves the right to terminate the retiree health insurance program and/or city contributions hereunder at any time. In the event of the termination of the retiree health insurance program, the rights, if any, of all participants to assets utilized to pay premiums of participants up to the date of termination shall be non-forfeitable. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, in the event of termination of the retiree health insurance program and trust fund, if arrangements have been made for the payment of the full amount of the current premium costs for the benefits provided under the retiree health insurance program for the participants and their dependents and beneficiaries, through the trust fund, so that the retiree health insurance program has no unfunded liability under the retiree health insurance program remaining, then the remaining assets in the retiree health insurance trust fund shall be returned to the city to be used for any legally permitted purpose, and the city shall have no further liability under the retiree health insurance program after the effective date of such termination. 
(Ord. No. 080155, § 1, 9-4-08)  
Chapter 3 - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  
ARTICLE I. - ENTERPRISE ZONE 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Gainesville Enterprise Zone Area. 
(a)  The area described in subsection (b) below has been found and determined: 
(1)  To chronically exhibit extreme and unacceptable levels of poverty, unemployment, physical deterioration, and economic disinvestment; 
(2)  That the rehabilitation, conservation or redevelopment of the area is necessary in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city; and 
(3)  That the revitalization of the area can occur only if the private sector can be induced to invest its own resources to build or rebuild the economic vitality of the area; 
Such area shall be known as the "Gainesville Enterprise Zone Area" in which the city shall undertake activities to decrease levels of poverty, unemployment, physical deterioration, and economic disinvestment in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The area shall consist of all the land lying within the boundaries described as follows: 
ALL THAT AREA LYING WITHIN THE EXISTING CITY OF GAINESVILLE LIMITS BEING EAST OF WEST 6 TH STREET FROM THE SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF NW 53 RD AVENUE TO THE SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SW ARCHER ROAD; AND ALL THAT AREA LYING EAST OF SW 13 TH STREET AND THOSE PROPERTIES ABUTTING THE WEST LINE OF SW 13 TH STREET, ALL BEING BETWEEN ARCHER ROAD AND THE SOUTHERLY CITY LIMIT LINE EXCLUDING THE SHANDS HOSPITAL PROPERTY; AND THAT AREA WITHIN THE EXISTING CITY LIMITS BEING BOTH NORTH OF NE 53 RD AVENUE AND EAST OF NE 15 TH STREET. 
ALSO, THAT PORTION OF AREA NO. 3 OF THE FORMER ENTERPRISE ZONE PER CITY ORDINANCE NO. 4069, LYING WEST OF WEST 6 TH STREET, EAST OF WEST 13 TH STREET, SOUTH OF NW 8 TH AVENUE AND NORTH OF ARCHER ROAD (STATE ROAD NO. 24) AND THAT PORTION OF SAID EXISTING AREA NO. 3 LYING WEST OF NW 13 TH STREET, SOUTH OF NW 5 TH AVENUE, EAST OF NW 19 TH STREET AND NORTH OF UNIVERSITY AVENUE (STATE ROAD NO. 26). 
The area is depicted on the map attached as Exhibit "A" to Ord. No. 170722 , and made a part hereof, said map also being on file in the city's office of economic development and innovation. 
(Ord. No. 170580 , § 4, 1-4-18; Ord. No. 170722 , § 4, 2-1-18)  
Sec. 3-2. - Gainesville Enterprise Zone Programs. 
(a)  Manufacturing retention/expansion incentive program for electric service. 
(1)  Creation and purpose of program. There is hereby created an economic development incentive program known as the "manufacturing retention/expansion incentive program for electric service." The purpose of the program is to encourage manufacturing businesses to stay within or expand within the Gainesville Enterprise Zone Area. The program provides reimbursement for 20 percent of the Gainesville Regional Utilities (GRU) Customer Charge, Demand (kW) Charge and Energy (kWh) Charge, after application of any other discounts, paid by the manufacturing business. Each year during the city's budget process, including the amendatory budget process, the city commission may, in its sole discretion, decide whether to fund this program. If the program is funded, new applications will be processed in order of date and time received and approvals will be limited to the funding, if any, provided for the program in the city budget. 
(2)  Eligibility. In order to apply for the program, a business must meet the following requirements: 
a.  Be an existing non-residential customer receiving electric utility service from GRU; 
b.  Have a minimum annual average electric usage of 400,000 kilowatt hours per month, calculated as the total kilowatt hours usage during the previous 12 full months divided by 12; 
c.  Not have any delinquencies in payment of its GRU bill within the 12 months immediately preceding the application date; 
d.  Be engaged in manufacturing (as defined in Sector 31-33 of the North American Industry Classification System, as same may be updated from time to time) within the Gainesville Enterprise Zone Area; and 
e.  Must demonstrate that it is actively seeking to relocate its manufacturing operations outside of the Gainesville Enterprise Zone Area or that it is seeking to expand (defined as a minimum additional average annual monthly usage of 100,000 kilowatt hours on the same site and not transferred from another site receiving GRU electric service) its manufacturing operations within the Gainesville Enterprise Zone Area. 
(3)  Application process. A business that meets the above requirements may apply for the program by submitting an application on the form provided by the city. Upon receipt of a complete application, the city commission will evaluate the application to determine, in its sole discretion, if: 
a.  All eligibility requirements specified in subsection (2) above are met; 
b.  The business has demonstrated that "but for" the program, the business would either move its manufacturing operations outside of the Gainesville Enterprise Zone Area or would not expand its manufacturing operations within the Gainesville Enterprise Zone Area; 
c.  The manufacturing operations are consistent with the city's economic development strategic action plan on file on the city's economic development and innovation webpage; and 
d.  The manufacturing operations are consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and are not the subject of any pending citation(s) for violation of the city's code of ordinances. 
(4)  Program terms. Approval by the city commission will be subject to the following program terms: 
a.  The incentive granted shall be for a term of four years, with an opportunity to request one extension for up to an additional four years. The city commission may determine, in its sole discretion, to grant or deny the extension. No applicant may receive more than eight years of incentive payments under this program; 
b.  The business shall remain actively engaged in manufacturing (as defined in Sector 31-33 of the North American Industry Classification System, as same may be updated from time to time) within the Gainesville Enterprise Zone Area throughout the term of the incentives; 
c.  The business shall maintain a minimum annual average electric usage of 400,000 kilowatt hours per month, calculated as the total kilowatt hours usage during the previous 12 full months divided by 12 throughout the term of the incentives; 
d.  The business shall submit its invoice for reimbursement to the city manager or designee after the end of each fiscal quarter (December, March, June and September.) The invoice shall include copies of the actual GRU bills, that include the customer charge, demand (kW) charge and energy (kWh) charge, after application of any other discounts, paid by the business during that fiscal quarter pursuant to this program. Upon verification of actual amounts paid to GRU, the city will process the invoice for reimbursement to the business; and 
e.  In order to receive payment under this program, the approved applicant shall enter into a contract on the form provided by the city that includes the above program terms, along with other standard contract terms. 
(Ord. No. 170580 , § 4, 1-4-18; Ord. No. 170722 , § 4, 2-1-18)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Adult performance establishment, escort service and escort licenses, § 14.5-52 et seq.; drunkenness, § 17-8; land development regulations relating to alcoholic beverage establishments, § 30-105. 
State Law reference— Beverage law, F.S. Ch. 561 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The definitions contained in the beverage law of the state, as defined in F.S. chs. 561, 563 and 564, and interpreted by the courts of this state and the state director of the division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco of the department of business and professional regulation, shall apply to the terms in this chapter. 
(b)  Open container shall mean any bottle, can, glass, cup or other vessel, other than the original unbroken sealed container or a bottle of wine resealed pursuant to F.S. § 564.09, containing an alcoholic beverage; provided however, that if a bottle of wine resealed pursuant to F.S. § 564.09 is transported in a motor vehicle, the resealed bottle shall be considered an open container unless it is placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(c)  Alcohol event permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 4-4 of this Code that allows the temporary sale of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Not-for-profit entity means an entity qualified under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and registered pursuant to F.S. ch. 496. 
(Code 1960, § 4-1; Ord. No. 3307, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 3311, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 4067, § 1, 3-27-92; Ord. No. 050369, § 1, 10-24-05; Ord. No. 130695, § 2, 3-6-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 4-2. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages by the package, other than packaged beer and unfortified wine. No beverage licensee, or employee or agent of such licensee, permitted under state law to sell alcoholic beverages by the package, bottle or original container shall sell, offer for sale, serve or deliver such a product (other than packaged beer and unfortified wine) for consumption either on or off the premises during the following hours (time is local time): 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following day, all days. 
(b)  All other alcoholic beverages. No beverage licensee, or employee or agent of such licensee, shall sell, offer for sale, serve, or permit to be sold or served or consumed, any alcoholic beverage not regulated under subsection (a) in a place operating under the beverage license, for consumption either on or off the premises, during the following hours (time is local time): 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m., all days. 
(Code 1960, § 4-5; Ord. No. 4067, § 2, 3-27-92; Ord. No. 970042, § 1, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 990443, § 1, 11-8-99; Ord. No. 990797, § 1, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 110367, § 1, 12-15-11) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate hours of sale, F.S. §§ 562.14(1), 562.45(2).  
Sec. 4-3. - Schools; distance restrictions. 
(a)  Schools. No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made where the place of business is within 400 feet of a public or a private school, duly accredited and offering any of the grades from kindergarten through the 12th grade, which measurements shall be by a straight line from the main entrance of the building of the licensed premises of the applicant to the nearest part of the school grounds normally and regularly used in connection with the school program. 
(b)  Existing licenses. Those licensees previously issued beverage licenses under the terms of F.S. § 561.34(1) (now F.S. § 563.02(1)), permitting sale of malt beverages containing alcohol of 0.5 percent or more by volume for consumption on the premises and having a beverage license for the year 1962—1963 may continue to sell alcoholic beverages at the same premises only and as vendors only under F.S. § 563.02(1), notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a). Should such license be suspended, revoked, transferred to a different licensed premises, or not be renewed and kept continuously valid, this exemption shall no longer apply, and the provisions of subsection (a) shall be enforced on those premises. 
(c)  Applicability. The prohibitions and distance restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to licenses issued pursuant to and for the classification described in F.S. § 563.02(1)(a) (sale of malt beverages containing alcohol of 0.5 percent or more by volume, only for consumption off the premises) and F.S. § 564.02(1)(a) (sale of brewed beverages containing malt, wines, and fortified wines, only for consumption off the premises. 
(Code 1960, § 4-7; Ord. No. 970296, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Cross reference— Land development regulations relating to alcoholic beverage establishments, § 30-105. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate location of alcoholic beverage business, F.S. § 562.45(2).  
Sec. 4-4. - Sale, dispensing, consumption and possession generally. 
(a)  Generally. Except as specifically allowed by this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, consume or possess any alcoholic beverage in any open container on any property owned by the city or on any public right-of-way, including without limitation, streets, thoroughfares, highways or sidewalks, Any person or legal entity that is allowed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages pursuant to this section shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws related to the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages. The city manager is authorized to promulgate written administrative procedures to implement this section and any alcohol event permits authorized herein. 
(b)  City-owned property. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispense, possess or consume any alcoholic beverages on any property owned by the city, except as follows: 
(1)  At the airport terminal facility and the municipal golf course facility when being sold or dispensed by the facility owner or by a natural person or legal entity that is under contract with the facility owner; 
(2)  Within the rental event space at the Thomas Center, the Thelma Bolton Center, Boulware Springs, and the Senior Recreation Center, dispensing, but not sale, for consumption during an event for which the space is rented. A fundraising event sponsored by a governmental or other public entity or a not-for-profit entity that charges admission for the event, but does not charge for the purchase of the alcoholic beverages, is not considered the sale of alcoholic beverages. The rental agreement may specify such terms and conditions as may be required by the city in its sole discretion as owner of the property. 
(3)  During a special event produced by the city, pursuant to written policy of the city. The city manager is authorized to promulgate a written policy to govern the process and contract terms and conditions under which the city may select not-for-profit entities to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages during a city produced special event. 
(4)  On other property that the city makes available for special events produced by private parties, pursuant to written policy of the city. The city manager is authorized to promulgate a written policy to govern the process and terms and conditions under which the city may issue an alcohol event permit for the sale, dispensing, consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages on particular parcels of city-owned property. The city commission shall determine which particular parcels, if any, are made available for such events. 
(5)  On property that is leased to a private party pursuant to the city's real estate policy, if the sale, dispensing, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages is expressly allowed under the terms of the lease agreement. The lease may specify such terms and conditions as may be required by the city in its sole discretion as owner of the property. 
(c)  Public right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, consume or possess any alcoholic beverage in any open container on any city or other public right-of-way, including without limitation, streets, thoroughfares, highways or sidewalks, except as follows: 
(1)  Within a sidewalk café that is licensed in accordance with the city's Land Development Code. 
(2)  At an outdoor event, within the downtown district as shown in Figure 1, pursuant to an alcohol event permit. 
 
Figure 1. Downtown District
_____ 
The city manager, or designee, is authorized to issue an alcohol event permit for the sale of beer and wine associated with an outdoor event organized, produced and managed by a governmental or other public entity or a not-for-profit entity, subject to the following: 
a.  An alcohol event permit application must be submitted by the event organizer, on the form provided by the city, along with payment of the fee set forth in Appendix A of this Code. 
b.  The alcohol event permit application shall include a site plan sketch showing the location, access, barriers delineating the event site from other public areas and all other pertinent details of the site; a report detailing the dates and times during which the event will be conducted, the estimated number of people expected to attend, the capacity of any proposed temporary structures, the capacity of the event site, whether there will be outdoor entertainment, a plan for the installation of temporary sanitary facilities, a plan for the storage and pickup of solid waste during and after the event; and a public safety plan detailing how the applicant will maintain crowd control and public safety, and comply with the city's noise ordinance. 
c.  The alcohol event permit application shall be reviewed by the appropriate departments of the city to ensure protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. In addition to normal concerns of each such department, particular attention will be given to traffic flow and control, auto and pedestrian safety, noise and the effect that the use and activity will have on surrounding uses, particularly where the adjoining or nearby use is residential. 
d.  The alcohol event permit may be approved or denied by the city manager or designee based on compliance with this subsection. The city manager or designee may impose additional special conditions as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
e.  Only two alcohol event permits may be issued per calendar year per applicant. However, one alcohol event permit may include all of the University of Florida home football games for the school year. 
f.  Each alcohol event permit issued shall be subject to the following conditions, requirements and limitations, as well as any other special conditions stated in the permit. 
1.  A sufficient number of off-duty law enforcement officers and EMS personnel, as determined by the city, shall be employed by the permittee to provide security, crowd control and emergency medical services for the event. 
2.  The permittee shall indemnify the city, its elected and appointed officers, employees, and agents from any claim for personal injury, including death, or property damage, including destruction, associated with the event. This indemnification shall be in the form of an insurance policy acceptable to the city's risk manager, that names the city as an additional insured and is endorsed to provide a separate aggregate of a minimum of $1,000,000.00 for the event. In addition, the permittee shall procure a liquor liability policy with not less than $1,000,000.00 of coverage that also names the city as an additional insured. 
3.  The event may only be held on such streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way as the city deems appropriate for temporary closure in its sole discretion. 
4.  The event may be open to the public only during such hours as the city deems appropriate in its sole discretion. Each event shall be limited to a maximum of 72 consecutive hours, inclusive of time for set-up and clean-up. 
5.  The sale, dispensing and consumption of beer and wine shall occur only within an area secured by fencing or barricades that are a minimum of four feet in height and with limited points of entry and exit. The permittee shall not allow alcoholic beverages purchased outside of the event to be brought into or consumed inside the permitted event area. Nor shall the event organizer allow beer or wine sold inside the secured area to be taken out of, or consumed outside of, the secured area. 
(d)  Outdoors on property owned by parties other than the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any alcoholic beverage in an open container outdoors on any property owned by a party other than the city, except as follows: 
(1)  Within a patio or porch that is part of the permanent building on property zoned, permitted and operated: a) as an alcoholic beverage establishment within the central city district; or b) as an eating place; or c) for the manufacturing of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  On property owned and managed/operated by the University of Florida or Alachua County, provided the university or the county (as applicable) ensures the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. In particular, attention should be given to traffic flow and control, auto and pedestrian safety, noise and the effect that the use and activity will have on surrounding uses, particularly where the adjoining or nearby use is residential. 
(3)  At a temporary outdoor event on property that is located in a business, mixed-use or industrial zoning district as classified in the city's land development code; or at a temporary outdoor event on property that is zoned planned development (provided the planned development ordinance allows commercial or mixed-uses and not solely residential uses); or in connection with a temporary sale for fundraising by a nonprofit agency that is permitted under section 30-107 of the city's land development code. Any such events shall require an alcohol event permit issued by the city manager or designee as follows: 
a.  All alcohol event permit applications shall be submitted by the event organizer to the city, on the form provided by the city, along with payment of the fee set forth in Appendix A of this Code. If the event is conducted within common area, the applicant must obtain the written consent of the owner(s) or manager (if the owners utilize a manager for such purposes) of the common area on the permit application. 
b.  All alcohol event permit applications must include a site plan sketch showing the location, access, barriers delineating the temporary sale from other public areas and all other details of the site; a report detailing the dates and times during which the event will be conducted, the estimated number of people expected to attend, the capacity of any proposed temporary structures, the capacity of the event site, whether there will be outdoor entertainment, a plan for the installation of temporary sanitary facilities, a plan for the storage and pickup of solid waste during and after the event; and a public safety plan detailing how the applicant will maintain crowd control and public safety, and comply with the city's noise ordinance. 
c.  Alcohol event permit applications shall be examined by the appropriate departments of the city to ensure protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. In addition to normal concerns of each such department, particular attention will be given to traffic flow and control, auto and pedestrian safety, noise and the effect that the use and activity will have on surrounding uses, particularly where the adjoining use is residential. 
d.  The alcohol event permit may be approved or denied by the city manager or designee based on compliance with this subsection. The city manager or designee may impose additional special conditions as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
e.  Only six (6) alcohol event permits may be issued per calendar year per applicant per location. However, one alcohol event permit may include all of the University of Florida home football games for the school year. 
f.  Each alcohol event permit issued shall be subject to the following conditions, requirements and limitations, as well as any other special conditions stated in the permit. 
1.  A sufficient number of off-duty law enforcement officers and EMS personnel, as determined by the city, shall be employed by the permittee to provide security, crowd control and emergency medical services for the event. 
2.  The event may be open to the public only during the hours 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day. Each event shall be limited to 48 consecutive hours, inclusive of time for set-up and clean-up. 
3.  The sale, dispensing, consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages shall occur only within an area secured by fencing or barricades a minimum of four feet in height and with limited points of entry and exit. The permittee shall not allow alcoholic beverages purchased outside of the permitted area to be brought into or consumed inside the permitted area. Nor shall the permittee allow alcoholic beverages sold inside the permitted area to be taken out of, or consumed outside of the permitted area. 
(e)  Alcohol event permits, generally. An application for an alcohol event permit may not be submitted more than six months prior to the first day of the event. If the city manager or designee determines that an event is creating a clear and present danger of a riot or other general public disorder, or substantial injury to persons or to property, the city manager or designee may require the immediate cessation of the sale, dispensing, consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages or may require the immediate cessation of the event. In addition, if the city manager or designee finds that the requirements or conditions of an alcohol event permit have been violated, and not cured within a reasonable time after reasonable notice to the permit holder, the city manager or designee may require the immediate cessation of the sale, dispensing, consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages or may require the immediate cessation of the event. 
(f)  Penalties. The provisions of this section regarding the unlawful open consumption of and/or possession of an open container of alcoholic beverage, may be enforced by civil citation as provided in sections 2-236 through 2-339 of this Code, or by criminal citation, as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. Any person not in compliance with any section of this article shall be subject to the penalties designated in sections 1-9 or 2-339 of this Code. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense, which can be prosecuted separately. 
(Ord. No. 130695, § 4, 3-6-14; Ord. No. 160080 , § 1, 9-15-16; Ord. No. 160381 , § 1, 10-20-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 130695, adopted March 6, 2014, repealed § 4-4 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 4-4 pertained to consumption, sale and possession generally, and special events, and derived from § 4-11 of the 1960 Code; Ord. No. 3066, § 1, adopted Oct. 8, 1984; Ord. No. 3373, § 1, adopted Sept. 21, 1987; Ord. No. 3762, § 1, adopted April 20, 1992; Ord. No. 3784, § 1, adopted July 20, 1992; Ord. No. 970260, § 1, adopted Oct. 27, 1997; Ord. No. 980349, § 1, 10-26-98; Ord. No. 981162, § 1, 4-26-99; Ord. No. 002382, § 1, adopted Sept. 23, 2002; Ord. No. 040669, § 1, adopted Jan. 10, 2005; Ord. No. 080931, § 1, adopted July 2, 2009; Ord. No. 090624, § 1, adopted March 18, 2010; Ord. No. 100217, § 1, adopted Feb. 17, 2011; Ord. No. 110017, § 1, adopted Aug. 18, 2011; and Ord. No. 120767, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 2013. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 23.  
Sec. 4-5. - Consumption on certain premises prohibited during certain hours. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to consume or to permit the consumption of any alcoholic beverages in bottle clubs or on premises open to the public, catering to the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., all days. All time is Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight savings time, whichever is in effect. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall apply whether the premises holds a valid beverage license or not and shall apply within or without any improvements located thereon. 
(Code 1960, § 4-11.1; Ord. No. 3311, § 2, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 110367, § 2, 12-15-11)  
Sec. 4-5.1. - Warning of the dangers of alcoholic beverage consumption for pregnant women, to be posted. 
All vendors of alcoholic beverages shall have posted in a conspicuous place in their premises a sign which is clearly visible and readable to all persons entering the premises which shall warn of the dangers of consuming alcoholic beverages during pregnancy. This sign shall read as follows: 
WARNING 
TO PREGNANT WOMEN 
The consumption of alcohol 
may be hazardous 
during your pregnancy 
(especially during the first 13 weeks) 
The warning sign is to be of the same dimensions as the vendor's alcoholic beverage license. The phrase "Warning to Pregnant Women" is to be printed in 36-point type. The words "The Consumption of Alcohol May be Hazardous During Your Pregnancy (Especially During the First 13 Weeks)," are to be printed in 18-point type. 
(Ord. No. 3317, § 1, 1-26-87) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3317, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 1987, added provisions to the 1960 Code which have been designated as § 4-5.1 hereof at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 4-5.2. - Minors prohibited in alcoholic beverage establishments. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person less than 18 years of age who is not accompanied by a parent or guardian, to enter or remain in an alcoholic beverage establishment as defined in section 30-23 of the City of Gainesville Land Development Code regardless of whether or not the alcoholic beverage establishment is selling or allowing the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the time the person less than 18 years of age is present. 
(2)  The employment exceptions set forth in F.S. § 562.13, and Rule 61A-3.039, Florida Administrative Code, shall be exceptions to this section. 
(Ord. No. 120991, § 1, 4-3-14)  
Sec. 4-6. - Violations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-9. 
(Code 1960, § 4-12)  
Secs. 4-7—4-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOTTLE CLUBS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-21. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Bottle club means a business establishment not licensed to sell alcoholic beverages providing facilities for the consumption of alcoholic beverages by its patrons on the premises, but without regard as to whether the patrons are required to be members of the bottle club. A bottle club does not include a social, fraternal or civic association or organization not licensed to sell alcoholic beverages which only incidentally, as opposed to primarily, provides facilities for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages by its members and their guests. A bottle club can be a private club or a public business establishment in which the principal revenue would be derived from the sale of setups, mixers, ice, water and charges for any entertainment provided. 
Operator means the person, corporation, partnership, joint venture or other group enterprise legally responsible for the day-to-day operation of the bottle club, having, as part of his/her or its responsibilities the making of policy decisions and the implementation of those policy decisions. 
Owner means the person, corporation, partnership, joint venture or other group enterprise having lawful possession of the premises upon which the bottle club is to be or is being operated, which lawful possession is by right of purchase, gift, lease or otherwise. 
(Code 1960, § 14A-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 4-22. - Right of entry. 
Any license issued by the city pursuant to this article shall hereby grant the right of inspection of the licensed premises by any law enforcement agency, when such inspection is so considered essential for the betterment and preservation of the safety, health and morals of the citizens of the city. A licensee, by the acceptance of a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, agrees that the premises licensed shall always be subject to being inspected and searched without search warrants by police officers during business hours or at any time such premises are occupied by the licensee or other persons. 
(Code 1960, § 14A-3)  
Sec. 4-23. - Prohibited acts. 
As relates to a bottle club, the following are prohibited: 
(1)  Possession on the premises of the bottle club of untaxed beverages as defined in F.S. § 562.01; 
(2)  Storage on the premises of the bottle club during the hours when the premises are closed of alcoholic beverages as defined in F.S. § 561.01; 
(3)  The entry and presence of persons under nineteen (19) years of age during the hours when alcoholic beverages are permitted on the premises of the bottle club; 
(4)  Employment of any person under eighteen (18) years of age, excepting those persons described in F.S. § 562.13(2); 
(5)  A bottle club also operating as a teen center must close for four (4) hours after operating as a teen center and before doing business as a bottle club. 
(Code 1960, § 14A-7; Ord. No. 3061, § 1, 9-24-84)  
Secs. 4-24—4-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 4-36. - Required; fee. 
The owner or operator of a bottle club shall obtain from the city tax and license division a license after completing in its entirety and filing the application hereinafter described, and upon payment of a fee as prescribed in the schedule in Appendix A, or such different fee amount as shall be determined by an appropriate amending ordinance. Half-year licenses may be issued by the tax and license division under the provisions of this article for the period from April 1 to September 30, upon payment of one-half of the fee fixed as the amount of such license for one (1) year. 
(Code 1960, § 14A-2(a); Ord. No. 3044, § 1, 8-20-84)  
Sec. 4-37. - Application. 
In obtaining a bottle club license the owner or operator shall submit to the city tax and license division an application containing the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the operator and also the name and address of the owner of the premises in or upon which the bottle club will be operated, if the operator is not the owner; 
(2)  The street address of the premises to be licensed; 
(3)  A certificate in writing from the city manager certifying that the premises to be licensed carries a land use zoning classification that will permit the operation of a bottle club from such premises. This certificate must be attached to the application before the application will be received for filing. All bottle clubs legally existing on May 21, 1984, and which were in existence prior to the moratorium of October 24, 1983, may continue as valid existing uses; 
(4)  A certificate of the state department of health and rehabilitative services or the county health department that the place of business wherein the bottle club business is to be conducted meets all of the sanitary requirements of the state; 
(5)  A statement in writing from the city manager or his/her designee that both the owner and operator: 
a.  Is not less than nineteen (19) years of age; 
b.  Has not been convicted within the last past five (5) years of any offense against the beverage laws of this state, the United States, or any other state; 
c.  Has not been convicted within the last past five (5) years in this state, or any other state or the United States of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place or illegally dealing in narcotics; 
d.  Has not been convicted in the last past five (5) years of any felony in this state, and has not been convicted in any other state or the United States, of any offense designated as a felony by such state or the United States; 
e.  If the owner and/or operator is a firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture or other group enterprise, then the provisions set forth in subsections (5)a. through d. above shall be applicable to: 
1.  Each officer or shareholder of the corporation holding more than a ten (10) percent ownership interest thereof; and 
2.  Each member of the other group enterprises listed who have an ownership interest therein of more than ten (10) percent. 
f.  As used herein, the term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(Code 1960, § 14A-2(b))  
Sec. 4-38. - Transfer. 
Transfer of a license issued pursuant to this division either by sale, lease or by any other means is prohibited. 
(Code 1960, § 14A-4)  
Sec. 4-39. - Renewal. 
(a)  A licensee under this division shall be entitled to a renewal of his/her annual license from year to year on or before October first of each year as a matter of course by paying the annual license fee established by the city. 
(b)  A license may be renewed subsequent to expiration each year only upon making to the tax and license division a delinquent application for approval, accompanied by an affidavit stating that no bottle club activities were conducted subsequent to the expiration of the license and upon payment of a penalty of five dollars ($5.00) for each month or fraction of a month of delinquency or upon payment of a penalty of five (5) percent of the license fee, whichever amount is the greater. Any license not renewed within sixty (60) days of expiration will be cancelled by the tax and license division unless such permit is involved in litigation. 
(Code 1960, § 14A-5)  
Sec. 4-40. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to revoke any bottle club license issued pursuant to this division whenever it is determined that the owner of the licensed property or the operator of the bottle club, their agents or employees, have committed, or have been convicted of, or have allowed or caused or permitted to exist any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  An indictment, information, or a conviction regarding an act amounting to a felony under the laws of the state, or the United States of America; 
(2)  The maintaining of a nuisance or the allowing of unsanitary conditions to exist on the property upon which a bottle club is being conducted; 
(3)  Engaging in or permitting disorderly conduct on the property upon which a bottle club is being conducted; 
(4)  Failure to comply with any of the provisions of the fire prevention code after having received reasonable notice to eliminate or correct any condition existing on the property upon which a bottle club is being conducted; 
(5)  Failure to comply with any of the provisions of the health and sanitation ordinances of the city or laws of the state, after having received reasonable notice to eliminate or correct any condition existing on the property upon which a bottle club is being conducted; 
(6)  Conviction for giving, selling or permitting to be served alcoholic beverages to persons under nineteen (19) years of age or permitting a person under 19 years of age to consume alcoholic beverages on the property upon which a bottle club is being conducted; 
(7)  Conviction for conducting an act prohibited by section 4-23. 
(b)  Should the city manager revoke a bottle club license pursuant to the authority hereinabove set forth, the aggrieved party, whether the owner or operator, may appeal the written notice of revocation to the city commission. An appeal shall be filed within ten days of the execution of the written notice by the city manager and such notice of appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the commission. The city commission shall consider either initially or finally the appeal at its next meeting. The city commission may continue final action on the appeal for a reasonable period to facilitate the presentation of the matter to the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 14A-6)  
Secs. 4-41—4-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNDERAGE PROHIBITION IN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 4-50. - Title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the "Underage Prohibition in Alcoholic Beverage Establishments Act." 
(Ord. No. 070941, § 1, 2-5-09)  
Sec. 4-51. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
Alcoholic beverage establishment means any establishment that possesses any alcoholic beverage license from the Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco Bureau of Licensing which permits the consumption or alcohol on premises and includes any place or location, licensed or unlicensed, within the city where a person may exchange something or pay another for an article or product that is alcoholic in nature or where an article or product for a consideration is sold, dispensed, served or provided, with the knowledge, actual or implied, that the article or product will be, or is intended to be, mixed, combined with or drunk on or about the premises in connection or combination with an alcoholic beverage. 
Quarter means, for purposes of this article, the period January 1 st through March 31 st , April 1 st through June 30 th , July 1 st through September 30 th and October 1 st through December 31 st . 
Underage drinking incident means any physical arrest or notice to appear (NTA) issued for possession or consumption of an alcoholic beverage by a person under the age of 21 which results in an adjudication of guilt, finding of guilt with adjudication withheld, waiver of right to contest the violation, plea of no contest including, but not limited to, payment of fine or civil penalty, or entering into an agreement for deferred prosecution. 
Underage prohibition order means an order issued by the city manager or designee which prohibits an alcoholic beverage establishment as herein defined, from admitting patrons under the age of 21 into such establishment during specified times. 
(Ord. No. 070941, § 1, 2-5-09)  
Sec. 4-52. - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to enter or remain in any alcoholic beverage establishment as defined in this article, or to be permitted to enter and remain in any alcoholic beverage establishment from 9:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day by an owner, manager, employee, independent contractor or promoter of such alcoholic beverage establishment, if an underage prohibition order is issued to such alcoholic beverage establishment in accordance with the provisions of this article. An underage prohibition order shall become effective on the 11 th day after the date of service of the order if no appeal is filed, or if a request for an administrative hearing is filed, on the 17 th day after all administrative action has been concluded, or if appeal is made to a court of competent jurisdiction, after a final order has been entered by that court. 
(Ord. No. 070941, § 1, 2-5-09)  
Sec. 4-53. - Underage prohibition order. 
(a)  An alcoholic beverage establishment shall be issued an underage prohibition order if the following number of underage drinking incidents have occurred at such alcoholic beverage establishment during any quarter as the term is defined herein: 
(1)  Aggregate occupancy load less than 201: Five or more. 
(2)  Aggregate occupancy load of 201 or greater: Ten or more. 
(b)  The final disposition of any underage drinking incident which may subject an alcoholic beverage establishment to an underage prohibition order, need not occur within the quarter of the underage drinking incident; however, the city manager or designee shall comply with the 45-day limit set forth in subsection (c)(1). 
(c)  If an alcoholic beverage establishment is the site of the requisite number of underage drinking incidents as provided in subsection (a) above, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  The city manager or designee shall issue the underage prohibition order against the alcoholic beverage establishment within 45 days from the date that such alcoholic beverage establishment has been the site of the requisite number of underage drinking incidents under subsection (a). The order shall contain notice that the establishment may request an administrative hearing as provided in paragraph (2) below. Service shall be deemed complete if personally delivered upon the owner or agent of the alcoholic beverage establishment by any officer authorized by law to serve process or a duly appointed law enforcement officer of the city police department. The person serving process shall make proof of service within the time during which the person served must respond to the process. If service cannot be personally made within the city, then service may be made by notice to a registered agent of the alcoholic beverage establishment. 
(2)  The owner or agent of the alcoholic beverage establishment shall have ten days from the date of service to file a request for an administrative hearing to contest the issuance of the underage prohibition order. The request shall be filed at the office of the city manager. 
(3)  Upon the timely filing of request for a hearing, the city attorney is authorized to arrange for the services of a hearing officer. 
(4)  In conducting the hearing, the hearing officer shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, compel the production of books, paper, and other documents, and receive evidence. All parties shall have an opportunity to respond, to present evidence and argument on all issues involved, to conduct cross-examination and submit rebuttal evidence, to submit proposed findings of facts and orders, to file exceptions to the hearing officer's recommended order, and to be represented by counsel. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The lack of actual knowledge of, acquiescence to, participation in, or responsibility for any underage drinking incident for this hearing on the part of the owner or agent shall not be defense by such owner or agent. 
(5)  If the hearing officer finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that (a) the requisite number of underage drinking incidents have occurred within a quarter to subject the alcoholic beverage establishment to issuance of the underage prohibition order; (b) the city complied with the procedural requirements of subsection (c)(1); and (c) none of the exceptions of section 4-54 are applicable, then the hearing officer shall prepare a recommended order that upholds the issuance of the underage prohibition order. 
(6)  If the hearing officer finds that the criteria of paragraph (5) above have not been met, then the hearing officer shall prepare a recommended order to rescind the underage prohibition order. 
(7)  The hearing officer's recommended order shall consist of findings of fact and conclusions of law and recommended action. The hearing officer shall transmit the recommended order to the city manager and the owner or agent of the alcoholic beverage establishment. The owner or agent shall have ten days from the date of the hearing officer's order to submit written exceptions to the hearing officer's recommended order. The city manager shall review such order and any written exceptions by the owner or agent and may set forth any deficiencies he/she finds with respect to the order. Said deficiencies shall be limited to determinations that the findings were not based upon competent, substantial evidence, or that the proceedings on which the findings were based did not comply with the essential requirements of law. In reviewing such recommended order, the city manager shall not have the power to receive or consider additional evidence and shall not have the power to reject or modify the findings of fact or conclusions of law contained in the recommended order. The city manager may remand the recommended order along with the delineated deficiencies back to the hearing officer for consideration of the deficiencies. The hearing officer shall address the deficiencies in an addendum to the recommended order. The city manager shall then either: 
a.  Adopt the recommended order and addendum, if applicable, in its entirety; or 
b.  Adopt the findings of fact and conclusions of law in the recommended order and addendum, if applicable, and accept, reject or modify the recommended action. 
The action of the city manager shall be the final administrative action. 
(8)  The city manager or designee shall provide written notice of the final administrative order to the alcoholic beverage establishment within five days of the date of the final order. 
(9)  The final administrative order of the city is subject to certiorari review in a court of competent jurisdiction in Alachua County, Florida by the timely filing of a petition. 
(10)  Upon the effective date of the underage prohibition order, the owner or agent of the alcoholic beverage establishment shall: 
a.  Conspicuously post a sign with the following wording in at least one-inch black letters with white background at each public entrance: "UNDERAGE PROHIBITION ORDER - No One Under 21 Permitted Inside from 9:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m.". The sign(s), shall remain posted for the duration of the underage prohibition order. 
b.  Cease permitting persons under the age of 21 to enter the alcoholic beverage establishment from 9:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day, except as provided in section 4-54 of this article. 
(11)  Duration of underage prohibition order. 
a.  First order: 90 days. 
If a second underage prohibition order is issued within three years of the first issued and effective underage prohibition order, then the second order shall have the following duration: 
b.  Second order: 180 days. 
If a third underage prohibition order is issued within three years of the first issued and effective underage prohibition order, then the third order shall have the following duration: 
c.  Third and subsequent orders: 365 days. 
(12)  Any underage drinking incident which occurs while an alcoholic beverage establishment is subject to an underage prohibition order shall count toward another violation. Any prohibition against admittance of patrons under 21 which results from an underage prohibition order issued while an underage prohibition order is already in effect against the owner, agent or establishment shall run consecutively. 
(13)  Consecutive penalty. Notwithstanding section 4-52, an underage prohibition order which is finalized during an active underage prohibition order penalty shall become effective the day after expiration of the active underage prohibition order. 
(14)  Any underage prohibition order, once effective, shall be valid against the owner or agent of the alcoholic beverage establishment and any alcoholic beverage establishment operating at the same premises. 
(Ord. No. 070941, § 1, 2-5-09)  
Sec. 4-54. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The prohibition in section 4-52 shall not apply to: 
(1)  Persons employed by an alcoholic beverage establishment during such hours as they are performing their duties for the establishment. 
(2)  Persons employed to deliver goods or services to the establishment during such hours as they are performing such duties. 
(3)  Persons accompanied by either of their parents (natural, adoptive or stepparent) or a legal guardian. 
(4)  Police, fire or emergency medical personnel during such hours as they are performing their duties in such capacities. 
(5)  An alcoholic beverage establishment during any time period in which it is not serving or selling alcoholic beverages to the public. 
(Ord. No. 070941, § 1, 2-5-09)  
Sec. 4-55. - Penalty. 
(a)  In addition to the underage prohibition order, the provisions of this article may be enforced by civil citation as provided in Chapter 2, Division 6 of this Code, or as otherwise provided in section 1-9 of this Code. Any person not in compliance with this article shall be subject to the penalties designated in section 2-339 or section 1-9. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense, which can be prosecuted separately. 
(b)  Findings and intent. 
(1)  It is the intent of this section to protect and preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Gainesville by strengthening enforcement methodologies to enforce the prohibition against consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage patrons. 
(2)  Admission of persons under the age of 21 to an alcoholic beverage establishment that has, by its actions, demonstrated an inability to reasonably prevent underage consumption on its premises presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare of the youth of our community and the citizenry at large. 
(3)  An enforcement officer shall not be required to provide a reasonable time period to correct a violation of this section prior to issuing a citation to a person that the officer has reasonable cause to believe has violated this section. 
(Ord. No. 070941, § 1, 2-5-09)  
Sec. 4-56. - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to the procedures provided herein, the city attorney is authorized to seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction against any alcoholic beverage establishment not in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 070941, § 1, 2-5-09)  
Chapter 5 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 950797, § 1, adopted Oct. 23, 1995, created Ch. 5 pertaining to animal control. Section 1 of Ord. No. 3914, adopted Oct. 18, 1993, repealed former Ch. 5, which pertained to animals and consisted of §§ 5-1—5-16 and 5-31—5-37. Chapter 5 was derived from §§ 5-1—5-14.1 and 5-16—5-24 of the 1960 Code and Ord. No. 2906, § 3, adopted 9-19-83; Ord. No. 3198, §§ 1—4, adopted 3-17-86; Ord. No. 3452, § 1, adopted 8-8-88; Ord. No. 3609, § 1, adopted 4-2-90; Ord. No. 3699, § 1, adopted 3-4-91; Ord. No. 3759, § 1, adopted 4-6-92; and Ord. No. 3775, § 1, adopted 5-18-92. 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 16. 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
Animal shall include all non-human species of animal. 
At large , when applied to animals, shall mean that the animal is off the property of its owner and not under the direct control of a competent person, by leash, cord, chain, or other physical device. 
Fowl shall include chickens, pea fowl, and like animals (Galliformes); ducks, geese, and like animals (Anseriformes); emus; rheas; and ostriches (Struthio camelus). 
Livestock shall include pigs and pig-like animals (Suidae); rabbits and rabbit-like animals when there are more than two (Leporidae); cows, sheep, goats and like animals (Bovidae); and horses and horse-like animals (Equidae). 
Owner shall mean any person owning, keeping, or harboring an animal. 
Pet shall mean any animal kept primarily for personal pleasure or companionship rather than to provide labor, food, or products for humans, or for other commercial or utilitarian purposes. 
(Ord. No. 950797, § 1, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 000337, § 1, 10-9-00; Ord. No. 130180, § 1, 11-21-13)  
Sec. 5-2. - Animals as a public nuisance. 
(1)  No owner or keeper of any animal shall permit the animal to become a public nuisance. The following can become a public nuisance and the owner or keeper of the animal can be cited for any instance of: 
(a)  An animal found to be at large. 
(b)  An animal damaging, or depositing fecal matter on, the property of others. 
(c)  An animal molesting or biting any person, unless that person is trespassing on the property of the owner or keeper of the animal or that person provokes the animal. 
(d)  An animal creating odors that are detectable and offensive to a person of reasonable sensibilities on nearby property, or attracting flies detected on nearby properties. 
(e)  An animal attacking another domestic animal. 
(f)  An animal making sounds that are a violation of Chapter 15 of this Code (Noise). 
(2)  Repeated instances of violations of subsection (1) adversely affect the rights of nearby residents to the quiet enjoyment of their property and therefore constitute a public nuisance. To this end: 
(a)  If there are two or more citations given for violation of any of the subsections (1)(a) through (f) within a 12-month period on the same premises, the city attorney, if there are reasonable grounds for the action, is authorized to seek an injunction in the name of the city from the appropriate court to abate the nuisance. 
(b)  Adjudication of guilt, withholding of adjudication, or plea of no contest (including, but not limited to, payment of fine) in a 12-month period for two violations of any of the subsections (1)(a) through (f) on the same premises, plus a third such citation within the 12-month period, shall be presumptive evidence of a public nuisance. However, the judge may find a public nuisance without such presumptive evidence based on other evidence presented. 
(c)  The judge may fashion an injunction that will abate the particular nuisance being found, up to and including removal of one or more animals from the premises. 
(d)  This remedy shall be in addition to any other penalties provided by this Code of Ordinances or the Alachua County Ordinance on Animal Control. 
(Ord. No. 950797, § 1, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 991309, § 1, 10-23-00)  
Sec. 5-3. - Animals in residential areas. 
(a)  No person shall keep or harbor any animal for use other than as a pet within any residential district, as defined in section 30-41(a)(1) of this Code, or mixed-use district, as defined in section 30-41(a)(4) of this Code, in the city, except if such use is allowed by right or special use permit, or if such use existed as a legal non-conforming use on October 23, 1995. 
(b)  Subsection (a) notwithstanding, no person shall keep or harbor fowl or livestock within any residential district, as defined in section 30-41(a)(1) of this Code, or mixed-use district, as defined in section 30-41(a)(4) of this Code, within the city, except if such use is allowed by right or special use permit, or if such use existed as a legal non-conforming use on October 23, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 950797, § 1, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 000337, § 2, 10-9-00)  
Sec. 5-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 140159, § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 2014, repealed § 5-4 which pertained to bird and game sanctuaries and derived from Ord. No. 950797, § 1, adopted Oct. 23, 1995.  
Sec. 5-5. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  Citations may be issued for violations of this chapter by any enforcement officer designated by the city manager. 
(b)  Penalties for violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be as prescribed in the Civil Citations division of Chapter 2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 950797, § 1, 10-23-95)  
Sec. 5-6. - Relationship to county ordinances. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be supplemental to the provisions of the Alachua County Code of Ordinances on Animal Control. In the event of direct conflict between a provision of the Alachua County Code of Ordinances and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter will apply. 
(Ord. No. 950797, § 1, 10-23-95)  
Chapter 5.5 - ART IN PUBLIC PLACES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3509, § 1, adopted Jan. 23, 1989, added §§ 2-106—2-110 to the 1960 Code and at the direction of the city said provisions have been included herein as Ch. 5.5. 
Cross reference— Gainesville-Alachua County cultural affairs board, § 2-281 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 23. 
 
Sec. 5.5-1. - Goals and definitions. 
(a)  The city commission has determined that art, which may include architectural enhancement and special landscape treatment, must be planned as an integral part of the city. The mission of this chapter, art in public places, is to enhance the quality of the visual environment in the Gainesville community, both natural and built; and in so doing add to the quality of life and raise the level of citizen awareness of the importance of aesthetic experiences in their everyday lives. This is consistent with the goal of the state comprehensive plan: "Florida shall increase access to its historical and cultural resources and programs and encourage the development of cultural programs of national excellence." 
The principal goals of this chapter are: 
(1)  To increase public access to art and the aesthetically designed environment, and to promote understanding and awareness of the visual arts in the public environment; 
(2)  To contribute to the civic pride and economic development of our community; 
(3)  To enhance the climate for artistic creativity in our community; 
(4)  To enrich the public environment for both residents and visitors to the area through incorporation of the visual arts; and 
(5)  To enable our community to attain recognition as cultural center. 
(b)  For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings shown: 
Architectural enhancement means the highest application of skill and aesthetic principles to the physical embellishment of the public areas of a building, which may include the placement of works of art, or specially designed plazas, atriums, or other public spaces. 
Art means the unique product of a skilled artist (or group of artists) who works according to aesthetic principles and includes, but is not limited to, architectural enhancements, special landscape treatments, paintings, sculpture, engravings, murals, mobiles, photographs, drawings and works in fabric. The following shall not be considered works of art: mechanical or other reproductions, commercially produced items, architectural rehabilitation or historic preservation. 
Buildings means permanent structures owned by the city where city employees work on a regular basis or that the general public uses. Utility and public works operations centers, process plants, staging centers, warehouses, etc. that meet the above test are considered buildings. Additions, improvements or renewal of process equipment and associated infrastructure at an existing utility or public works site, such as tanks, piping, controls, boilers, etc. that do not add or expand routinely occupied structures, shall not be considered buildings or renovations for the purposes of this chapter. 
Construction budget means monies budgeted for pre-construction costs, such as planning and design, engineering, architectural and legal services and permits, as well as construction costs, including but not limited to site preparation, construction supervision, HVAC, roofing and other structural or systems costs. Basic repairs or a new roof or HVAC system alone would not be considered renovations and would not qualify under this chapter unless one or more are a part of a larger project. "Construction budget" shall not include land acquisition costs, equipment or furniture costs. 
Major renovation means a renovation with a construction budget of over $100,000.00. 
Public art master plan means a plan, developed by the art in public places trust in concert with the planning and development services, public works and other appropriate city departments, that identifies way to enhance the built environment. 
Special landscape treatment means the highest application of skill and aesthetic principles to creating unique planted or designed areas, which may include earthworks, gardens, paving and water features, not normally associated with public facility landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 3509, § 1, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 990386, § 1, 10-9-00)  
Sec. 5.5-2. - Establishment of the Gainesville Art in Public Places Trust. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created and established a Gainesville Art in Public Places Trust. 
(b)  Membership. The Gainesville Art in Public Places Trust shall consist of five regular members, plus up to three temporary members for each project, as described below. No member of the Gainesville Art in Public Places Trust may be the owner or operator of, or consultant for a for-profit enterprise engaged in the appraisal, sale, leasing or showing of art to the public on a retail or wholesale basis. All trust members shall serve without compensation. 
(1)  Regular members. The five regular members shall be appointed for three-year terms by the city commission. The city commission shall fill vacancies for the expired or unexpired terms of the members. No regular member shall serve more than two consecutive three-year terms. Whenever possible, two of the five appointed members shall be citizens with appreciation for the visual arts and three of the five appointed members shall represent one or more of the following classifications: architect, landscape architect or interior designer, professional in the field of art, and art or architectural historian. 
(2)  Temporary members. Temporary members shall change for each project and shall include the director of the division having jurisdiction over the public building being constructed and the authorized architect for the project, if the project is in or around the structure generating the funds. If there is no architect for the project, the city commission shall appoint an additional member representing one or more of the classifications set out in subsection (b)(1). The city commission may appoint up to three citizen experts for each project that is not associated with a particular building. All temporary members will have voting privileges only for the particular project for which they were designated or appointed and will serve on the trust only for the project for which they were designated or appointed. 
(c)  Duties. 
(1)  The trust will be responsible for development and implementation of the city public art master plan, through the Art in Public Places Trust Program and for the management of the Gainesville Art in Public Places Trust Fund. The public art master plan must be reviewed by the city plan board and approved by the city commission. 
(2)  The trust shall evaluate and select works of art as described in section 5.5-4 below. Early in the design of a project, the trust shall develop a plan for adding art to the project. 
(3)  The trust shall also review any art project suggested, or offered to be donated, by another board or committee of the city or county, or by any citizen or group of citizens, or by the city commission or board of county commissioners, and make a decision on the suitability of the proposed project and any conditions to place on its execution. 
(Ord. No. 3509, § 1, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 3913, § 2, 10-18-93; Ord. No. 960440, § 2, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 960988, § 2, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 990386, § 1, 10-9-00; Ord. No. 000829, § 1, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 170526 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 5.5-3. - Art in Public Places Trust Fund. 
(a)  Fund. There is hereby created a Gainesville Art in Public Places Trust Fund consisting of all funds appropriated and deposited to the trust fund in connection with the construction or major renovation of public places. The trust fund is also authorized to accept gifts, grants and donations made to the city for art in public places. All appropriations, gifts, grants and awards of moneys for art in public places shall be deposited in an interest bearing account entitled the City of Gainesville Art in Public Places Trust Fund Account, which shall be a separate account established and maintained apart from the general revenue funds and accounts of the city. All interest earned in said account shall accrue to the use and benefit of the trust fund account. Funds deposited or credited to the City of Gainesville Art in Public Places Trust Fund Account and not expended by the close of any fiscal year shall be carried forward into the next succeeding fiscal year. 
(b)  Terms of existence. The City of Gainesville Art in Public Places Trust Fund Account shall be self-perpetuating from year to year unless specifically terminated by the city commission. 
(c)  Trust fund income. Each appropriation for the original construction or major renovation of a city building where public employees work on a regular basis or that the general public uses shall include an amount of at least one percent of the total construction budget for the art in public places trust. The total appropriation for the trust fund from any single project shall not exceed $100,000.00. All city departments and agencies shall include, in all budgets or applications for funding for capital improvement projects to granting organizations or governmental agencies, an amount equal to at least one percent of eligible construction costs for the Gainesville Art in Public Places Trust. All appropriations shall be deposited in the City of Gainesville Art in Public Places Trust Fund Account when the construction or renovation begins. 
(d)  Trust fund expenditures. Monies may be used in accordance with the requirements of this section for all costs associated with acquiring and commissioning art for public places, including costs for administration, travel, training, postage, printing, grants match, and education workshops. These costs may not exceed 20 percent of the total budget. Bond funds shall be appropriated and accounted for in the bond capital project accounts. Any gifts, grants and awards received subject to a condition shall be expended strictly in accordance with that condition. If an appropriation is not used for the acquisition of art for the public place for which it was appropriated, it shall be retrained in the trust fund to supplement other appropriations for the acquisition of art under this section or to place art in, at, or near public buildings which are already in existence. The trust may authorize projects to be paid for from retained funds. It is not the intent of this section to prohibit the expenditure of an amount greater than the amount allocated pursuant to section 5.5-3(c). 
(Ord. No. 3509, § 1, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 960440, § 3, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 960988, § 3, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 990386, § 1, 10-9-00; Ord. No. 000829, § 1, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 170526 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 5.5-4. - Selection procedures. 
All acquisitions shall be in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Whenever possible, a national call to artist request for qualification (RFQ) or other formal solicitation should be widely broadcast. Finalists, and ultimately the final selection(s), are made by the trust through a deliberative process, or the trust may reject all recommended selections. The charter officer or designee shall negotiate and execute all appropriate contracts for art selected. Funds from multiple capital projects may be aggregated to acquire the art. 
(1)  Selection criteria. The intent of the art in public places program is to select and provide works of art through a creative collaboration among the public, artist and architect and/or project representative. Therefore, the trust discusses physical and aesthetic considerations including the following: 
a.  Art shall be located in areas where residents and visitors live and congregate and shall be in accordance with the goals of the public art master plan. 
b.  The trustees should consider the impact of public art on the lives of those frequenting public places. Art reflecting enduring artistic concepts, not transitory ones, should be sought. 
c.  The trust's selections must reflect the cultural and ethnic diversity of this city without deviation from a standard of excellence. 
d.  Final selection shall also take into account appropriateness to the site, permanence of the art in light of environmental conditions at the site, maintenance requirements, quality of art, likelihood that the artist can successfully complete the art within the available funding, diversity of art already acquired by the trust, and diversity of the artists whose art has been acquired by the trust. 
(2)  Supervision of contracts. The charter officer is responsible for contracting with the artist for the commission or purchase of art by the city. The contract is negotiated between the City of Gainesville and the artist and includes the following: 
a.  A description of the art to be commissioned or purchased. 
b.  Site and base or footing preparation. 
c.  A price and payment schedule. 
d.  An installation and time schedule. 
e.  The transfer of ownership to the city. 
f.  The artist's right to claim authorship and all rights secured under federal copyright laws. 
g.  The artist's rights regarding changes, repairs or relocation of the art. 
h.  The charter officer is responsible for contract supervision and for the performance of the work specified in the contract. The charter officer facilitates installation of the art with the artist advising concerning the installation. The charter officer shall supply personnel and technical support. After the art is in place and has been formally accepted by the city, the charter officer is responsible for security and maintenance of the art. The artist will provide a technical description of materials used in the art and instructions for general maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 3509, § 1, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 990386, § 1, 10-9-00; Ord. No. 000829, § 1, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 170526 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 5.5-5. - Ownership and maintenance. 
Unless otherwise provided, ownership of all art and architectural enhancements acquired by the city under this chapter is vested in the city, including copyrights, patents and other reproduction rights. The city shall be responsible for managing the reproduction rights of each acquisition with advice and counsel from the art in public places trust. The responsibility for maintenance, insurance and restoration of each artwork shall rest with the city and the art shall be maintained by the charter officer with advice from the Gainesville Art in Public Places Trust. 
(Ord. No. 3509, § 1, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 990386, § 1, 10-9-00; Ord. No. 170526 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, adopted December 6, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-20, 6-31—6-42, 6-56—6-59, 6-71—6-77, 6-91—6-99, 6-116—6-122, 6-136—6-140, 6-156—6-159, 6-176—6-196, 6-231—6-244, Ch. 6, App. A, §§ 100—110, and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. The former Ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Department of community development, § 2-211 et seq.; code enforcement board, § 2-376 et seq.; fair housing, § 8-86 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11.5; housing, Ch. 13; dangerous buildings and hazardous land code, § 16-16 et seq.; perilous land code, § 16-46 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 23; utilities, Ch. 27; land development code, Ch. 30; subdivisions, § 30-180 et seq.; sign regulations, § 30-315 et seq.; general lot and building requirements under land development code, § 30-338; retaining walls, § 30-340; fences, § 30-342; board of adjustment for buildings chapter, § 30-354. 
State Law reference— Building construction standards, F.S. Ch. 553. 
 
ARTICLE I. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter governs the administration and enforcement of the Florida Building Code. The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare through structural strength, means of ingress and egress, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-2. - Florida Building Code incorporated by reference. 
The Florida Building Code, as adopted and amended from time to time by rule of the Florida Building Commission pursuant to F.S. Ch. 553, is adopted and incorporated by reference. The Florida Building Code will be used in the administration and enforcement of this chapter, except as otherwise modified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-3. - Administration and enforcement. 
The administration provisions of the Florida Building Code will be used for the administration and enforcement of this chapter, except as otherwise modified in this chapter. 
(a)  Enforcing officials. The city manager or designee shall designate a building official to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The building official may render interpretations of this chapter and may adopt administrative policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures must be in compliance with the purpose of this chapter, and may not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this chapter. The building official may determine any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of any existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health, or general welfare, not specifically covered by this chapter or other technical codes. 
(b)  Required. Unless specifically exempted by the Florida Building Code, an owner or owner's authorized agent shall apply to the Building Official and obtain the required permit prior to undertaking any of the following: 1) constructing, enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, demolishing, or changing the occupancy of a building or structure; 2) erecting, installing, enlarging, altering, repairing, removing, converting, or replacing any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system or site construction, the installation of which is regulated by this chapter; or 3) causing any such work to be performed. 
(c)  Permit fees. Fees for any permit applied for under this chapter are established in this chapter and must be paid at the time of filing an application. 
(1)  Work starting before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits will be subject to permit fees that are double the amount as provided in this chapter. This provision does not apply to emergency work when delay would clearly have placed life or property in imminent danger. This provision does not preclude any prosecution for commencing work without first obtaining a permit, nor preclude the imposition of any other remedy or penalty provided by law. 
(d)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or violation that makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this chapter. If such building or premises are occupied, the building official shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control to request entry. If entry is refused, the building official has recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. When the building official has first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care, or control of any building, structure, or premises may fail or neglect, after proper request is made as provided, to promptly permit entry by the Building Official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  Liability. The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan by the city under the requirements of this chapter may not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system, or plan. The city and its employees are not liable in tort for damages for any defect, hazardous condition, illegal condition, inadequacy, or component failure in such building, system, or plan that may occur subsequent to inspection or permitting. 
(f)  Violations. The provisions of this chapter are deemed to be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare, and any violation of the terms of this chapter is declared by the city commission to constitute a public nuisance. The city may employ enforcement powers and seek penalties and remedies as provided by Florida law or the City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances, including as provided by section 1-9, for violations of this chapter or related provisions. 
(g)  Revocation of permits. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever: 1) the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate, or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any provisions of this chapter; 2) there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based; or 3) the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter or the Florida Building Code. 
(h)  Appeals. The building official's final decision or order may be appealed to the Florida Building Commission pursuant to Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-4. - Tiny houses. 
(a)  Scope. This section is applicable to tiny houses used as single dwelling units. Tiny houses must comply with the Florida Building Code except as otherwise stated in this section. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and terms, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to the Florida Building Code for general definitions. 
Egress roof access window means a skylight or roof window designed and installed to satisfy the emergency and rescue opening requirements of Section R310.2. 
Landing platform means a landing provided as the top step of a stairway accessing a loft. 
Loft means a floor level located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the main floor, open to the main floor on one or more sides with a ceiling height of less than six feet eight inches (2032 mm) and used as a living or sleeping space. 
Tiny house means a dwelling that is 400 square feet (37 square meters) or less in floor area excluding lofts. 
(c)  Minimum ceiling height. Habitable space and hallways in tiny houses must have a ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches (2032 mm). Bathrooms, toilet rooms, and kitchens must have a ceiling height of not less than six feet four inches (1930 mm). Obstructions including but not limited to beams, girders, ducts, and lighting, must not extend below these minimum ceiling heights. 
(1)  Exception. Ceiling heights in lofts are permitted to be less than six feet eight inches (2032 mm). 
(d)  Lofts. 
(1)  Minimum loft area and dimensions. Lofts used as a sleeping or living space must meet the following minimum area and dimension requirements: 
a.  Minimum area. Lofts must have a floor area of not less than 35 square feet (3.25 square meters). 
b.  Minimum dimensions. Lofts must be not less than five feet (1524 mm) in any horizontal dimension. 
c.  Height effect on loft area. Portions of a loft with a sloped ceiling measuring less than three feet (914 mm) from the finished floor to the finished ceiling may not be considered as contributing to the minimum required area for the loft. 
i.  Exception. Under gable roofs with a minimum slope of six units vertical in 12 units horizontal (50 percent slope), portions of a loft with a sloped ceiling measuring less than 16 inches (406 mm) from the finished floor to the finished ceiling may not be considered as contributing to the minimum required area for the loft. 
(2)  Loft access. The access to and primary egress from lofts may be any of the following types: 
a.  Stairways. Stairways accessing lofts must comply with the Florida Building Code or with the following: 
i.  Width. Stairways accessing a loft may not be less than 17 inches (432 mm) in clear width at or above the handrail. The width below the handrail may not be less than 20 inches (508 mm). 
ii.  Headroom. The headroom in stairways accessing a loft may not be less than six feet two inches (1880 mm), as measured vertically, from a sloped line connecting the tread or landing platform nosings in the middle of their width. 
iii.  Treads and risers. Risers for stairs accessing a loft may not be less than seven inches (178 mm) and not more than 12 inches (305 mm) in height. Tread depth and riser height must be calculated in accordance with one of the following formulas: 1) the tread depth shall be 20 inches (508 mm) minus four-thirds of the riser height; or 2) the riser height shall be 15 inches (381 mm) minus three-fourths of the tread depth. 
iv.  Landing platforms. The top tread and riser of stairways accessing lofts must be constructed as a landing platform where the loft ceiling height is less than six feet two inches (1880 mm) where the stairway meets the loft. The landing platform must be 18 inches to 22 inches (457 to 559 mm) in depth measured from the nosing of the landing platform to the edge of the loft, and 16 to 18 inches (406 to 457 mm) in height measured from the landing platform to the loft floor. 
v.  Handrails. Handrails must comply with Section R311.7.8. 
vi.  Stairway guards. Guards at open sides of stairways must comply with Section R312.1. 
b.  Ladders. Ladders accessing lofts must comply with the above regulations for stairways and with the following: 
i.  Size and capacity. Ladders accessing lofts must have a rung width of not less than 12 inches (305 mm), and ten-inch (254 mm) to 14-inch (356 mm) spacing between rungs. Ladders must be capable of supporting a 200-pound (75 kg) load on any rung. Rung spacing must be uniform within ? inch (9.5 mm). 
ii.  Incline. Ladders must be installed at 70 to 80 degrees from horizontal. 
c.  Alternating tread devices. Alternating tread devices accessing lofts must comply with Sections R311.7.11.1 and R311.7.11.2. The clear width at and below the handrails must be not less than 20 inches (508 mm). 
d.  Ships ladders. Ships ladders accessing lofts must comply with Sections R311.7.12.1 and R311.7.12.2. The clear width at and below handrails must be not less than 20 inches (508 mm). 
e.  Loft guards. Loft guards must be located along the open side of lofts. Loft guards must be not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height or one-half of the clear height to the ceiling, whichever is less. 
(e)  Emergency escape and rescue openings. Tiny houses must meet the requirements of Section R310 for emergency escape and rescue openings. 
(1)  Exception. Egress roof access windows in lofts used as sleeping rooms are deemed to meet the requirements of Section R310 where installed such that the bottom of the opening is not more than 44 inches (1118 mm) above the loft floor, provided the egress roof access window complies with the minimum opening area requirements of Section R310.2.1. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-5. - Temporary boarding and sealing of buildings. 
(a)  Permit required. A permit must be obtained before any building is boarded and sealed. The permit will expire one year after it is issued. An exception may be granted by the building official under emergency conditions to protect life and property. 
(b)  Application. The application for initial permit must contain the following information: 
(1)  Location of building by street address and tax parcel number. 
(2)  Name, mailing address, and telephone number of owner. 
(3)  Name, mailing address, and telephone number of individual applying for the permit, if other than owner. 
(4)  Reason for boarding and sealing building. 
(5)  Length of time building is expected to remain boarded and sealed. 
(6)  Whether utilities will be turned off during the time the building is boarded and sealed. 
(c)  The individual to whom the permit is issued shall comply with the vacant property standards in the City of Gainesville's Code of Ordinances within 30 calendar days and shall remain in compliance during the permit period. 
(d)  The city manager or designee shall inspect any building for which a board and seal permit or renewal of permit is being sought. If the city manager or designee finds that a building is so dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be unsafe or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, as these terms are defined in the City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances, and that it is unreasonable to repair such building considering the cost to repair and the expected market value of the property after repair, the city manager or designee shall order the owner of the building to demolish and remove such building. No board and seal permit will be issued or renewed for a building that has been ordered demolished and removed. 
(e)  A fee must be collected with the application for permit, to cover the costs of processing the permit and inspections of the building. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-6. - Demolition of structures. 
(a)  Demolition or vacation of structures. 
(1)  Recording of statement. Whenever the city or any of its officers or agents issues, under the provisions of any ordinance or law, any notice to vacate or notice to demolish any structure within the city and the notice becomes an order following an appeal or the absence of a timely appeal, the city manager or designee shall cause to be recorded in the public records of the county a statement indicating the existence of the order. 
(2)  Form of statement. The recorded statement must include the name of the owner of the real property upon which the structure is located as shown on the tax rolls at the time of recording, the tax parcel number, a legal description of the real property, the nature of the outstanding order and what is required to comply with the order, and the possible consequences if the order is not complied with. 
(3)  Record of satisfaction. When an order to vacate or to demolish a structure is no longer effective, because the situation causing the required vacation or demolition has been corrected by the owner, or because a demolition has been accomplished by the property owner, or because the city has corrected the situation or demolished the structure and recorded a lien for the correction or demolition, or for any other reason, the city manager or designee shall enter a record of satisfaction stating that the outstanding order is no longer effective. 
(b)  Waiting period for certain demolition permits. If the city's Historic Preservation Planner determines that a structure meets all of the following criteria, a demolition permit may not be issued until the expiration of 90 calendar days from the date of the permit application: 
(1)  The structure has a Florida master site file or is 45 years of age or older; 
(2)  The structure is either: a) located in a historic neighborhood as identified by the ERLA Survey, titled City of Gainesville Comprehensive Preservation and Conservation Plan, on file with the city, or b) a "landmark" structure in that it is designed in an architectural "high style" or a recognized vernacular building pattern or has historic events or persons associated with it; and 
(3)  The structure has not been substantially burned or damaged by an event not within the landowner's control with more than 50 percent of the structure affected. 
(c)  Posted sign. After invoking a demolition delay, the historic preservation planner shall post the subject property with a sign notifying the public of the owner's intent to demolish the structure in order to allow interested parties to come forward and move the structure upon consent of the owner. 
(d)  Historic preservation board. After invoking a demolition delay, the historic preservation planner shall schedule the item for the next regularly scheduled meeting of the historic preservation board that is not less than 10 calendar days after the date of demolition delay. The purpose of this hearing is: 1) to allow the historic preservation board to consider potential alternatives to demolition and to document information regarding the structure prior to demolition; and 2) to allow the property owner to request a waiving of the demolition delay due to economic hardship. The historic preservation planner shall notify the owner by mail of the demolition delay and the date of the subject historic preservation board meeting, including the process for appeal due to economic hardship. The historic preservation board and its authorized designees must be permitted access to the premises and to the subject structure during the 90-day period at reasonable times by appointment with the owner or proprietor for the purpose of photographing, measuring, and documenting information concerning the structure or site. 
(1)  Alternatives and information. At the subject meeting of the historic preservation board, the board may pursue alternatives to demolition and may assemble and document information pertaining to the appearance and history of the subject structure prior to demolition. 
(2)  Economic hardship. If requested by the property owner, the historic preservation board shall hold a quasi-judicial hearing pursuant to section 30-3.5 and the board's adopted rules to consider economic hardship to the property owner as a result of the demolition delay. The historic preservation board shall waive the demolition delay if the owner demonstrates economic hardship due to the demolition delay. The historic preservation board may require from the property owner any or all of the following information before it makes a decision on the application as long as such information is relevant, and the historic preservation board may hire an independent third-party to perform an analysis of the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure. 
a.  A report from a licensed engineer, contractor, or architect with experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures on the property and their suitability for rehabilitation. 
b.  An estimate from an architect, licensed contractor, real estate consultant, appraiser, or other real estate professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure on the property. 
c.  If the property is income-producing, the Historic Preservation Board may also require: 
i.  The annual gross income from the property for the previous two years, itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years, and depreciation deductions and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period. 
ii.  The remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years. 
iii.  All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing, or ownership of the property. 
iv.  Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked, and offers received, if any, within the previous two years. 
v.  The assessed value of the property according to the two most recent assessments. 
vi.  The real estate taxes for the previous two years. 
vii.  The form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, or other. 
viii.  Any other information considered necessary by the board to a determination as to whether the property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owners. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-7. - Schedule of fees. 
Building Permit Fees 
Type 	Fee 
1) New Buildings 
	Nonresidential and residential: 	Building value multiplied by 0.008 for the first $250,000; building value above $250,000 multiplied by 0.004. In no case may permit be less than $60. 
Building value means the greater of the following: 1) latest published Building Valuation Data compiled by the International Code Council (ICC) multiplied by 0.75; or 2) contract price submitted by the applicant. 
2) All Other Construction 
		Contract price multiplied by 0.008 for the first $250,000; contract price above $250,000 multiplied by 0.004. In no case may permit be less than $60. 
If no contract available, the owner shall submit a sworn affidavit of the cost of the project with supporting backup provided. 
3) Electrical/Plumbing/Gas/Mechanical 
	Each permit: 	$60 
	Additional inspection: 	$60 
4) Administrative Fees 
	Building plan review: 	20% of permit cost. 
	Fire plan review: 	20% of permit cost. 
	Revisions to plans (each item): 	$12 
	Duplicate plans reproduction: 	$56 
	Duplicate permit card: 	$12 
	Letter of Reciprocation: 	$50 
	Plans search/location: 	$50 
5) Special Inspections 
	Reinspections: 	$70 each reinspection. 
Charged when the project was not ready for the inspection requested; when a reinspection is required because the necessary corrections have not been made; or when requested. The fee must be paid prior to scheduling any additional inspections for that project. 
	Inspections after working hours: 	$180 each inspection. 
	Special project inspections: 
* Required for projects that meet any of following: 1) contract price greater than $10,000,000; 2) total gross square feet greater than 50,000; or 3) meets state law definition of Threshold Building. Upon request for other projects based on availability. 	$53 per hour; $9,100 per 30-day period for on-site, full-time inspector. 
6) Flat Rate Permit Fees 
	Board and seal permit: 	$83 
	Demolitions: 	$70 
	Manufactured and mobile homes: 	$70 
	Pre-manufactured storage buildings greater than 100 square feet: 	$60 
	Tent permit: 	$60 
	Christmas tree sales lot, includes structure, temporary pole, lights, and signs: 	$60 
	Change of use, no construction: 	$60 
	Electrical service changes, upgrades only, all service sizes: 	$60 
 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
ARTICLE II. - GAINESVILLE GREEN BUILDING PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 6-8. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words, terms, and phrases have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
City commission means the City Commission of the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
City-owned civic or office construction project means city-owned buildings providing a public gathering place or office facilities. 
Construction means any project associated with the creation, development, or erection of any building eligible for the program. 
FGBC means the Florida Green Building Coalition. 
GHDS means the Green Home Designation Standard of the Florida Green Building Coalition. 
Green building means generally the resource efficient design, construction, and operation of buildings by employing environmentally sensible construction practices, systems, and materials. 
Independent or independent of the city means not employed by, or acting as agents of, the city. 
L.E.E.D. means the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Rating System of the U.S. Green Building Council. 
Municipal means owned by the city. 
Private means property not owned by the city. 
Program means the city green building program. 
Program certification means the final designation awarded to a program participant for satisfying all requirements associated with the program for a particular project. 
Program participant means any person or entity seeking program certification for a particular project. 
Project means any construction associated with the creation, development, or erection of any building eligible for the program. 
Project application form means the form submitted to the Building Inspection Department indicating that a program participant is interested in participating in the program for a particular project. 
Sub-program means any area of construction covered by the program. 
USGBC means the U.S. Green Building Council. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-9. - Purpose. 
The Gainesville Green Building Program is a voluntary program that seeks to incentivize and promote sustainable and environmentally-friendly practices of construction and design. City-owned construction projects must follow the program guidelines when feasible, upon review by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-10. - Administration. 
The program will be jointly administered by the building inspection department and Gainesville Regional Utilities, which together are responsible for: 
(a)  Funding the program through annual funds budgeted and appropriated by the city commission; 
(b)  Marketing the program to the community by any reasonably effective means, including but not limited to print advertising, press releases, television advertising, or advertising in monthly mailers; 
(c)  Developing any appropriate or necessary application procedures, including but not limited to the program application form; 
(d)  Providing an incentive award to any program participant who has successfully satisfied the requirements associated with that incentive; and 
(e)  Resolving disputes that may arise from implementing the program. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-11. - Scope. 
(a)  The program is voluntary for all non-city projects. 
(b)  For any city-owned construction project, the city must participate in the program unless the city commission determines that the cost (e.g., time, function, or funding) associated with participating in the program significantly outweighs the benefits. 
(c)  The program shall be administered on a per-unit basis. For the purpose of this section of the program, "per-unit" means each unit built, except that any multi-family dwelling or similarly clustered structure may count as one unit, as determined by the city manager or general manager for utilities or their designees. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-12. - Standards. 
The program will be administered using current standards developed by the U.S. Green Building Council, the Florida Green Building Coalition (FGBC), the Florida Home Builders Association, or any other standard approved by the city. For the purpose of this section, "current" means at the time a program participant submits a project application form with the building inspection department. These standards apply as follows: 
(a)  Residential construction. For new residential construction, the project must satisfy all of the requirements of the current Green Home Designation Standard (GHDS) of the FGBC, including but not limited to any monetary or certification requirements. For residential retrofitting or remodeling, the project must satisfy all of the requirements of the current and applicable LEED rating program, including but not limited to any monetary or certification requirements. In addition, all projects must satisfy all of the requirements of the current and applicable Florida Water Star Standards established by the Florida Home Builders Association certified ratings program. 
(b)  Nonresidential construction. For nonresidential construction, the project must satisfy all of the requirements associated with the current and applicable LEED rating program, including but not limited to any monetary or certification requirements. In addition, the project must satisfy all of the requirements of the current and applicable Florida Water Star Standards established by the Florida Home Builders Association certified ratings program. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-13. - Incentives. 
The city shall provide the following incentives to encourage the use of this program: 
(a)  Expedited process for building permits. 
(b)  Reduced permitting fee, subject to availability of funds. The discounted fee shall equal 50 percent of the otherwise required permitting fee; if the project is located in a designated enterprise zone, then the reduced permitting fee shall equal 50 percent of the applicable enterprise zone permit fee. 
(c)  For all projects other than one and two-family residential projects, there shall be a reduced development plan review fee, which shall equal 50 percent of the otherwise required development plan review fee. 
(d)  For multi-family residential retrofitting or remodeling, projects shall be eligible for the following incentives provided by GRU: 
(1)  A cash renovation incentive, subject to availability of funds; and 
(2)  A solar water heater incentive, subject to availability of funds and meeting other solar rebate program requirements. 
(e)  Marketing incentives, including but not limited to: 
(1)  The erection of building site signs designating a project under the program; 
(2)  Educational information for building owners and the general public demonstrating the benefits of green building; 
(3)  The inclusion of program participants on a city webpage dedicated to the program; 
(4)  The creation of promotional packages such as a program logo for a program participant's advertisements or brochures; 
(5)  Press releases; and 
(6)  City endorsement of program participants to a certified green builder list developed by the city. 
(f)  Green building award. The city shall annually award one project that demonstrates an outstanding commitment to green building with the "Green Building Award." 
(g)  Other incentives. Other incentives as may be approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-14. - Certification. 
The program is subject to certification by a qualified third party who has been trained and certified as a green building rater. For the purpose of this section, "third party" means any person or entity authorized by the FGBC or the USGBC to verify that a program participant has satisfied any or all of the requirements associated with the standard designated for a particular project. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-15. - Training. 
The building inspection department in conjunction with FGBC shall conduct at least one training workshop per year for the purpose of educating potential or current program participants about the program. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-16. - Program review. 
The building inspection department and GRU shall jointly review the program as necessary in order to make the program more effective, including but not limited to potentially updating program incentives, recommending program or marketing changes to the city commission, reviewing suggestions made by program participants, and annually awarding the Green Building Award in accordance with the program. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION TRADES REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 6-17. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words, terms, and phrases have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apprentice or helper means a person employed in a trade or craft specified in this article for the purpose of learning that trade or craft through practical experience under the direction and supervision of certified master or journeyman craftsmen. 
Contractor means a contractor as defined in F.S. § 489.105, and means a person who engages in business, under express or implied contract, in the performance of those construction trades regulated by this chapter of the Code of Ordinances, or who undertakes or offers to undertake or purports to have the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to, or does himself or herself, or by or through others, engage in the business of doing such a construction trade. A contractor does not include either a person who only furnishes material, supplies, or equipment without consuming them in the performance of the work of a contractor, or a person who engages in the activities herein regulated as an employee with wages as his or her sole compensation. 
Contractor certificate means a certificate of competency issued by the city that certifies that its holder has met this article's requirements to engage in business as a contractor in the category indicated on the certificate. A contractor certificate is not a business tax receipt. 
Journeyman craftsman (electrician only) means a person who has been examined by the city and found to have the required skill, knowledge, and experience to do the work in the performance of a particular trade or craft and holds a current valid journeyman craftsman certificate issued by the city. 
Master craftsman (electrician only) means a person who has been examined by the city and found to have the required skill, knowledge, and experience to plan, layout, supervise, and do the work of a particular trade or craft and who holds a current valid master craftsman certificate issued by the city. 
Trade and craft mean occupations in the construction field that require skill, knowledge, manual ability, and experience to perform. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-18. - Purpose. 
In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, it is declared necessary to establish regulations to ensure that persons engaged in the contracting for a performance of certain trades, construction, equipping, and installations of and in buildings and structures are competent to perform their work and possess the experience, education, skill, and financial capability to adequately perform such work in a manner that is safe to persons and property. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-19. - Scope. 
This article includes the work of contractors and craftsmen as provided in this article on private and public property, except: 
(a)  Utilities. Work performed by the employees or contractors of a public utility, including railroads and communications utilities, on equipment, rights-of-way, easements, and operating facilities of the utility and which is not, by reason of that special use, normally or usually performed by craftsmen or contractors regulated by this article. 
(b)  Certain equipment and machinery. Work on ships, aircraft, automotive, mine, and industrial process equipment and operating machinery. 
(c)  Conflict with state or federal law. Work upon a site or project where federal or state law supersedes this article. 
(d)  Registration and certification under state law. Work performed by contractors in the various construction trades who do not hold a contractor certificate issued by the city and who are certified as provided by state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec 6-20. - Contractor certificate. 
(a)  Required. Except as otherwise provided by law, applications for a permit to perform work within the scope of this article will be accepted only from a contractor holding a current contractor certificate and business tax receipt. It is unlawful for any person to engage within the city in the business or act in the capacity of a contractor as provided in this article without a valid contractor certificate issued by the city. 
(b)  Bidding on city projects. Any person who bids or proffers a bid to the city on any public works project within the scope of this article shall, at the time the bid or proffer of bid, hold a valid contractor certificate issued by the city qualifying him or her to perform the work proposed by the bid and contract documents. 
(c)  Grandfathering current certificate holders. Any construction contractor who has a valid active certificate from the construction trades advisory board of the city as of August 1, 1995, may continue to perform the work for which certified, provided the certificate is renewed as provided in this article. 
(d)  Application. The applicant shall apply on a form prescribed by the building official and provide a receipt evidencing payment of any applicable application processing fee as provided in this Code of Ordinances. The supporting papers must be maintained as a permanent record as long as the certificate issued thereon is valid. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-21. - Insurance requirements for contractors. 
(a)  Liability insurance. Contractors shall provide evidence to the building official that the contractor has in full force and effect a policy of public liability insurance with respect to such contractor's business, trade, or occupation issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Florida. The amounts of the policy must be at least equal to but not limited to those amounts required by the State of Florida. 
(b)  Worker's compensation insurance. Except as exempted by law, contractors shall maintain worker's compensation insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Florida as required by law. Evidence of such insurance must be filed with the building official. 
(c)  If the insurance required under this section expires or is at any time canceled, then the certification or registration of the person will be immediately and automatically suspended and it will be unlawful for the person to engage in such business until the certification or registration is reinstated. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-22. - Journeyman certificate. 
A certificate for a journeyman may be obtained in the following manner: 
(a)  Application. The applicant shall apply on a form prescribed by the building official. The supporting papers must be maintained as a permanent record as long as the certificate issued thereon is valid. 
(b)  Experience. To be eligible for a journeyman certificate, the applicant must have and shall include in his or her application evidence of at least three years of practical experience as an apprentice or helper in the trade or craft concerned. 
(c)  Fee. Each application for a certificate must be accompanied by a receipt evidencing payment of an application processing fee as provided in this Code of Ordinances. Fees are not refundable. 
(d)  Examination. Each applicant must successfully pass an examination as provided by the building inspection department. To be eligible for a particular examination, an applicant must file his or her application with the building official at least 30 calendar days before the date of the examination. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-23. - Responsibilities of contractors and craftsmen. 
(a)  Prohibited. It is unlawful for any contractor or master craftsman to do work for which no permit has been issued where required or to allow his or her name to be used to obtain permits for work: 
(1)  That is to be done by anyone who is not a bona fide employee of the contractor or master craftsman or of the entity for which the contractor or master craftsman works full-time; or 
(2)  That is not done under the supervision of the contractor or master craftsman. 
(b)  Lawful work. It is the responsibility of the contractor or master craftsman obtaining a permit under his or her name to ensure that: 
(1)  Work done under the permit complies with the law and regulations related to the work; and 
(2)  The work is done by craftsmen holding valid certificates where required; for this purpose, a certified craftsman is deemed to do the work if he or she is in direct charge of the work, is continuously present on the site where the work is being done, and is assisted by no more than four helpers. 
(c)  Registration of employer. Each contractor and master craftsman serving as a qualifying agent shall register with the building official the name and place of business of his or her full-time employer. No contractor or master craftsman serving as a qualifying agent shall serve in that capacity for more than one employer at a time. No master craftsman shall serve as qualifying agent for more than two contractors in any 12-month period. 
(d)  Notification of change in employment. Each contractor or master craftsman serving as a qualifying agent shall promptly notify the building official of a change in employment. If a contractor has obtained a permit for work to be done under the supervision of a master craftsman who later leaves the contractor's employment, work authorized by the permit may be done by qualified journeyman craftsmen, notwithstanding the lack of supervision by a master craftsman, but only as provided in this article. 
(e)  Qualifying agent generally. Where a master craftsman has notified the building official, by endorsement of an application for a contractor's certificate or otherwise, that he or she is serving a contractor as qualifying agent, the master craftsman shall be held responsible under this Code of Ordinances for ensuring that all work done by the contractor is in compliance with all provisions of this Code of Ordinances applicable thereto. A qualifying agent is required to keep himself or herself informed of the status of work being performed by his or her employing contractor and to carry out the responsibilities delineated by this section. It is the express intent of these regulations that a master craftsman serving as a qualifying agent will be physically capable of carrying out his or her responsibilities at all times while employed in that capacity. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Sec. 6-24. - Violations. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any applicable provision of this article. The proprietor, all partners, and all directors of any firm or corporation are responsible for the acts of their respective agents and employees, and it is an offense against the city for any such proprietor, partner, or director to cause, or to knowingly suffer or permit, his or her agent or employee to violate or fail to comply with any applicable provision of this article. The city may employ enforcement powers and seek penalties and remedies as provided by Florida law or the City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances, including as provided by section 1-9, for violations of this chapter or related provisions. 
(Ord. No. 171056 , § 1, 12-6-18)  
Chapter 7 - CEMETERIES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 11.5; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Florida Cemetery Act, F.S. § 559.30 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Cemetery shall mean the Evergreen Cemetery, including any additions thereto. 
Interment right shall mean the right of all owners to use cemetery grounds for the interment of dead persons. This interment right belongs to the owner of the cemetery lot, part lot, or grave space and is subject to the rules and regulations contained in this chapter. 
Memorial shall mean any marker or structure upon or in any lot or niche, placed thereupon or therein or partially therein for the purpose of identification or in memory of the interred. 
New addition shall be construed to mean that part of the cemetery known as the Geer Addition and all other lots or part lots which might be added for burial purposes in the future as a result of the closing of unneeded roadways. 
Owner shall mean any person, firm, corporation or trust who has purchased a lot, part lot or grave space in the cemetery or the heirs, personal representatives or successors of the owners. 
(Code 1960, § 10-1; Ord. No. 030697, § 1, 1-26-04) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 7-2. - Designated; use. 
The lands now owned by the city and known as Evergreen Cemetery and all lands hereafter acquired by the city for cemetery purposes contiguous thereto are hereby designated as Evergreen Cemetery, and shall be used for the interment of dead persons or their cremated remains. 
(Code 1960, § 10-8)  
Sec. 7-3. - Sales of grave spaces. 
Sale of all grave spaces shall be a function of the city manager or designee. The city manager or designee may refuse to sell any grave space to any person or corporation if the sale would be detrimental to the cemetery, or if the sale would violate the state law prohibiting speculation in cemetery property. 
(Code 1960, § 10-10; Ord. No. 4079, § 1, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 7-4. - Payment by installments. 
Payment for grave spaces may be made by installment in accordance with established procedures of the city on installment sales. 
(Code 1960, § 10-14; Ord. No. 4079, § 2, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 7-5. - Deeds of conveyance. 
The city manager, or designee, is hereby authorized to execute certificates of interment on behalf of the city to the purchasers of lots within the cemetery, which conveyances shall be valid for all purposes as the act and deed of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 10-11; Ord. No. 980128, § 6, 7-27-98; Ord. No. 030697, § 2, 1-26-04)  
Sec. 7-6. - Disposition of proceeds from sale, rental and upkeep. 
All moneys from the sale, rental and upkeep of lots in the cemetery shall be paid to the director of finance of the city and deposited by him/her in the general fund of the city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1960, § 10-12)  
Sec. 7-7. - Lot improvements and maintenance. 
(a)  Work performed on lots to maintain, change, alter, improve, inter or disinter shall be accomplished by employees of the cemetery under the direction of the supervisor. 
(b)  All grading, landscaping work, care of trees, shrubs, and herbage and all plantings shall be done by cemetery employees unless special permission therefor is first granted by the supervisor. 
(c)  Estimates for any special work will be made by the supervisor upon application, and charges for the work shall be paid in advance. 
(d)  The supervisor shall direct generally all improvements within the grounds and upon all lots and graves, before as well as after interments have been made therein. 
(e)  If any improvement or alteration of individual property in the cemetery shall be made without prior approval of the supervisor, the supervisor shall have the right to remove the improvement or alteration at the expense of the owners. 
(f)  Chairs, settees, benches and vases shall be permitted only if properly installed and maintained. Failure to properly install or maintain such fixtures will be cause for their removal. 
(g)  Coping enclosures, fences, structures of wood and hedges are prohibited. Those structures or enclosures established on any lot which have, in the judgment of the city, become unsightly by reason of neglect or age shall, after 30 days' written notice to the owner, be removed by the city at its expense. 
(h)  No elevated mounds shall be built over graves and no lot shall be filled above the grade established by the supervisor. 
(i)  If any tree, shrub or plant standing upon any lot, by means of its roots, branches or otherwise, be or become detrimental to adjacent lots or avenues, or if for any reason its removal is deemed necessary, the supervisor shall have the right and it shall be his/her duty to remove the tree, plant or shrub or any part thereof, or otherwise correct the condition existing. 
(j)  If any memorial or structure, or any inscription placed on same shall be determined by the supervisor to be offensive, the supervisor shall have the right and it shall be his/her duty to enter upon any lot and remove, change, or correct the offensive or improper object. 
(k)  Potted plants, wreaths and baskets shall be removed from lots and graves when in the judgment of the supervisor it is to the best interest of the cemetery to remove them. 
(Code 1960, § 10-4)  
Sec. 7-8. - Annual care—Required for lots owned prior to October 21, 1957. 
There shall be assessed against all lots or plots owned prior to October 21, 1957, in the cemetery not covered by perpetual care service, an annual care service charge at the rates set forth in Appendix A. All such assessments shall accumulate from year to year against the lots assessed until fully paid, and no interment or disinterment shall be permitted at any lot until all accumulated assessments for annual care services have been paid in full. 
(Code 1960, § 10-13; Ord. No. 4079, § 3, 5-22-95; Ord. No. 080984, § 1, 7-16-09)  
Sec. 7-9. - Annual care—Charges for services. 
In order to provide funds for the costs of maintaining cemetery grounds and furnishing cemetery services, prices for spaces and charges for services will be adjusted periodically, based on review and analysis of local market rates and thereafter set forth in Appendix A. 
(Code 1960, § 10-14; Ord. No. 080984, § 1, 7-16-09)  
Sec. 7-10. - Perpetual care service—Required. 
No grave space in the cemetery shall be sold unless the purchaser shall, at the time of purchase, pay the requisite fee for perpetual care for the grave space purchased. The prices set by the city commission for spaces sold in the cemetery shall be inclusive of an amount for perpetual care, as specified in section 7-11. 
(Code 1960, § 10-15; Ord. No. 4079, § 4, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 7-11. - Same—Trust fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a perpetual care trust fund known as "Evergreen Cemetery Trust Fund." All moneys received from owners of lots who are changing from annual to perpetual care, together with a portion of the moneys received from the sale of spaces specified by the city commission shall be paid to the city manager or designee, who shall deposit the moneys in the trust fund in any depository for deposit of city funds or as otherwise authorized by the city commission. The city commission when setting prices for spaces shall designate what portion of moneys received shall be paid into the trust fund. 
(b)  The income from the trust fund shall be used exclusively for the care and maintenance of the lots and spaces covered thereby and for the care and maintenance of the cemetery grounds. 
(c)  The city commission shall invest such funds as they deem advisable. 
(Code 1960, § 10-15; Ord. No. 4079, § 5, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 7-12. - Same—Services enumerated. 
Perpetual care service shall consist of cutting, maintaining and trimming all grass areas, top dressing and annual fertilizing of all grass areas. 
(Code 1960, § 10-15)  
Sec. 7-13. - Change from annual to perpetual care—Fees. 
An owner of any lot that is being assessed fees for annual care may purchase perpetual care for the lot by paying charges in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(Code 1960, § 10-15; Ord. No. 4079, § 6, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 7-14. - Payment in installments for perpetual care service. 
(a)  Persons owning interment rights in the city's cemetery are authorized to purchase perpetual care service for the area in the cemetery where the interment rights are owned, by paying the cost thereof in equal monthly or quarterly payments over a period not to exceed 18 months to the director of finance, who shall deliver to the purchaser a certificate as provided by section 7-15 evidencing the purchase when the cost thereof has been fully paid. Provided, however, that charges for annual care shall continue to be assessed against the area for which perpetual care service is being purchased until the perpetual care service is fully paid for, and the director of finance is authorized to make such adjustments with the purchaser by way of refund of fees paid by the purchaser for annual care for the year in which the perpetual care service is fully paid. The refunds, if any, shall be made pro tanto to the end of the quarterly period in which the perpetual care service is fully paid. That is to say, if the perpetual care service is fully paid during the third quarter of a year, the purchaser shall be refunded one-fourth of the amount paid for annual care for that year. 
(b)  If any purchaser purchasing perpetual care service fails to pay the amount due therefor in full within the eighteen-month period, then the director of finance shall retain all sums paid and apply the same on the payment of annual care service fees applicable to the area upon which perpetual care service was being purchased until such sums are exhausted. 
(Code 1960, §§ 10-16, 10-17)  
Sec. 7-15. - Certificate of purchase of perpetual care service. 
Upon the payment of a perpetual care fee, the city manager or designee is authorized to deliver to the purchaser a certificate evidencing the purchase, signed by him/her on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 10-15; Ord. No. 100815, § 1, 6-2-11)  
Sec. 7-16. - Funeral regulations. 
(a)  The supervisor shall be given 24 hours advance notice before any interment shall be made. 
(b)  Funeral directors making arrangements for interments shall be responsible for the payment of all interment charges in addition to all charges which have accrued to or against the lot. 
(c)  Boxes or vaults to be installed by the city and used for interment, shall be delivered to the cemetery at least eight working hours previous to the time of interment and not later than 4:30 p.m. on the day preceding the funeral. Times for funerals are to be so arranged that cemetery workmen can complete interment by 4:30 p.m. All costs and payments for overtime of workmen after 4:30 p.m. on weekdays and on Sundays will be charged to the funeral director or person in charge of the burial. 
(Code 1960, § 10-5)  
Sec. 7-17. - Burials. 
(a)  No interment shall take place until a burial permit has been issued by the city health officer and an interment certificate has been issued by the supervisor, nor until all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations relative to burials have been complied with and all fees and costs previously billed by the city have been paid. 
(b)  The city shall not be responsible for errors in location of graves or lots arising from improper instructions of lot owners. Orders from funeral directors shall be construed as orders from owners. 
(c)  No person shall be buried in any lot in which the person did not have a legal interest, except by written consent of all parties having a legal interest in the lot, and the city. 
(d)  The burial of two bodies in one grave is prohibited. 
(Code 1960, § 10-6)  
Sec. 7-18. - Installations, foundations, vaults, memorials, mausoleums. 
(a)  All foundations shall be built by the city at the cost of the owner, and the city shall assume the responsibility for the proper construction of the foundation. 
(b)  Approval of the location must be obtained from the city before a monument is set. 
(c)  The charges for building foundations shall be established by the supervisor and shall be reasonable and uniform. 
(d)  Prior to installing a vault in the cemetery, a person or corporation shall be required to have the location of the installation and the design and material of the vault approved by the supervisor. 
(e)  A sealed vault is required to each and every burial in the cemetery, except for burials of cremains and for burials in the lots set aside for indigent burials as of October 1, 1994. 
(f)  Single markers shall consist of one piece and shall be placed level with the ground in all new additions. 
(g)  Not more than one marker shall be placed on any one grave. No marker shall embrace two or more graves, except on a two-grave lot where a double marker is permitted. Double markers shall not exceed 20 inches in height and 16 inches in width. 
(h)  No marker shall be set unless the location has been first approved by the supervisor and the grave space is paid for in full. 
(i)  No material except granite, a good grade of white marble, cut stone from recognized monument quarries, or standard bronze, shall be used for markers or monuments. The use of two or more kinds of granite in any one lot varying materially in color or texture shall not be permitted. 
(j)  Before work on any private mausoleum is begun, complete plans and specifications and the proposed location shall be submitted to, and approved by, the supervisor. 
(k)  Mausoleums shall be constructed of granite, white marble or other stone of durable quality approved by the supervisor. In those cases where walls are 18 inches in thickness or less the ashlar shall be of full thickness. All metalwork shall be of standard bronze. Catacombs shall be airtight so that interments can be separately sealed. Air spaces shall be provided between crypts and outside walls and provided with suitable inlets and outlets. Vestibules shall be properly ventilated. 
(l)  Interments in crypts shall be made in hermetically sealed caskets or boxes. Duplicate keys for mausoleums shall be furnished to the city. 
(m)  In all new additions only one grave memorial will be permitted on one space. No memorial may be set to embrace two or more grave spaces except a companion or a family memorial, nor shall more than two family names be permitted on any memorial unless approved in writing by the city at the time of the sale of the interment rights. All memorials shall be set on uniform lines as prescribed by the supervisor to conform to the general plan of the cemetery. 
(Code, 1960, § 10-7; Ord. No. 4043, § 1, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 080439, § 4, 11-20-08)  
Sec. 7-19. - Interment rights; transfer. 
(a)  Any and all transfers of interment rights are subject to all rules and regulations of the cemetery, which are now in full force and effect or which may be hereafter enacted. 
(b)  Before transfer of interment rights the original owner must reconvey the interment rights to the city. The city shall then issue a warranty of conveyance to the new owner. The warranty of conveyance shall not be issued unless perpetual care has been purchased. The same rules shall apply in all cases of assignment of purchase contract for interment rights. This information shall then be duly recorded in a permanent cemetery file. 
(c)  The owner of interment rights may dispose of same by will, subject to the conditions of transfer in interment rights as stated above. 
(d)  The city may exchange interment rights when desired by owners, but not for interment rights of lesser value. When such an exchange is made the original conveyance must be surrendered by proper assignment, or by conveyance if considered necessary and a fee in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A shall be paid, before any change is effected. 
(e)  The subdivision of interment rights shall not be effective without prior consent of the city. The subdivision will not be allowed on property unless perpetual care has been purchased. 
(f)  The city may refuse to consent to a transfer or to an assignment as long as there is any indebtedness due the city in connection with the lot, grave memorial, lot care, or right of transfer in question. 
(Code 1960, § 10-9)  
Sec. 7-20. - Conduct in cemetery. 
(a)  No person shall break or injure any tree or shrub, or mar any landmark, marker, or memorial, or in any way deface the grounds of the cemetery. 
(b)  No person shall be permitted to enter or leave the cemetery except by the public gates which will be open from 8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. daily. 
(c)  No boxes, shells, toys, discarded glassware, sprinkling cans, receptacles or similar articles will be permitted on any grave, lot or tree. 
(d)  No person shall pluck or remove any plant or flower, either wild or cultivated from any part of the cemetery. 
(e)  Persons within the cemetery grounds shall use only the established avenues, walkways and roads. 
(f)  Children under 15 years of age shall not be permitted within the cemetery or its buildings, unless accompanied by an adult. 
(g)  No person may use any form of advertisement on cemetery grounds. 
(h)  No person shall permit any dog or other domestic animal to enter or remain in the cemetery. 
(i)  No person may consume refreshments or liquors within the cemetery or carry same into the premises. 
(j)  No person shall throw rubbish or debris on walks, drives or any part of cemetery grounds. 
(k)  Unauthorized persons shall not loaf, lounge, or otherwise use any of the grounds, graves or monuments in the cemetery, or in any of the buildings therein. 
(l)  No loud talking shall be permitted on the cemetery grounds within hearing distance of funeral services. 
(m)  No money shall be paid the attendants at the entrance or on the grounds. The entire time of the persons regularly employed on the grounds belong to the cemetery; visitors and owners must not otherwise engage them. 
(n)  Any person found on the grounds after dark will be considered a trespasser. 
(o)  All orders, inquiries and complaints by visitors or owners must be reported to the office of the supervisor. 
(Code 1960, § 10-2; Ord. No. 110199, § 1, 9-15-11) 
Cross reference— Offenses generally, Ch. 17.  
Sec. 7-21. - Motor vehicles. 
(a)  Motor vehicles shall not be driven through the grounds at a greater speed than 15 miles per hour. 
(b)  Motor vehicles shall be driven and parked only on the right side of the opened roads and driveways. No U-turns are permitted. 
(c)  Motor vehicles shall not be parked in front of an open grave unless the occupants thereof are in attendance at a funeral. 
(d)  The traffic laws of the city shall be applicable to the operation of motor vehicles in the cemetery. 
(Code 1960, § 10-3) 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 26.  
Sec. 7-22. - Violations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-9.  
Chapter 8 - DISCRIMINATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Disabled and elderly citizens' advisory board, § 2-430.1 et seq.; miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 14.5. 
State Law reference— Human Rights Act, F.S. § 23.161 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Declaration of findings and policy. 
(a)  The city commission hereby finds that: 
(1)  The right of access to and the full and equal enjoyment of places of public accommodation as defined hereafter, without discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity is a matter of concern to the citizens of the city and more particularly of concern to the city in providing for the health, welfare, safety and morals of the citizens of the municipality; 
(2)  The availability of adequate housing without discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity is a matter of concern to the citizens of the city and more particularly of concern to the city in providing for the health, welfare, safety and morals of the citizens of the municipality; 
(3)  Employment practices without discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity is a matter of concern to the citizens of the city and more particularly of concern to the city in providing for the health, welfare, safety and morals of the citizens of the municipality. 
(4)  The extension of credit without discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity is a matter of concern to the citizens of the city and more particularly of concern to the city in providing for the health, welfare, safety and morals of the citizens of the municipality; and 
(5)  Employment discrimination against persons having physical or mental disabilities that do not constitute bona fide occupational qualifications is a matter of concern to the citizens of the city and more particularly of concern to the city in providing for the health, welfare, safety and morals of the citizens of the municipality. 
(6)  Religious institutions, organizations, corporations, associations or societies (hereinafter "institutions") have long been important in this country's constitutional framework, and exempting out the application of sexual orientation and gender identity provisions in those institutions is rationally related to the legitimate purpose of alleviating significant governmental interference with the ability of religious institutions to define and carry out their religious missions. 
(b)  The above findings being made, the city commission hereby declares the policy of the city to be, for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare, for the maintenance of business and good government, and for the promotion of the city's trade, commerce and manufacturing, to prohibit discrimination in the access to and equal enjoyment of places of public accommodation, to ensure equal opportunity to all persons to live in decent housing facilities, regardless of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity and to that end to prohibit discrimination in the extension of credit without regard to sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity and to prohibit employment discrimination against persons because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity that do not constitute bona fide occupational qualifications. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-2; Ord. No. 3421, § 1, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 3799, §§ 1, 2, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 970262, § 1, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 1, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 1, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 1, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-2. - Objective. 
The objective of the provisions of this chapter is to provide a means for implementation of the above-declared policy and to discourage and eliminate discriminatory practices. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-3)  
Sec. 8-3. - "Person" defined. 
As used in this chapter, the term "person" includes one or more individuals, labor unions, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under Title 11 U.S.C., receivers, fiduciaries, and the Gainesville-Alachua County Regional Airport Authority. Except as otherwise noted above, the term shall not include any federal, state or local government or any agency thereof, but shall include all natural persons whether or not acting as agents for such governmental entities. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-4; Ord. No. 060058, § 1, 7-10-06) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 8-4. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in this section for any person to commit any act in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in this section for any person to aid, abet, compel, coerce or participate in the doing of any act declared to be unlawful by this chapter, or to obstruct or prevent enforcement of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in this section for any person to engage in any reprisal against any person because that person has filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or hearing under this chapter. 
(d)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-5)  
Sec. 8-5. - Cumulative effect of provisions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to exempt or relieve any person from any liability, duty, penalty or punishment provided by any applicable state or federal law or local ordinance. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-6)  
Sec. 8-6. - "Sexual orientation," and "gender identity" defined. 
(a)  As used in this chapter, "sexual orientation" means the condition of being heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual or having a history of such identification. This definition is not intended to permit any practice prohibited by federal, state or local law. 
(b)  As used in this chapter, "gender identity" means an inner sense of being a specific gender, or the expression of a gender identity by verbal statement, appearance, or mannerisms, or other gender-related characteristics of an individual with or without regard to the individual's designated sex at birth. 
(Ord. No. 970262, § 2, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 051225, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 090025, § 1, 6-18-09)  
Secs. 8-7—8-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HUMAN RIGHTS BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980524, §§ 2—6, adopted Dec. 14, 1998, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 8-21—8-31, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to the human relations advisory board and derived from Code 1960, §§ 2-4.1, 10-C1—10-C6, 10-C6.1, 10-C7—10-C10; Ord. No. 3216, § 1, adopted Apr. 28, 1986; Ord. No. 3730, §§ 1—3, adopted July 15, 1991; Ord. No. 3799, § 6, adopted Nov. 2, 1992; and Ord. No. 970262, §§ 3, 4, adopted June 1, 1998. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-245 et seq.; board to act as fair housing board, § 8-96. 
State Law reference— Florida Commission on Human Relations, F.S. § 23.163 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-21. - Equal opportunity director. 
(a)  The director of the City of Gainesville Equal Opportunity Office is hereby designated to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The duties, functions, powers, and responsibilities authorized by this article are as follows: 
(1)  Implement the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder and all City of Gainesville ordinances, codes, rules and regulations pertaining to discrimination of the basis of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity in employment, fair housing, fair credit, and public accommodations, and advise the city commissioners when changes in the federal or state human rights laws require revisions to this chapter. 
(2)  Receive and investigate written complaints, as provided by this chapter, of unlawful practices in violation of this chapter when a complainant seeks to file a complaint. Refer any written complaints received by the director that allege unlawful practices in employment, fair housing, fair credit, or public accommodations by the federal government or the State of Florida to the appropriate agency with authority to investigate such complaints. 
(3)  Upon receiving a written complaint, make such investigations as the director deems appropriate to ascertain facts and issues. 
(4)  Utilize methods of conciliation and mediation or informal adjustment of grievances. 
(5)  Provide assistance in all matters relating to equal employment, fair housing, equal credit opportunity and public accommodations opportunity relating to sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity within the City of Gainesville. 
(6)  Publish and disseminate public information and educational materials relating to discrimination in employment, fair housing, equal credit opportunity and public accommodations relating to sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. 
(7)  Implement recommendations received from the human rights board concerning this chapter and the carrying out of its purpose. When, in the opinion of the director, effectuating any such recommendation would be undesirable or unfeasible, the director shall promptly so report to the board, with his or her reasons. Any differences of judgment not able to be resolved between the board and the director may, if the board feels the matter warrants, be carried to the city commission for decision. 
(8)  Make annual reports to the city commission of activities under the provisions of this chapter, and make recommendations concerning methods by which to reduce discrimination, and such other comments and recommendations as the director may choose to make. 
(9)  Conduct educational and public information activities that are designed to promote the policy of this chapter. 
(10)  Bring to the attention of the city commission, those items that may require the city commission's notice or action to resolve. 
(Ord. No. 980524, § 2, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 2, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 3, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-22. - Human rights board—Established; membership; meetings. 
There is hereby created the City of Gainesville Human Rights Board. 
(a)  The board shall be composed of seven members appointed by the city commission. Membership should be representative of the city's population and whenever possible, should reflect racial, ethnic and religious minorities as well as geographic economic and sexual considerations. 
(b)  Members of the boards shall serve terms of three years each; provided, however, that three of the initial appointments shall be for a term of one year, two of the initial appointments shall be for a term of two years, and the remaining two initial appointments shall be for a term of three years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three-year terms. 
(c)  The members of the board shall receive no compensation. 
(d)  The board shall annually elect one of its members as chair and one as vice-chair. Elections shall be held at the first regularly scheduled meeting after appointment of the board. The chair shall preside and conduct meetings of the board. The vice-chair shall act in the absence of the chair. Unless otherwise stated in this article, all actions and decisions of the board may be by a simple majority vote of those members present at a lawful meeting of the board. 
(e)  The board shall have the power and authority to promulgate such procedures and rules as necessary to conduct the business of the board, provided such rules are not inconsistent with this chapter and provided that such rules are subject to approval by the city commission. 
(f)  The board shall meet at least monthly, if there is business to come before the board, but may also meet as often as necessary. The director shall schedule each meeting and give notice of the time and place of the meetings to all board members, all parties to be heard, and the public. Special meeting of the board may be converted by the chair, with the concurrence of the director, upon giving notice thereof to the members of the board, or may be called by written notice signed by three members of the board. The notice of a special meeting shall be given at least 48 hours prior thereto. All meetings shall be public. 
(g)  The city's equal opportunity director shall provide clerical and administrative support to the board as may be reasonably required by the board to discharge its duties and responsibilities. The city's equal opportunity director shall provide a regular meeting place for the board. 
(Ord. No. 980524, § 3, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 3, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 040874, § 1, 2-28-05)  
Sec. 8-23. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The board shall have the following duties, powers, functions, and responsibilities: 
(a)  Adopt rules and procedures necessary to conduct the business of the board. 
(b)  Subpoena and compel the production of evidence necessary for investigation of complaints filed for any alleged violation of this chapter. Administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and production of evidence by subpoenas issued by the chair of the board. 
(c)  In coordination with the director, take other informational or educational actions to enforce the purpose of this chapter. 
(d)  Apply to a court of competent jurisdiction, subject to the approval of the city commission, for enforcement of any subpoena upon the refusal to answer or produce the requested document or information, wherein the court shall determine the matter. 
(e)  Recommend that the city, subject to approval of the city commission, seek prompt judicial action for appropriate temporary or preliminary relief pending final disposition of a complaint if the board determines that such action is necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(f)  Any other powers and duties provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 980524, § 4, 12-14-98)  
Sec. 8-24. - Jurisdiction over governmental agencies. 
Other than as set forth in section 8-3, the human rights board shall not have jurisdiction over the City of Gainesville or any other governmental entity, their officers, employees or agents when the complaint of discrimination arises from actions taken in their official capacity. 
(Ord. No. 980524, § 5, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 4, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 060058, § 2, 7-10-06)  
Secs. 8-25—8-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Employee benefits, § 2-451 et seq. 
State Law reference— Employment policies of the state, F.S. § 110.105; discrimination in county and municipal employment on basis of race, color, sex, religion, creed or natural origin, F.S. § 112.042; discrimination in state or county employment on the basis of age, F.S. § 112.043; discrimination in government employment on the basis of age, F.S. § 112.044; discrimination against deaf, blind, visually handicapped and other physically disabled persons in public employment, F.S. § 413.08; employment discrimination on basis of membership or membership in labor organization, F.S. § 447.171; employment discrimination based on sickle-cell trait, F.S. § 448.075. 
 
Sec. 8-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980524, § 6, adopted Dec. 14, 1998, repealed § 8-46 which pertained to rules of construction and derived from Code 1960, § 10B-7.  
Sec. 8-47. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
(a)  Age shall mean chronological age not less than 40 years and not more than 70 years. 
(b)  Because of sex or on the basis of sex includes, but is not limited to, because of or on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions; and women affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions shall be treated the same for all employment related purposes including receipt of benefits under fringe benefit programs, as other persons not so affected but similar in their ability or inability to work, and nothing in section 8-49(c) shall be interpreted to permit otherwise. This subsection shall not require an employer to pay for health insurance benefits for abortion, except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term, or except where medical complications have arisen from an abortion, provided, that nothing herein shall preclude an employer from providing abortion benefits or otherwise affect bargaining agreements in regard to abortion. 
(c)  Employer shall mean any person who has five or more employees for each working day in each of four or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar year, and any agent of such a person. 
(d)  Employment agency shall mean any person regularly undertaking, either with or without compensation, to procure employees for an employer or to procure for employees opportunities to work for any employer, and includes any agent of such a person. 
(e)  Labor organization shall mean any person defined in this chapter and any agent of such an organization, and includes any organization of any kind, any agency, or employee representation committee, group, association or plan so engaged in which employees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours or other terms or conditions of employment, and any conference, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours or other terms or conditions of employment, and any conference, general committee, joint or system board or joint council so engaged which is subordinate to a national or international labor organization. 
(f)  Physical or mental disability shall mean, for the purpose of this chapter, (i) an impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities; (ii) a record of impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities; or (iii) being regarded as having an impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities. For purposes of the sections of this chapter as they relate to employment, such term does not include any individual who is an alcohol or drug abuser whose current use of alcohol or drugs prevents such individual from performing the duties of the job in question or whose employment, by reason of such current alcohol or drug abuse, would constitute a direct threat to the property or the safety of others. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-8; Ord. No. 3421, § 2, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 980524, § 7, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 4, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 070857, § 1, 2-25-08) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 8-48. - Prohibition of discrimination in employment practices. 
(a)  It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to: 
(1)  Fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his/her compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of the individual's sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. 
(2)  Limit, segregate or classify employees or applicants for employment in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his/her status as an employee, because of such individual's sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. 
(3)  Discriminate against any person because of his/her physical or mental disability except in respect to a bona fide occupational qualification. 
(b)  It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer for employment, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual because of his/her sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity or to classify or refer for employment any individual on the basis of his/her sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity, except where sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity is a bona fide occupational qualification. 
(c)  It shall be an unlawful employment practice for a labor organization to: 
(1)  Exclude or expel from its membership or otherwise to discriminate against any individual because of his/her sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity; 
(2)  Limit, segregate or classify its membership, or applicants for membership, or to classify or fail or refuse to refer for employment, any individual in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of employment opportunities, or would limit such employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his/her status as an employee or as an applicant for employment, because of the individual's sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity; 
(3)  Discriminate against any person because of his/her disability except in respect to a bona fide occupational qualification; 
(4)  Cause or attempt to cause an employer to discriminate against an individual in violation of this section. 
(d)  It shall be an unlawful employment practice for any employer, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs to discriminate against any individual because of his/her sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity in admission to, or employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other training. 
(e)  It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer, labor organization, employment agency, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to print or publish or cause to be printed or published any notice or advertisement relating to employment by such an employer or membership in or any classification or referral for employment by such a labor organization, or relating to any classification or referral for employment by such an employment agency, or relating to admission to, or employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other training by such a joint labor-management committee indicating any preference, limitation, specification or discrimination based on sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity, except that such a notice or advertisement may indicate a preference limitation, specification or discrimination based on sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity when sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status or disability is a bona fide occupational qualification for employment. 
(f)  It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to discriminate against any of his/her employees or applicants for employment, for an employment agency, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to discriminate against any individual, or for a labor organization to discriminate against any member thereof or applicant for membership, because he/she has made a charge, testified, assisted or participated in any matter in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under this article. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-9; Ord. No. 3421, § 3, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 970262, § 5, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 8, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 6, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 4, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 090025, § 2, 6-18-09)  
Sec. 8-49. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Section 8-48 shall not apply to an employer with respect to a religious corporation, association, educational institution or society with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by the corporation, association, educational institution or society of its activities in those certain instances where sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that particular business or enterprise, nor shall it be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to give and to act upon the results of any professionally developed ability test provided that the test, its administration or action upon the results, is not designed, intended or used to discriminate because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to hire and employ employees, for an employment agency to classify, or refer for employment any individual, for a labor organization to classify its membership or to classify or to refer for employment any individual, or for an employer, labor organization or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs, to admit or employ any individual in any such program on the basis of his/her sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity in those certain instances where sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that particular business or enterprise. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to apply different standards of compensation, or different terms, conditions or privileges of employment pursuant to a bona fide seniority or merit system, or a system which measures earning by quantity or quality of production or to employees who work in different locations, provided that such differences are not the result of an intention to discriminate because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity, nor shall it be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to give and to act upon the results of any professionally developed ability test provided that the test, its administration or action upon the results, is not designed, intended or used to discriminate because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. It shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to give and to act upon the results of any professionally developed ability test provided that such test, or its administration or action upon the results, is not designed, intended or used to discriminate on the basis of physical or mental disability, except in respect to a bona fide occupational qualification. It shall not be an unlawful employment practice under this article for any employer to differentiate upon the basis of sex in determining the amount of wages; or compensation paid or to be paid to employees of such employer if such differentiation is authorized by the provisions of Section 6(d) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, as amended (19 U.S.C. 206(d)). 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to establish an unlawful employment practice based on actual or perceived gender identity due to the denial of access to shared shower or dressing facilities in which being seen fully unclothed is unavoidable. 
(e)  The provisions in this article relating to sexual orientation shall not apply to any religious institution, organization, corporation, association, society, or any nonprofit charitable or educational institution, or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious institution, organization, corporation, association, or society. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-10; Ord. No. 3421, § 4, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 970262, § 6, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 8, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 7, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 5, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 090025, § 3, 6-18-09)  
Sec. 8-50. - Filing of complaints. 
(a)  Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this article may file a written, verified complaint with the director, or his designated representative. The complaint shall state the name and address of the complainant and the person or persons against whom the complaint is made (hereinafter referred to as the "respondent"). The complaint shall set forth the facts upon which the complaint is made, and such other information as the director requires. The complaint must be filed within 180 days after the date the alleged unlawful practice has occurred. The complaint may be voluntarily withdrawn by the complainant at any time. 
(b)  When it is determined that a complaint has been timely filed, the director shall cause notice of the filing and a copy of the complaint to be served upon the respondent. Notice shall be served within ten days of the date of filing. An amendment likewise shall be served upon the respondent. The notice shall advise the respondent of relevant procedural rights and obligations. 
(c)  The director shall serve notice upon the complainant acknowledging the filing of the complaint and advising the complainant of relevant procedural rights and remedies. The notice shall advise the complainant of remedies and choice of forums and inform the complainant that the administrative procedure provided for in this article is neither an obstacle nor a prerequisite to the complainant commencing a separate civil action on his own. 
(d)  Once a complaint has been served on the respondent, the respondent shall preserve all records and other evidence which may pertain to the complaint until the matter has been finally determined. 
(e)  The respondent may file an answer to the complaint not later than ten days after receipt of the notice of the filing. The answer shall be sworn to or affirmed before a notary public or other person duly authorized by law to administer oaths and take acknowledgments. 
(f)  A complaint or answer may be amended at any time when it would be fair and reasonable to do so, and the director shall furnish a copy of each amended complaint or answer to the respondent or the complainant, respectively, as promptly as practicable. With respect to any complaint filed pursuant to this article, the initial burden of proof is on the complainant. 
(Ord. No. 980524, § 9, 12-14-98)  
Sec. 8-51. - Processing of complaints. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the filing of a complaint, the director shall commence such investigation as deemed appropriate to ascertain facts and issues. The director may utilize the services and information gathered from other public agencies charged with the administration of equal opportunity laws. 
(b)  The following investigation procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  Complaint verification. As part of the investigation process, the complaining party may be required to provide an additional sworn written statement which shall include: 
a.  A statement of each particular harm or potential harm which the aggrieved person has suffered or will suffer and the date on which each harm occurred or will occur. 
b.  For each harm, a statement specifying the act, policy, or practice which is alleged to be unlawful. 
c.  For each act, policy, or practice alleged to have harmed the aggrieved person, a statement of the facts which led the complainant to believe that the act, policy, or practice is discriminatory. 
(2)  Requests for information. In investigating a complaint, the director and/or the director's designee may obtain information by: 
a.  Oral interview; and/or 
b.  Requests for written statement or affidavit; and/or 
c.  Any discovery methods set forth in the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(3)  Investigations. The investigations will seek the voluntary cooperation of all persons in obtaining information. If, however, the director is unable to obtain the voluntary cooperation of persons, the director shall request the board issue subpoenas. The board shall have the power to issue subpoenas or subpoenas duces tecum. Any subpoena issued by the board must be approved by the city attorney as to the subpoena's form and legality before it is issued. 
(4)  Complaining party's failure to cooperate. Where the complainant fails to provide a necessary information statement; fails or refuses to appear or be available for interviews or conferences; fails or refuses to provide necessary information requested by the director pursuant to this section; or otherwise refuses to cooperate to the extent that the director shall dismiss the complaint after providing 20 days' notice to the complainant unless the director, with board approval, determines there is sufficient grounds and sufficient evidence to proceed with the complaint. 
(5)  Access to files during investigation. Information obtained during the investigation of a complaint shall be disclosed only in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Public Records Law. 
(c)  The director shall, within 100 days after the filing of a complaint, complete the investigation of the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the director is unable to complete the investigation within 100 days after the filing of a complaint, the director shall notify, by certified mail or by personal service, the complainant and the respondent in writing of the reasons for not so doing. The director shall notify the aggrieved person and the respondent if administrative disposition of the complaint pursuant to this article cannot be accomplished within one year of the filing of the complaint. 
(d)  Beginning with the filing of the complaint and ending with the filing of a reasonable cause charge, as provided for in subsection (g) herein, the director shall attempt to conciliate the matter by methods of initial conference and conciliation with all interested parties and such representatives as the parties may choose to assist them. Such conciliation conferences may be by whatever method the director determines to be most appropriate. The director shall attempt to achieve a just resolution of all violations found, and to obtain agreement that the respondent will eliminate the unlawful practice and provide appropriate affirmative relief. Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, nothing that is said or done in the course of conciliation or such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of the persons concerned. 
(e)  Where conciliation attempts are successful, the terms of a settlement of a complaint shall be reduced to a written conciliation agreement. The agreement must be executed by the respondent and the complainant, and is subject to the approval of the director. The conciliation agreement shall seek to protect the interests of the aggrieved person, other persons similarly situated, and the public interest. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (d) above, each conciliation agreement shall be made public in accordance with the public records law. 
(f)  A duly executed conciliation agreement shall operate as a dismissal with prejudice of the complaint. 
(g)  If conciliation has not been reached within 100 days of the filing of the complaint and the complaint has not been withdrawn, the director shall make a determination as to whether reasonable cause exists to believe that an unlawful discriminatory practice has occurred or is about to occur. Reasonable cause shall be based upon sufficiently trustworthy information which would lead an impartial observer to a belief that a discriminatory practice has occurred or is likely to occur. The director and/or the director's designee shall report the results of the investigation and his or her determination to the board. The board shall receive a copy of the director's report and shall have the opportunity to review the report and submit comments to the director. If the board determines that reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory practice has occurred or is about to occur, it shall issue a written notice of determination of reasonable cause. A copy of the notice shall be served upon the respondent, the complainant, and the aggrieved person within ten days of the date of the written notice; along with the notice, the parties shall be advised of the options available under this section. 
(h)  When the board has issued a notice of determination of reasonable cause, the aggrieved person may either: 
(1)  Bring a civil action against the person named in the complaint in any court of competent jurisdiction no later than one year after the date of the written notice of reasonable cause by the board; or 
(2)  Request an administrative hearing as provided for in subsection (j) herein. The request for an administrative hearing must be in writing and must be made no later than 35 days after the date of the written notice of reasonable cause by the board. The election by the aggrieved person of filing a civil action or requesting an administrative hearing under this subsection is the exclusive procedure available to the aggrieved person pursuant to this article. 
(i)  If the director determines that the complaint lacks reasonable grounds upon which to base a violation of this article, the director shall dismiss the complaint, then the director shall inform the board of his or her findings through a written report. The board, in its discretion, may order that the matter be closed or may order, by a three-fourths majority vote, such further investigation as may be deemed necessary. If further investigation is ordered, the results thereof shall be presented to the board in the form of a written report within ten days and shall be acted upon by the board within an additional 20 days. 
(j)  If a request for an administrative hearing is timely made under subsection (h), an evidentiary hearing on the merits shall be held. The city, through the city attorney's office, shall arrange for the services of a hearing officer to conduct the administrative hearing. Any conciliation agreement reached prior to a scheduled hearing may result in such hearing being cancelled. 
(k)  In conducting any administrative hearing to determine whether or not there has occurred a failure to comply with the provisions of this article, the hearing officer shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, compel the production of books, paper, and other documents, and receive evidence. All parties shall have an opportunity to respond, to present evidence and argument on all issues involved, to conduct cross-examination and submit rebuttal evidence, to submit proposed findings of facts and orders, to file exceptions to the presiding officer's recommended order, and to be represented by counsel or other qualified representative. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. In interpreting the provisions of this article, the hearing officer may consider administrative and judicial interpretations of substantially equivalent provisions of state or federal laws. 
(l)  The hearing officer shall prepare a recommended order consisting of findings of fact, conclusions of law and affirmative relief, if applicable. The hearing officer shall transmit the recommended order to the board and all parties. Each party shall have 15 days from the date of the hearing officer's order to submit written exceptions to the hearing officer's order to the board. The board shall review such order and any written exceptions and may set forth any deficiencies it finds with respect to the order. Said deficiencies shall be limited to determinations that the findings were not based upon competent, substantial evidence, or that the proceedings on which the findings were based did not comply with the essential requirements of law. In reviewing such recommended order, the board shall not have the power to receive or consider additional evidence. The board shall have no power to reject or modify the findings of fact contained in the recommended order. The board may either adopt the recommended order as the final order, or by a three-fourths majority vote, remand the recommended order along with the delineated deficiencies back to the hearing officer for consideration of the deficiencies. The hearing officer shall address the identified deficiencies in an addendum to the recommended order. The hearing officer's order along with the addendum addressing the concerns of the board shall be the final order of the board. The final order shall be served upon the complainant and respondent within ten days of adoption by the board. If the hearing officer finds that a discriminatory practice has occurred or is about to occur, the hearing officer may recommend affirmative relief from the effects of the practice, including actual damages, equitable and injunctive relief and reasonable attorneys fees and costs. Judgment for the amount of damages, equitable relief and costs assessed pursuant to a final order by the board may be entered in any court of competent jurisdiction thereof and may be enforced as any other judgment. 
(m)  Final orders of the board are subject to certiorari review. Unless specifically ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction, the commencement of any appeal does not suspend or stay an order of the board. 
(n)  Either party to the administrative proceeding or the city shall have authority to bring an action in equity in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the final administrative order to ensure compliance with this article. The court shall be empowered to issue mandatory or prohibitive injunctions to implement such administrative order. 
(o)  Should any party fail or refuse to comply with the final order issued by the board or breach a conciliation agreement as provided herein, then, following the expiration of the appeal time as provided herein, the board shall forward such order or conciliation agreement to the city commission with a request that the city commission authorize the city attorney to bring such action or actions as necessary to obtain compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 980524, § 10, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 040874, § 2, 2-28-04)  
Sec. 8-52. - Civil action and penalties. 
In any civil action commenced under subsection (h) of section 8-51, the court may issue an order prohibiting the discriminatory practice and providing affirmative relief from the effects of the practice, including back pay. A civil action brought under this section shall be commenced no later than one year after the date of determination of reasonable cause by the board. The commencement of a civil action shall divest the board of jurisdiction of the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 980524, § 11, 12-14-98)  
Secs. 8-53—8-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EQUAL ACCESS TO PLACES OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Housing, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Discrimination on the basis of race, creed, color, sex, physical disability or national origin in public lodgings and food service establishments, F.S. §§ 509.092, 509.141, 509.142; discrimination based on religion in advertising for public accommodations, F.S. § 871.04. 
 
Sec. 8-66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980524, § 12, adopted Dec. 14, 1998, repealed § 8-66 which pertained to rules of construction and derived from Code 1960, § 10B-11.  
Sec. 8-67. - Prohibition of discrimination in places of public accommodation; equal access. 
(a)  All persons shall be entitled to the full and equal enjoyment, of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages and accommodations of any place of public accommodation, as defined in this section, without discrimination or segregation on the ground of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. 
(b)  As used in this article, each of the following establishments which serves or holds itself out as serving the public is a place of public accommodation including any place where a member of the public would go seeking the services, goods, facilities, etc., which are held out as being public, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Any inn, hotel, motel, resort or other establishment which provides lodging to transient guests, other than an establishment located within a building which contains not more than five rooms for rent or hire and which is actually occupied by the proprietor of the establishment as his/her residence; 
(2)  Any restaurant, cafeteria, lunchroom, lunch counter, soda fountain, buffet or other facility principally engaged in selling food for consumption on the premises, including, but not limited to, any such facility located on the premises of any retail establishment, or any gasoline station; 
(3)  Any tavern, bar, liquor lounge, package store or other facility holding a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages issued by the division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco of the department of business regulation of the state and which serves or which holds itself out as serving the general public; 
(4)  Any pool or billiard hall, bowling alley, motion picture house, theater, concert hall, sports arena, stadium, place of amusement, skating rink, amusement park, golf courses, swimming pool or other places of exhibition or entertainment; 
(5)  Any gasoline station, retail establishment, convenience store, beauty parlor, barbershop, styling salon and laundries; 
(6)  Any hospital, nurseries, schools, library or educational facilities supported in part or whole by public funds, kindergartens, daycare centers, and any conveyance open to the general public, including taxis, limousines, trains and buses; 
(7)  Any professional office generally open to the public, such as those of attorneys, physicians, dentists, architects, accountants, etc.; 
(8)  Any establishment which is physically located within the premises of any establishment otherwise covered by this section or within the premises of which is physically located any such covered establishment and which holds itself out as serving patrons of the covered establishment. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-12; Ord. No. 3421, § 5, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 970262, § 7, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 13, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 8, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 6, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-68. - Prohibition against deprivation of, interfering with and punishment for exercising rights under this article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Withhold, deny or attempt to withhold or deny, or deprive or attempt to deprive, any other person of the right to full and equal enjoyment of places of public accommodation because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. 
(2)  Intimidate, threaten or coerce, or attempt to intimidate, threaten or coerce any person with the purpose of interfering with the right to full and equal enjoyment of places of public accommodation because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. Provided further that failure to provide reasonable access to, and use of, facilities as described in section 8-69(c) shall not be unlawful unless and until said provisions become effective as described therein and as provided in section 8-69(c)(1). 
(3)  Punish or attempt to punish any person for exercising or attempting to exercise any right to full and equal enjoyment of places of public accommodation because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-13; Ord. No. 3421, § 6, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 970262, § 8, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 14, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 9, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 7, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 090025, § 4, 6-18-09)  
Sec. 8-69. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of sections 8-67 and 8-68 prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity shall not apply to a private club or other establishment, not in fact open to the public, except to the extent that the facilities of the club or establishment are made available to the customers or patrons of an establishment within the scope of section 8-67(b). 
(b)  The provisions of sections 8-67 and 8-68 prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sex or marital status shall not apply to: 
(1)  The refusal to rent any housing facility jointly to two or more unmarried persons of different sex. 
(2)  The refusal to rent or continue to rent any housing facility on the grounds that two or more unmarried persons of different sex are or would thereby be in joint occupancy thereof. "Joint occupancy" is hereby defined as two or more persons using a single housing facility or portion thereof which is used or occupied or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as the home, residence or living quarters of such two or more persons. 
(3)  Bar any person from operating a housing facility for the exclusive occupancy of a single sex if the housing facility provides only communal bath or toilet facilities. "Communal bath or toilet facilities" is hereby defined as bath or toilet facilities provided for regular and ordinary use for occupants of more than one separate living unit. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to establish an unlawful discriminatory practice based on actual or perceived gender identity due to the denial of access to shared shower or dressing facilities in which being seen fully unclothed in unavoidable. 
(d)  The provisions in this article relating to sexual orientation and gender identity shall not apply to any religious institution, organization, corporation, association, society, or any nonprofit charitable or educational institution, or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious institution, organization, corporation, association, or society. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-14; Ord. No. 3421, § 7, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 970262, § 9, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 15, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 10, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 8, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 090025, § 5, 6-18-09)  
Sec. 8-70. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article relating to enforcement, filing, complaint procedure, orders and penalties shall follow in the same manner as in employment actions under article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 980524, § 16, 12-14-98)  
Secs. 8-71—8-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FAIR HOUSING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3228, § 1, adopted June 9, 1986, repealed Ch. 10B, Art. IV, §§ 10B-15—10B-22 of the 1960 Code, codified herein as Ch. 8, Art. V, §§ 8-86—8-93; and added new provisions in lieu thereof which have been designated as §§ 8-86—8-101 at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; housing, Ch. 13; state housing initiatives partnership program, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Fair Housing Act, F.S. § 760.20 et seq.; prohibition against violation of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 in providing housing, F.S. § 420.205. 
 
Sec. 8-86. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city, in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health and general welfare, to assure equal opportunity for each person so desiring to obtain housing of the person's choice in the city regardless of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status or disability and, to that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing on basis of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity by any person. 
(Ord. No. 3228, § 1, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 3799, § 3, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 970262, § 10, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 17, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 11, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 9, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-87. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings ascribed to them as used in this article: 
(1)  Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under the terms of this article. 
(2)  Age means the chronological age of an individual who is 18 years old or older. 
(3)  Disability: 
a.  "Disability," as used in this chapter, means, with respect to a person: 
1.  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; 
2.  A record of having such an impairment; or 
3.  Being regarded as having such an impairment. 
b.  The term "disability" excludes current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined by law. The term "disability" does not include the following sexual and behavioral disorders: 
1.  Transvestitism, transsexualism, pedophilia, exhibitionism, voyeurism, gender identity disorders not resulting from physical impairments, or other sexual behavior disorders; 
2.  Compulsive gambling, kleptomania, or pyromania; or 
3.  Psychoactive substance use disorders resulting from current illegal use of drugs. 
(2)  Person includes one or more human beings, individuals, governments, governmental agencies, governmental departments, governmental programs, political subdivisions, labor unions, mortgage companies, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations, and all other groups or combinations. 
(3)  Owner includes the owner, lessee, sub lessee, assignee, manager, agent, or other person, firm, or corporation having the right to sell, rent, lease, or transfer any housing facility, real property, or interest therein, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(4)  Building contractor includes any person, partnership, association, organization, firm or corporation engaged in the designing, redesigning, constructing, reconstructing, repairing or remodeling of any housing facility within the corporate limits of the city. 
(5)  Dwelling or housing facility includes any facility, structure, mobile home, hotel, motel, or any other building, or portion thereof, which is used or occupied or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as the home, residence or living quarters of one or more persons, or any parcel of land or portion thereof available or intended for the construction or location of such a facility, structure, mobile home, hotel, motel or other building. 
(6)  Family means one individual living alone or two or more individuals living together as a unit. 
(7)  Lending institution includes any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association, mortgage company or any other person or organization engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans. 
(8)  Real estate broker includes any person duly licensed as a real estate broker in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(9)  Real estate salesperson or agent includes any person, whether licensed or not, who, for a fee, commission, salary or other valuable consideration, or who, with the intention or expectation of receiving or collecting the same lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents, leases or otherwise transfers real estate, or the improvements thereon, including options, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate such an activity, or who advertises or holds himself/herself out as engaged in such activities, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance, upon a transfer of real estate, or who is engaged in the business of charging an advanced fee or contracting for collection of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he/she undertakes to promote the sale, purchase, exchange, rental, lease or other transfer of real estate through its listing in a publication issued primarily for such purpose; or a person employed by, or acting on behalf of any of these. 
(10)  To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(11)  Real property includes building structures, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives and condominiums. 
(12)  Familial status means one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years and are domiciled with: 
a.  A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual(s); or 
b.  The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person. 
The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
(13)  Housing for older persons means housing: 
a.  Provided under any state or federal program that is designed specifically and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program; 
b.  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or 
c.  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older for each unit. In determining whether housing qualifies as housing intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older, the board shall look for at least the following factors: 
1.  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons or, if the provision of the facilities and services is not practicable, that the housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; 
2.  That at least 80 percent of the dwellings are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older for each unit; and 
3.  The publication of and adherence to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
d.  Housing does not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons by reason of: 
1.  Persons residing in this housing as of the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived [November 2, 1992] who do not meet the requirements of subsection b. or c.; or 
2.  Unoccupied units, provided that these units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the new requirements of subsection b. or c. 
(14)  Covered multifamily dwelling means: 
a.  A building which consists of four or more units and has an elevator; or 
b.  The ground floor units of a building which consists of four or more units and does not have an elevator. 
(Ord. No. 3228, § 1, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 3799, §§ 4, 5, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 980524, § 18, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 12, 11-24-03) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 8-88. - Prohibition of discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 8-94, it shall be unlawful and a discriminatory housing practice for an owner, or any other person engaging in a real estate transaction, or for a real estate broker, as defined in this chapter: 
(1)  To refuse to sell, purchase, rent or lease, or otherwise deny or withhold any housing accommodation from a person or to evict a person because of such person's sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity; 
(2)  To evict a person from or to refuse to negotiate with a person for the sale, purchase, rental, assignment or other transfer of the title, leasehold or other interest in any housing facility because of such person's sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity; 
(3)  To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase, rent or lease any housing facility from or to a person because of such person's sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity; 
(4)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, purchase, rental, assignment or other transfer of any housing facility, or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith, because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity; 
(5)  To represent to any person that any housing facility is not available for inspection, sale, purchase, rental or lease, assignment or other transfer when in fact it is so available, or to refuse to permit a person to inspect any housing facility, because of such person's sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity when such a dwelling is in fact available to persons who are financially qualified; 
(6)  To make, as part of a process or pattern of discouraging the purchase, sale, rental, occupancy or other use of any housing facility in a particular block, area or neighborhood of the city, any representation to a person known to be a prospective purchaser, seller or renter that such a block, area or neighborhood may undergo, is undergoing or has undergone a change in composition with respect to sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity; 
(7)  To induce, or attempt to induce, a person to transfer any interest in a housing facility by representations regarding the existing or potential proximity of real property owned, used or occupied by a person of a particular sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity; 
(8)  To promote, induce or influence, or attempt to promote, induce or influence, by the use of postal cards, letters, circulars, telephone calls, visitation or any other means, directly or indirectly, a person to sell, list for sale, remove from listing, rent, assign, transfer or otherwise, any housing facility by referring, as a part of the pattern or process of inciting neighborhood unrest, community tension or fear of change in composition in a block, street, neighborhood or area of the city by creating or playing upon fear, by representing that the presence or anticipated presence in that area of persons of any particular sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity will or may result in the lowering of property values in the area, the increase in criminal or anti-social behavior in the area, or a decline in the quality of the schools serving the area; 
(9)  To engage in, or hire or conspire with others to engage in, acts or activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to harass, degrade, embarrass or cause economic loss to a person who has provided or offered to provide housing facilities or services to any person, regardless of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity; or 
(10)  To engage in, or hire or conspire with others to engage in, acts or activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to harass, degrade, embarrass or cause economic loss to a person who has purchased or leased, or contracted to purchase or lease, any housing facility or service because of such person's sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 8-94: 
(1)  It is unlawful to discriminate in the sale or rental of, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of: 
a.  That buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with the buyer or renter. 
(2)  It is unlawful to discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a disability of: 
a.  That buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with the buyer or renter. 
(3)  For purposes of subsections (1) and (2), discrimination includes: 
a.  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted. 
b.  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
c.  Covered multifamily dwellings as defined herein which are intended for first occupancy after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived [November 2, 1992] shall be designed and constructed to have at least one building entrance on an accessible route unless it is impractical to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. Such buildings shall also be designed and constructed in such a manner that: 
1.  The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons. 
2.  All doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by a person in a wheelchair. 
3.  All premises within such dwelling contain the following features of adaptive design: 
(a)  An accessible route into and through the dwelling. 
(b)  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations. 
(c)  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars. 
(d)  Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that a person in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
(4)  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standards Institute for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically disabled people, commonly cited as ANSI A117.1 1986, suffices to satisfy the requirements of subparagraph (3). 
(Ord. No. 3228, § 1, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 3421, § 8, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 3799, § 7, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 970262, § 11, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 19, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 13, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 10, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 090025, § 6, 6-18-09)  
Sec. 8-89. - Prohibition of discrimination in advertising practices. 
Except as provided in section 8-94, it shall be unlawful and a discriminatory and advertising practice for an owner or any other person engaging in a real estate transaction or for a real estate broker, as defined in this chapter: 
(1)  To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale, rental, assignment or other transfer of a housing facility, that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity, or any intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination; 
(2)  To make or cause to be made an untrue or intentionally misleading statement or advertisement, or in any other manner, attempt as part of a process or pattern of inciting neighborhood unrest, community tension or fear of change in composition of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity in any street, block, neighborhood, or any other area, to obtain a listing of any housing facility for sale, rental, assignment, transfer or other disposition, where such statement, advertisement or other representation is false or materially misleading, or where there is insufficient basis to judge its truth or falsity to warrant making the statement, or to make any other material misrepresentations in order to obtain such listing, sale, removal from listing, rental, lease, assignment, transfer or other disposition of said housing facility; 
(3)  To place a sign or display any other device either purporting to offer for sale, rental, assignment, transfer or other disposition or tending to lead to the belief that a bona fide offer is being made to sell, rent, assign, transfer or otherwise dispose of any housing facility that is not in fact available or offered for sale, rental, assignment, transfer or other disposition because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. 
(Ord. No. 3228, § 1, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 3421, § 9, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 3799, § 8, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 970262, § 12, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 20, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 14, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 11, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-90. - Prohibition of discrimination in building practices. 
It shall be an unfair and discriminatory building practice and shall be unlawful for any building contractor: 
(1)  To refuse to design, redesign, construct, reconstruct, repair, remodel or otherwise maintain any housing facility because of the sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity of the owner, lessee, tenant, assignee or other occupant of such housing facility, or of the prospective owner, lessee, tenant, assignee or other occupant of such housing facility; 
(2)  To include in the terms, conditions or privileges of any design or construction contract pertaining to a housing facility, any clause, condition or restriction which discriminates against any person, directly or indirectly, because of such person's sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity; 
(3)  To discriminate in the provision of facilities or services related to a design or construction contract pertaining to a housing facility because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. 
(Ord. No. 3228, § 1, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 3421, § 10, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 3799, § 9, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 970262, § 13, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 21, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 15, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 12, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-91. - Prohibition of discrimination in financing of housing or in residential real estate transactions. 
(a)  Discriminatory financing practices. It shall be unlawful and a discriminatory financing practice for any bank, savings and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to which application is made for financial assistance for the purchase, acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any dwelling or housing facility, or an officer, agent or employee thereof: 
(1)  To discriminate against any such applicant or applicants because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity of such applicant or applicants or any member, stockholder, director, officer or employee of such applicant or applicants or of the prospective occupants or tenants of such housing facility, in the granting, withholding, extending or renewing, or in the fixing of the rates or other terms or conditions of any such loans or other financial assistance. 
(2)  To use any form or application for such financial assistance or to make any record or inquiry in connection with application for such financial assistance which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. 
(b)  Residential real estate transactions. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person or entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity. 
(2)  As used in this subsection, the term "residential real estate transaction" means any of the following: 
a.  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance: 
1.  For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or 
2.  Secured by residential real estate. 
b.  The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property. 
(Ord. No. 3228, § 1, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 3421, § 11, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 3799, § 10, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 970262, § 14, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 22, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 16, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 13, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-92. - Prohibition of discrimination in provision of brokerage practices. 
It shall be an unfair and discriminatory brokerage practice and shall be unlawful to deny any qualified person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or any other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting housing facilities or to discriminate against this person in the terms or conditions of such assess, membership or participation because of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status or disability. 
(Ord. No. 3228, § 1, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 3421, § 12, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 3799, § 11, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 970262, § 15, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 23, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 17, 11-24-03)  
Sec. 8-93. - Prohibition of other discriminatory housing practices. 
It shall be unlawful and a discriminatory housing practice for any person: 
(1)  To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person because he/she has opposed a practice declared unlawful by this article, or because he/she has filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, hearing or conference under this article; or 
(2)  To resist, prevent, impede, or interfere with the human relations advisory board, or any of its members or representatives in the lawful performance of its or their duty under this article; or 
(3)  To commit by canvassing, any unlawful practices prohibited by this article; or 
(4)  To otherwise deny to or withhold any housing accommodation from a person because of such person's sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status or disability. 
(Ord. No. 3228, § 1, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 3799, § 12, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 970262, § 16, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 24, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 18, 11-24-03)  
Sec. 8-94. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Nothing in sections 8-88 through 8-91 and 8-93(4) applies to rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his/her residence. 
(b)  Nothing in this article prohibits a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of any dwelling which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons. Nothing in this article prohibits a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(c)  Nothing in this article requires any person renting or selling a dwelling constructed for first occupancy before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived [November 2, 1992] to modify, alter or adjust the dwelling in order to provide physical accessibility except as otherwise required by law. 
(d)  Any provision of this article regarding familial status does not apply with respect to housing for older persons. 
(e)  Nothing in this article: 
(1)  Prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status or disability. 
(2)  Limits the applicability of any reasonable local restriction regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. 
(3)  Requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(4)  Prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined under F.S. ch. 893. 
(f)  The provisions in this article relating to sexual orientation shall not apply to any religious institution, organization, corporation, association, society, or any nonprofit charitable or educational institution, or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious institution, organization, corporation, association, or society. 
(g)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to establish an unlawful housing practice based on actual or perceived gender identity due to the denial of access to shared shower or dressing facilities in which being seen full unclothed is unavoidable. 
(Ord. No. 3228, § 1, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 3421, § 13, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 3799, § 13, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 970262, § 17, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 25, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 19, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 14, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 090025, § 7, 6-18-09)  
Sec. 8-95. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  Any aggrieved person may file with the director, or his designated representative, a written complaint, which shall be verified. The complaint shall state the name and address of the complainant and the person or persons against whom the complaint is made (hereinafter referred to as the "respondent"). The complaint shall set forth the facts upon which the complaint is made and such other information as the director requires. The complaint must be filed within one year after the alleged unlawful practice has occurred. The complaint may be withdrawn by the complainant at any time. 
(b)  When it is determined that a complaint has been timely filed, the director shall cause notice of the filing and a copy of the complaint to be served upon the respondent. Notice shall be served within ten days of the date of filing. An amendment likewise shall be served upon the respondent. The notice shall advise the respondent of relevant procedural rights and obligations. The notice shall advise the respondent of the complainant's rights to commence a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction not later than two years after the occurrence or termination of the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice shall state that the computation of this two-year period excludes any time during which the matter is pending for administrative relief with respect to a complaint or charge based on the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice shall state, however, that the time period includes the time during which an action arising from a breach of a conciliation agreement under this article is pending. The notice shall advise the respondent that retaliation against any person because he or she made a complaint or testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation or conciliation under this article is a discriminatory housing practice that is prohibited. 
(c)  The director shall serve notice upon the aggrieved person acknowledging the filing of the complaint and advising the aggrieved person of relevant procedural rights and remedies. The notice shall advise the aggrieved person of remedies and choice of forums and inform the aggrieved person that the administrative procedure provided for in this article is neither an obstacle nor a prerequisite to the aggrieved person commencing a separate civil action on his own. The notice shall advise the aggrieved person of his right to commence a civil action in a court not later than two years after the occurrence or termination of the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice shall state that the computation of this two-year period excludes any time during which the matter is pending for administrative relief with respect to a complaint or charge based on the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice shall also state, however, that the time period includes the time during which an action arising from a breach of a conciliation agreement under this article is pending. The notice shall advise the aggrieved person that retaliation against any person because he or she made a complaint or testified, assisted or participated in an investigation or conciliation under this article is a discriminatory housing practice that is prohibited. 
(d)  Once a complaint has been served on the respondent, the respondent shall preserve all records and other evidence which may pertain to the complaint until the matter has been finally determined. 
(e)  The respondent may file an answer to the complaint not later than ten days after receipt of the notice of the filing. The answer shall be sworn to or affirmed before a notary public or other person duly authorized by law to administer oaths and take acknowledgments. 
(f)  A complaint or answer may be amended at any time when it would be fair and reasonable to do so, and the director shall furnish a copy of each amended complaint or answer to the respondent or aggrieved person, respectively, as promptly as practicable. With respect to any complaint filed pursuant to this article, the initial burden of proof is on the complainant. 
(g)  Within 30 days after the filing of a complaint, the director shall commence such investigation as deemed appropriate to ascertain facts and issues. The director may utilize the services and information gathered from other public agencies charged with the administration of equal opportunity laws. 
(h)  The following investigation procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  Complaint verification. As part of the investigation process, the complaining party may be required to provide an additional sworn written statement which shall include: 
a.  A statement of each particular harm or potential harm which the aggrieved person has suffered or will suffer and the date on which each harm occurred or will occur. 
b.  For each harm, a statement specifying the act, policy, or practice which is alleged to be unlawful. 
c.  For each act, policy, or practice alleged to have harmed the aggrieved person, a statement of the facts which led the complainant to believe that the act, policy, or practice is discriminatory. 
(2)  Requests for information. In investigating a complaint, the director and/or the director's designee may obtain information by: 
a.  Oral interview; and/or 
b.  Requests for written statement or affidavit; and/or 
c.  Any discovery methods set forth in the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(3)  Investigations. The investigations will seek the voluntary cooperation of all persons in obtaining information. If, however, the director is unable to obtain the voluntary cooperation of persons, the director shall request the board issue subpoenas. The board shall have the power to issue subpoenas or subpoenas duces tecum. Any subpoena issued by the board must be approved by the city attorney as to the subpoena's form and legality before it is issued. 
(4)  Complaining party's failure to cooperate. Where the complainant fails to provide a necessary information statement; fails or refuses to appear or be available for interviews or conferences; fails or refuses to provide necessary information requested by the director pursuant to this section; or otherwise refuses to cooperate to the extent that the director shall dismiss the complaint after providing 20 days' notice to the complainant unless the director, with board approval, determines there is sufficient grounds and sufficient evidence to proceed with the complaint. 
(5)  Access to files during investigation. Access to files during investigation shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Public Records Law. 
(i)  The director shall, within 100 days after the filing of a complaint, complete the investigation of the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the director is unable to complete the investigation within 100 days after the filing of a complaint, the director shall notify, by certified mail or by personal service, the complainant and the respondent in writing of the reasons for not so doing. The director shall notify the aggrieved person and the respondent if administrative disposition of the complaint pursuant to this article cannot be accomplished within one year of the filing of the complaint. 
(j)  Beginning with the filing of the complaint and ending with the filing of a reasonable cause charge as provided for in subsection (n) herein, the director shall attempt to conciliate the matter by methods of initial conference and conciliation with all interested parties and such representatives as the parties may choose to assist them. Such conciliation conferences may be by whatever method the director determines to be most appropriate. The director shall attempt to achieve a just resolution of all violations found, and to obtain agreement that the respondent will eliminate the unlawful practice and provide appropriate affirmative relief. Except as provided in subsection (k) of this section, nothing that is said or done in the course of conciliation or such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of the persons concerned. 
(k)  Where conciliation attempts are successful, the terms of a settlement of a complaint shall be reduced to a written conciliation agreement. The agreement must be executed by the respondent and the complainant, and is subject to the approval of the director. The conciliation agreement shall seek to protect the interests of the aggrieved person, other persons similarly situated, and the public interest. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (j) above, each conciliation agreement shall be made public in accordance with the public records law. 
(l)  A conciliation agreement negotiated under this article to resolve a discriminatory real estate transaction may include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  The sale, exchange, lease, rental, assignment, or sublease of real property to an individual; 
(2)  The extension to all persons the full and equal enjoyment of the advantages, facilities, privileges, and services of the respondent; 
(3)  The reporting as to the manner of compliance; 
(4)  The posting of notice in conspicuous places in the respondent's place of business, indicating compliance with equal housing opportunity, and inclusion of such notices in advertising material; 
(5)  The payment to the complainant of damages for injury, expenses incurred by the complainant in securing alternate housing or facilities, and other costs actually incurred by the complainant as a direct result of such discriminatory practice. 
(m)  A duly executed conciliation agreement shall operate as a dismissal of the complaint. 
(n)  If conciliation has not been reached within 100 days of the filing of the complaint and if the complaint has not been withdrawn, the director shall make a determination as to whether reasonable cause exists to believe that an unlawful discriminatory practice has occurred or is about to occur. Reasonable cause shall be based upon sufficiently trustworthy information which would lead an impartial observer to a belief that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is likely to occur. The director and/or the director's designee shall report the results of the investigation and his or her determination to the board. The board shall receive a copy of the director's report and shall have the opportunity to review the report and submit comments to the director. If the board determines that reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, it shall issue a written notice of determination of reasonable cause. A copy of the notice shall be served upon the respondent, the complainant, and the aggrieved person within ten days of the date of the written notice. At the time the notice of determination of reasonable cause is served, notice shall be given that a complainant, a respondent, or an aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint was filed may elect, in lieu of an administrative hearing pursuant to this article, to have the claims asserted in the charge decided in a civil action and advise that such election must be made not later than 20 days after the date of receipt of the notice of determination of reasonable cause. The person making the election shall give notice to the board and all other parties. 
(o)  If the director determines that the complaint lacks reasonable grounds upon which to base a violation of this article, the director shall dismiss the complaint, then the director shall inform the board of his or her findings through a written report. The board, in its discretion, may order that the matter be closed or may order, by a three-fourths majority vote, such further investigation as may be deemed necessary. If further investigation is ordered, the results thereof shall be presented to the board in the form of a written report within ten days and shall be acted upon by the board within an additional 20 days. 
(p)  If timely election of a civil action is not made under subsection (n), the charge will proceed to an administrative hearing. An evidentiary hearing on the merits shall be held. Any conciliation agreement reached prior to a scheduled hearing may result in such hearing being cancelled. The city, through the city attorney's office, shall arrange for the services of a hearing officer to conduct the administrative hearing. 
(q)  In conducting any administrative hearing to determine whether or not there has occurred a failure to comply with the provisions of this article, the hearing officer shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, compel the production of books, paper, and other documents, and receive evidence. All parties shall have an opportunity to respond, to present evidence and argument on all issues involved, to conduct cross-examination and submit rebuttal evidence, to submit proposed findings of facts and orders, to file exceptions to the hearing officer's recommended order, and to be represented by counsel or other qualified representative. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. In interpreting the provisions of this article, the hearing officer may consider administrative and judicial interpretations of substantially equivalent provisions of state or federal laws. 
(r)  The hearing officer shall prepare a recommended order consisting of findings of fact, conclusions of law and affirmative relief, if applicable. The hearing officer shall transmit the recommended order to the board and all parties. Each party shall have 15 days from the date of the hearing officer's order to submit written exceptions to the hearing officer's order to the board. The board shall review such order and any written exceptions and may set forth any deficiencies it finds with respect to the order. Said deficiencies shall be limited to determinations that the findings were not based upon competent, substantial evidence, or that the proceedings on which the findings were based did not comply with the essential requirements of law. In reviewing such recommended order, the board shall not have the power to receive or consider additional evidence. The board shall have no power to reject or modify the findings of fact contained in the recommended order. The board may either adopt the recommended order as the final order, or by a three-fourths majority vote, remand the recommended order along with the delineated deficiencies back to the hearing officer for consideration of the deficiencies. The hearing officer shall address the identified deficiencies in an addendum to the recommended order. The hearing officer's order along with the addendum addressing the concerns of the board shall be the final order of the board. The final order shall be served upon the complainant and respondent within ten days of adoption by the board. If the hearing officer finds that a discriminatory practice has occurred or is about to occur, the hearing officer may recommend affirmative relief from the effects of the practice, including actual damages, equitable and injunctive relief and reasonable attorneys fees and costs. Judgment for the amount of damages, equitable relief and costs assessed pursuant to a final order by the board may be entered in any court of competent jurisdiction thereof and may be enforced as any other judgment. 
(s)  Any sale, encumbrance, or rental consummated prior to the issuance of an order by the board issued under the authority of this article and involving a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant without actual notice of the existence of the filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions of this article shall not be affected. 
(t)  Either party to such administrative proceedings shall have the right to appeal the final administrative order described herein by certiorari review. Unless specifically ordered by the court, the commencement of an appeal does not suspend or stay an order of the board. Costs or fees may not be assessed against the board in any appeal from a final order issued by the board under this article. Either party to the administrative proceeding or the city shall have authority to bring an action in equity in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the final administrative order to ensure compliance with this article. The court shall be empowered to issue mandatory or prohibitive injunction to implement such administrative order. 
(u)  Should any party fail or refuse to comply with the final order issued by the board or breach a conciliation agreement as provided herein, then, following the expiration of the appeal time as provided herein, the board shall forward such order or conciliation agreement to the city commission with a request that the city commission authorize the city attorney to bring such action or actions as necessary to obtain compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 980524, § 26, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 040874, § 3, 2-28-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980524, § 26, adopted Dec. 14, 1998, repealed the former § 8-95 and enacted a new § 8-95 as set out herein. The former § 8-95 pertained to the fair housing coordinator and derived from Ord. No. 3228, § 1, adopted June 9, 1986.  
Sec. 8-96. - Civil action and penalties. 
(a)  In addition to the election of remedies provisions if, as a result of investigation under this article, the director finds there is reasonable cause to believe that an unlawful discriminatory housing practice has occurred, at the request of the person aggrieved, the board may recommend to the city commission that the matter be referred to the state attorney's office for appropriate proceedings to enforce the provisions of this article. The board may also recommend to the city commissioners that the city attorney bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction if the director is unable to conciliate a complaint or if the city is unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this article. The city and/or the board need not have requested or petitioned for an administrative hearing or exhausted any administrative remedies prior to bringing a civil action. 
(b)  If an aggrieved person wishes to bring a civil action, such action shall be commenced no later than two years after an alleged discriminatory practice has occurred. The aggrieved person need not have requested or petitioned for an administrative hearing or exhausted his or her administrative remedies prior to bringing a civil action. Such two-year period does not include any time during which conciliation efforts or an administrative hearing action was pending with respect to such complaint. 
(c)  Whenever an action filed in a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to this article comes to trial, the director shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain conciliation. 
(d)  In a civil action brought under this article, if a court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred, it shall issue an order prohibiting the practice and providing affirmative relief from the effects of the practice, including injunctive and other equitable relief, actual damages, and reasonable attorneys' fees and costs. If the city has brought the civil action, the court shall award reasonable attorneys' fees and costs to the city in any action in which the city prevails. 
(e)  It is hereby found and declared that a violation of any provision of this article constitutes an irreparable injury to the citizens of the City of Gainesville. 
(Ord. No. 980524, § 27, 12-14-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980524, § 27, adopted Dec. 14, 1998, repealed the former § 8-96 and enacted a new § 8-96 as set out herein. The former § 8-96 pertained to fair housing board established and membership, and derived from Ord. No. 3228, § 1, adopted June 9, 1986; Ord. No. 3799, § 14, adopted Nov. 2, 1992; and Ord. No. 3827, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 1993.  
Sec. 8-97. - Additional remedies. 
The procedures prescribed by this article do not constitute an administrative prerequisite to another action or remedy available under other law. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to modify, impair, or otherwise affect any right or remedy conferred by the constitution or laws of the United States or the State of Florida, and the provisions of this article shall be in addition to those provided by such other laws. Nothing herein shall prevent any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which he might otherwise be entitled, or from filing any complaint with any other agency or any court having proper jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 980524, § 28, 12-14-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980524, § 28, adopted Dec. 14, 1998, repealed the former § 8-97 and enacted a new § 8-97 as set out herein. The former § 8-97 pertained to duties and powers of the fair housing board and derived from Ord. No. 3228, § 1, adopted June 9, 1986, and Ord. No. 3799, § 15, adopted Nov. 2, 1992.  
Secs. 8-98—8-101. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980524, § 29, adopted Dec. 14, 1998, repealed §§ 8-98—8-101, which pertained to procedure, violation of article, penalties, and additional remedies, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 3228, § 1, adopted June 9, 1986, and Ord. No. 3799, §§ 16, 17, adopted Nov. 2, 1992.  
Secs. 8-102—8-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - EQUAL CREDIT OPPORTUNITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Discrimination on basis of sex, race or marital status in lending money, granting credit or providing equal pay for equal services, F.S. § 725.07. 
 
Sec. 8-111. - Rules of construction. 
The provisions of this article are adopted by the city commission with the knowledge of a similar federal law contained in 15 U.S.C. Section 1691a, et seq. The commission has specifically patterned this article after that law and except where the two (2) are clearly different, hereby adopts relevant judicial and administrative constructions of that federal law as applicable hereto. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-23)  
Sec. 8-112. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Applicant or credit applicant shall mean any person who applies to a creditor directly for an extension, renewal, or continuation of credit, or applies to a creditor indirectly by use of an existing credit plan for an amount exceeding a previously established credit limit. 
Credit shall mean the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
Creditor shall mean any person who regularly extends, renews or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal or continuation of credit; or any assignees of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew or continue credit. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-24) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 8-113. - Prohibition of discrimination in credit extension practices. 
It shall be unlawful for any creditor to discriminate against any applicant on the basis of sexual orientation, race, color, gender, age, religion, national origin, marital status, disability or gender identity with respect to any aspect of a credit transaction. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-25; Ord. No. 970262, § 18, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 980524, § 30, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 030313, § 20, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 051225, § 15, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-114. - Exceptions. 
Section 8-113 shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any inquiry of marital status if the inquiry is for the purpose of ascertaining the creditor's rights and remedies applicable to the particular extension of credit, and not to discriminate in a determination of credit worthiness; 
(2)  A request for the signature of both parties to a marriage for the purpose of creating a valid lien, passing clear title, waiving inchoate rights to property, or assigning earnings; provided, however, this subsection shall not be construed to permit a creditor to take sex or marital status into account in connection with the evaluation of the credit worthiness of any applicant; 
(3)  Consideration or application of state property laws which directly or indirectly affect credit worthiness of the applicant. 
(4)  The provisions in this article relating to sexual orientation and gender identity shall not apply to any religious institution, organization, corporation, association, society or any nonprofit charitable or educational institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious institution, organization, corporation, association or society. 
(Code 1960, § 10B-26; Ord. No. 970262, § 19, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 051225, § 16, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-115. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article relating to enforcement, filing, complaint procedure, orders and penalties shall follow in the same manner as in employment actions under article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 980524, § 31, 12-14-98)  
Chapter 9 - ELECTIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Electors and elections, F.S. Ch. 97 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Applicability of general laws of state to city elections. 
The general law of the state on the subject of elections shall apply to and govern all city elections insofar as there is no conflict with the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 11-17)  
Sec. 9-1.1. - Election districts. 
(a)  In accordance with Section 2.02 of the Charter of the city, the following election districts are hereby established for the purpose of representation upon and election of four members to the city commission: 
District No. 1 
District No. 1 shall be comprised of the following precincts: Precinct Nos. 13, 19, 25, 28, 30, 33, 34, 55, and 59. 
District No. 2 
District No. 2 shall be comprised of the following precincts: Precinct Nos. 12, 17, 21, 22, 37, 38, 45, 50, and 57. 
District No. 3 
District No. 3 shall be comprised of the following precincts: Precinct Nos. 24, 26, 32, 36, 39, 40, 43, 48, 52, 54, and 61. 
District No. 4 
District No. 4 shall be comprised of the following precincts: Precinct Nos. 5, 7, 23, 27, 31, and 44. 
A map identifying the election districts is attached to the ordinance from which this section derives as Exhibit A for illustrative purposes only and is on file in the office of the clerk of the commission. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "precincts" means the county election precincts of Alachua County, Florida, as established by the board of county commissioners and approved by the supervisor of elections. The boundaries of said precincts are the boundaries as they exist on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives or any amendatory ordinance, but only to the extent that they are located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3346, § 1, 7-13-87; Ord. No. 3588, § 1, 1-8-90; Ord. No. 3637, § 1, 7-16-90; Ord. No. 3708, § 1, 4-1-91; Ord. No. 3801, § 1, 12-7-92; Ord. No. 3921, § 1, 12-20-93; Ord. No. 4041, § 1, 11-14-94; Ord. No. 950799, § 1, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 960216, § 1, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 960718, § 1, 2-10-97; Ord. No. 980736, § 1, 1-11-99; Ord. No. 001723, § 1, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 020353, § 1, 9-23-02; Ord. No. 020628, § 1, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 070640, § 1, 12-10-07; Ord. No. 100391, § 1, 12-2-10; Ord. No. 120311, § 1, 12-20-12)  
Sec. 9-2. - Date of regular elections for city commissioners and mayor. 
(a)  Regular elections shall be held in March or April of each year, on a date set by the city commission by ordinance, for the election of city commissioners, including the mayor, whose terms of office expire or to fill vacancies that may occur. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast in an election to fill a district, mayoral or at large vacancy, a runoff election shall be held on the sixth Tuesday following the first election between the two candidates for such district(s), mayoral or at large seat receiving the highest number of votes cast. 
(b)  The clerk of the commission shall recommend a date for the next regular election to the commission at or before the first regular city commission meeting in May of each year. The city commission shall determine the date and direct an ordinance be drafted and advertised setting the election date and early voting dates for the general election and runoff election if necessary. This ordinance shall be adopted no later than July 1 of each year. 
(c)  If for any reason the city commission does not adopt an ordinance setting the date of the next regular election by July 1 of any year, the next regular election shall be held on the third Tuesday in March of the following year and the early voting dates shall be as provided for in state law. 
(d)  When considering the date of the next election, the city commission may consider factors including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The schedules for Spring Break of the Alachua County School Board, Santa Fe Community College and the University of Florida; 
(2)  The transition time between the election and the start of the terms of office of the new commissioners; and 
(3)  The dates of county-wide or state-wide elections occurring at about the same time. 
(Code 1960, § 11-1; Ord. No. 3310, § 2, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 3349, § 1, 8-10-87; Ord. No. 3893, § 1, 7-26-93; Ord. No. 951175, § 1, 3-25-96; Ord. No. 980068, § 1, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 980736, § 1, 1-11-99; Ord. No. 020091, § 1, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 061129, § 1, 6-11-07; Ord. No. 090112, § 1, 7-2-09; Ord. No. 160430 , § 1, 11-17-16)  
Sec. 9-3. - Designation, elections, runoff elections, pollworker training. 
(a)  Candidates for the commission shall, at the time of qualifying, designate the district seat or at large seat for which they intend to run. The district candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast in a particular district shall be elected. The at large or mayoral candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast within the city at large shall be elected. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast in a district or the city at large, as applicable, a runoff election shall be held between the two candidates in such district(s) or at large, as applicable, receiving the highest number of votes cast. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes cast in such runoff election shall be elected. In the case of a tie the candidates shall be selected for the runoff election in the same manner as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(b)  For purposes of poll worker training mandated by state law, the regular and runoff elections shall be considered as one election. Therefore, in a city election where there is a runoff election, one training is required. 
(Ord. No. 3349, § 5, 8-10-87; Ord. No. 980736, § 1, 1-11-99; Ord. No. 090078, § 1, 12-17-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3349, § 5, adopted Aug. 10, 1987, repealed and reenacted § 11-15 of the 1960 Code, codified as § 9-3 hereof, to read as herein set out. The former provisions concerned grouping of candidates and runoff election.  
Sec. 9-4. - Special elections required; proclamation. 
(a)  Special elections shall be held in the following cases: 
(1)  When there has been no choice of any city commissioner or the mayor who should have been elected at a regular or special election; 
(2)  When a vacancy exists in any office due to resignation, death or otherwise. If any vacancy shall occur less than three months before a regular election, it shall be within the discretion of the city commission to call a special election. 
(3)  When the city commission determines in its sole discretion to submit any question affecting the interest of the city to a vote of the qualified electors of the city. 
(b)  The special election shall be ordered by the city commission by resolution instructing the mayor to issue a proclamation calling the election in the same manner and form as provided for in the case of regular elections. 
(Code 1960, § 11-2; Ord. No. 980736, § 1, 1-11-99)  
Sec. 9-5. - Mayor to issue proclamation; contents; publication. 
At least, 30 days prior to any and all elections for mayor or commissioners the mayor shall issue a proclamation calling the election. The proclamation shall specify what officers are to be elected, the length of time the officers are to serve and the time and date of holding the election, including any provision for early voting as allowed in this chapter. Such proclamation shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. 
(Code 1960, § 11-3; Ord. No. 3301, § 1, 11-17-86; Ord. No. 980128, § 7, 7-27-98; Ord. No. 980736, § 1, 1-11-99; Ord. No. 020091, § 2, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 040796, § 1, 7-1-05; Ord. No. 050373, § 1, 11-14-05)  
Sec. 9-6. - Registration and qualifying officer designated; registration books to be kept; contents. 
The clerk of the commission is hereby designated as the registration and qualifying officer for the city. Alternatively, the city may contract with the Supervisor of Elections of Alachua County to serve as the registration and qualifying officer for the city. The supervisor shall maintain the registration records of city electors as provided in the general law of the state. 
(Ord. No. 3301, § 3, 11-17-86; Ord. No. 160740 , § 1, 6-1-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3301, § 2, adopted Nov. 17, 1986, repealed § 11-3.1 of the 1960 Code, from which § 9-6 derived. Section 3 of Ord. No. 3301, amending § 11-5 of the 1960 Code, has been included as a new § 9-6 at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference— Registration officers, F.S. § 98.041 et seq.  
Sec. 9-6.5. - Early voting. 
(a)  As a convenience to the voter, early voting shall be allowed in municipal general elections that are not held in conjunction with county or state elections. The provisions of this section shall apply only to municipal general elections that are not held in conjunction with county or state elections. Early voting in municipal elections that are held in conjunction with county or state elections shall be governed as provided by state law. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to municipal special elections that are not held in conjunction with county or state elections. 
(c)  Early voting pursuant to this section shall be at such sites as are allowed by state law and designated as early voting sites by the city commission. 
(d)  Early voting for municipal general elections and runoff general elections pursuant to this section shall be conducted at dates and times set forth in the election ordinance adopted annually by the city commission, provided that such dates and times are not inconsistent with state law. 
(Ord. No. 050373, § 2, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 130397, § 1, 11-21-13; Ord. No. 160430 , § 2, 11-17-16)  
Sec. 9-7. - Appointment of inspectors and clerks; opening and closing polls; substitute inspectors and clerks; qualifications. 
The supervisor shall appoint the necessary clerks and inspectors for the conduct of the election. The clerks and inspectors shall have the rights, duties and responsibilities provided in F.S. Ch. 102. 
(Code 1960, § 11-8; Ord. No. 3301, § 4, 11-17-86; Ord. No. 980736, § 1, 1-11-99) 
State Law reference— Opening and closing of polls, F.S. § 100.011.  
Sec. 9-8. - Paper ballots in annexation elections where number of registered voters is under 500. 
The use of paper ballots, which means that printed sheet containing the proposition submitted to the electorate, on which sheet of paper the elector casts his or her vote, shall be permitted (both for poll and mail in ballot voting) for exclusive use in annexation elections where the number of registered voters in the area to be annexed is 500 or less. The votes shall be tabulated and counted by hand by the board of canvassers. 
(Ord. No. 020091, § 3, 8-26-02) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of § 9-8 by Ord. No. 020091, Ord. No. 980736, § 1, adopted Jan. 11, 1999, repealed § 9-8 which pertained to oath of inspectors and clerks and derived from Code 1960, § 11-11 and Ord. No. 3301, § 6, adopted Nov. 17, 1986.  
Sec. 9-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980736, § 1, adopted Jan. 11, 1999, repealed § 9-9 which pertained to clerks to be chairpersons of election boards and decision of majority to decide questions, and derived from Code 1960, § 11-12.  
Sec. 9-10. - Qualifications of candidates for city commission. 
(a)  Any person who meets the eligibility requirements described in Article II of the Charter may become a candidate for the office of mayor or city commissioner of the city by filing the necessary qualifying papers as provided in Florida Statutes with the supervisor, at any time after noon of the first day for qualifying which shall be the fiftieth day prior to the day of the election, but not later than noon of the 46th day prior to the day of the election. Provided, however, as a condition precedent to having his/her name printed on the ballot for such election such person shall pay to the supervisor the election assessment imposed by F.S. § 99.093(1), or be exempted from such payment of assessment pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 99.093(2). Any person who is seeking election as a write-in candidate shall not be required to pay a filing fee or submit a petition. A write-in candidate shall not be entitled to have his/her name printed on any ballot; however, space for his/her name to be written in shall be provided on the ballot. No person may qualify as a write-in candidate if the person has also otherwise qualified for nomination or election to such office. All write-in candidates must submit their qualifying paperwork to the supervisor by the end of the qualifying period set out above. 
(b)  For purposes of determining the eligibility requirements of Article II of the Charter, a person who resides in an area that is redistricted into another district (hereinafter the "new district") shall be deemed to be a resident of the new district if the person resides anywhere within the area that is placed in the new district for a period of not less than six months prior to the date the person qualifies to run for office. 
(Code 1960, § 11-9; Ord. No. 3301, § 5, 11-17-86; Ord. No. 3310, § 3, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 3319, § 1, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 3349, § 2, 8-10-87; Ord. No. 3688, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 3924, § 1, 1-10-94; Ord. No. 980736, § 1, 1-11-99; Ord. No. 001788, § 1, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 020746, § 1, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 040796, § 2, 7-1-05)  
Sec. 9-11. - Campaign contribution limitations; campaign finance reports. 
(a)  Candidates shall not accept campaign contributions made by persons or political committees as defined in F.S. § 106.011, in an amount exceeding $250.00 per election per person or political committee. For purposes of this section, a runoff election is considered a separate election. This limitation does not apply to contributions from political parties. 
(b)  Reports of all contributions received, and all expenditures made by a candidate or a political committee, as that term is defined in F.S. ch. 106, that has made contributions or expenditures to influence the results of a city election, shall be filed monthly once a campaign treasurer is appointed and on the 25th, 11th and fourth days immediately preceding the regular or special election, and, if a run-off is required, on the 11th and fourth days immediately preceding the run-off election. 
(Ord. No. 040796, § 3, 7-11-05; Ord. No. 130171, § 1, 11-7-13)  
Sec. 9-12. - Ballots; contents. 
The names of all qualified candidates for election to the city commission, except for write-in candidates, shall be placed upon the ballot as a candidate for a particular district, or at large, as the case may be. However, when there is only one qualified candidate for an office, the name of the candidate shall not be printed on the election ballot, and such candidate shall be deemed to have voted for himself/herself and be declared elected to the office. Each district, mayoral or at large seat shall be clearly separated and the candidates' names for each office shall be listed in alphabetical order according to surnames; provided, no person's name shall be printed on the ballot if that person notifies the supervisor not less than 42 days prior to the election that he/she will not accept the nomination. The supervisor of elections may use discretion and allow a candidate to withdraw after the 42nd day before an election upon receipt of written notice, sworn under oath, that the candidate will not accept the nomination or office for which he/she qualified. 
(Code 1960, § 11-10; Ord. No. 3319, § 2, 2-2-87; Ord. No. 3349, § 3, 8-10-87; Ord. No. 3520, § 1, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 980736, § 1, 1-11-99)  
Sec. 9-13. - Qualifications of electors. 
Electors in the city shall have the qualifications as set forth in F.S. §§ 97.041 and 166.032. 
(Code 1960, §§ 11-4—11-4.2)  
Sec. 9-14. - Board of canvassers; composition; powers and duties. 
(a)  Composition. 
(1)  The board of canvassers for all elections held for election of city commissioners or mayor and for questions submitted to a vote of the people, except when state law requires the county canvassing board to be used, is as follows: the mayor, the mayor pro tempore, or a member of the commission, a citizen appointed by the city commission, and the clerk of the commission or designee. 
(2)  If either the mayor, the mayor pro tempore, or a member of the city commission is: a) unable to serve; b) is a candidate who has opposition in the election to be canvassed, or c) is an active participant in the campaign or candidacy of any candidate who has opposition in the election being canvassed, then the city auditor or designee shall replace that member of the board of canvassers. 
(3)  The mayor, the mayor pro tempore, or a member of the city commission or their replacement shall serve as the chair of the board of canvassers. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The board may begin the canvassing of absentee ballots at or after 7:00 a.m. on the fourth day before the election, but shall begin not later than noon on the day following the election; however, the counting of votes on absentee ballots shall begin no earlier than 7:00 p.m. on the day of the election. In addition, whenever electronic tabulating equipment is used, the processing of absentee ballots through such tabulating equipment may begin upon the opening of the polls on election day. However, notwithstanding any such authorization to begin canvassing or otherwise processing absentee ballots early, no result or tabulation of absentee ballots shall be made until after the close of the polls on election day. The board shall canvass the election returns of the inspectors and clerks of the election and the absent electors' ballots to declare the result of the election. In the event it may be necessary in order to come to a proper decision, the board shall have the power to examine witnesses and to take testimony. 
(Code 1960, § 11-14; Ord. No. 3301, § 7, 11-17-86; Ord. No. 3349, § 4, 8-10-87; Ord. No. 4063, § 1, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 960834, § 1, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 980736, § 1, 1-11-99; Ord. No. 030596, § 1, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 030978, § 1, 3-18-04; Ord. No. 090078, § 2, 12-17-09)  
Sec. 9-14.1. - Certificate of result. 
The supervisor shall certify the total number of voted ballots to the board of canvassers on a composite form of certificate to be used by the board of canvassers which shall provide for the entry of the number of votes for each candidate and upon each question cast at the several polling places in the city, and for the entry of the number of votes for each candidate or upon each question cast by absentee voters' ballots, and for the total number of votes cast for each candidate or upon each question. Such certificate shall be signed in duplicate by each member of the board of canvassers present at the time the canvass of the election was made; one copy of such certificate shall be incorporated in the minutes of the next regular meeting of the city commission following the canvass of the election and the other copy of the certificate shall be publicly posted at the city hall. 
(Ord. No. 3301, § 8, 11-17-86) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3301, § 8, adopted Nov. 17, 1986, amending § 11-35 of the 1960 Code, has been included herein as § 9-14.1 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 9-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980736, § 1, adopted Jan. 11, 1999, repealed § 9-15 which pertained to violations and derived from Code 1960, § 11-18.  
Sec. 9-16. - Submission of petition proposing Charter amendments to supervisor of elections. 
(a)  Any petition form proposing an amendment to the Charter of the City of Gainesville shall be submitted to the supervisor of elections for approval as to format prior to the petition being circulated for signatures. Such submission shall be in writing and shall include a copy or a facsimile of the petition form proposed to be circulated. The supervisor of elections shall review the form as to the sufficiency of the format only and render a decision. No review of the legal sufficiency of the text of the proposed charter amendment is to be undertaken by the supervisor of elections. 
(b)  The petition drive shall start on the date of approval by the supervisor of elections of the form of the petition and shall terminate 90 days after that date, not counting the date of the approval. In the event sufficient signatures are not acquired during that 90-day period, the petition initiative shall be rendered null and void and none of the signatures may be carried over to another petition. 
(Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 4-11-94; Ord. No. 980736, § 1, 1-11-99)  
Sec. 9-17. - Petition format. 
(a)  A petition proposing a charter amendment shall be circulated for signatures only if the format of the petition is deemed sufficient by the supervisor of elections. To be sufficient, the petition form must be printed on separate cards or individual sheets of paper. The minimum size of such forms shall be 3" × 5", and the maximum size shall be 8½" × 11", as measured at the outer boundary of the form. Additional material may be attached; however, when detached, the petition must be consistent with the dimensions and content of the form approved by the supervisor of elections. Each form shall contain space for only one elector's signature. Forms providing for multiple signatures shall not be approved by the supervisor of elections. 
(b)  The top of the petition form shall be clearly and conspicuously entitled "Charter Amendment Petition Form" followed by "I, the undersigned, a registered voter of the City of Gainesville, hereby petition pursuant to Section 5.01 of the Charter of the City of Gainesville and Chapter 9 of the City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances, to have the following proposed amendment to the Charter of the City of Gainesville submitted to a vote of the electors at a regular city election, a state-wide general election, or at a special election called by the City Commission for the City of Gainesville for that purpose." The petition form shall conspicuously contain the full text of the amendment being proposed which shall be presented in a legislative strike through (delete)/underline (addition) format. Should the text be required to be printed on both sides of the form, it shall clearly indicate that the text is continued or begins on the other side. The petition form shall conclude with adequate space for the signer's printed name, residence street address, city, precinct number, date signed, and signature. Additional materials supporting the proposed amendment, or providing a method by which the petition form may be returned by mail to the sponsors, may be attached to the form. The supervisor of elections shall not review the content of such material. 
(c)  Each form shall be deemed a political advertisement as defined in F.S. § 106.011(17), and must contain the information required by F.S. § 106.143. 
(d)  Petition forms may be reproduced in newspapers, magazines, and other forms of printed mass media, provided such forms are reproduced in the same dimensions and format as approved by the supervisor of elections. The petition forms may be included within a larger advertisement, provided the forms are clearly defined by a solid- or broken-line border of the approved dimensions and format. Forms included within a larger advertisement must be removed from the larger advertisement prior to being submitted to the supervisor of elections for signature verification and counting. 
(e)  Any change in a previously approved petition form, or additional types of petition forms for the same proposed amendment, shall be submitted to the supervisor of elections for approval in advance of circulation, in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 3969, § 2, 4-11-94; Ord. No. 980736, § 1, 1-11-99)  
Sec. 9-18. - Verification of signatures on petition. 
The person or organization sponsoring the petition shall submit signed and dated petition forms on or before the expiration of the 90-day period, and upon submission pay all fees as required by F.S. § 99.097. The supervisor of elections shall verify the signatures on the submitted approved petition forms in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 99.097 to determine whether or not ten percent of the registered voters of the city as of the last preceding municipal regular election have petitioned for an amendment to the city charter. The supervisor of elections shall within 45 days of submission (not including the day of submittal) verify the signatures thereon and certify to the city commission whether or not the requisite number of signatures has been verified. If the supervisor of elections certifies that the requisite number of signatures were verified, the city commission shall place the proposed amendment on the ballot of either the next state-wide general election, as defined in F.S. § 100.131, or the next City of Gainesville regular election, whichever first occurs on or after 135 days from the day all the petition forms were submitted to the supervisor of elections (not counting the day of the submittal). Alternatively, the city commission may at its discretion place the proposed amendment before the electors at a special election called for the purpose. This special election shall not be held earlier than 90 days following the date of the supervisor's certification, not counting the date of the certification. 
(Ord. No. 3969, § 3, 4-11-94; Ord. No. 960153, § 1, 10-28-96)  
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 002251, § 1, adopted Sept. 9, 2002, repealed the former §§ 10-7—10-11 of Ch. 10, renumbered the former §§ 10-12, 10-13 and 10-30, 10-31 as §§ 10-7—10-10, and added §§ 10-11—10-14 as set out herein. The former §§ 10-7—10-11 pertained to fire hydrants, false fire alarms, and crossing fire hose prohibited, respectively, and derived from Code 1960, §§ 13-6.1, 13-10—13-13; Ord. No. 970013, § 1, adopted July 28, 1997; and Ord. No. 990267, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 1999. Prior to the adoption of Ord. No. 002251, the former § 10-11.1 pertaining to residential smoke detectors was relocated to § 13-16.1 at the direction of the city. 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 2-376 et seq.; consolidated police officers and firefighters retirement plan, § 2-596 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; fire district, § 6-18; fire restrictions in parks, § 18-20(4); fire lanes on private property, § 26-47.1. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and control, F.S. Ch. 633; local fire chief authorized to enforce laws and rules or state fire marshal, F.S. § 633.121; explosives, F.S. Ch. 552; procedure to lawfully burn land, F.S. § 590.12; sale of fireworks, F.S. Ch. 791. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Risk reduction bureau—Established; officers; composition. 
(a)  A bureau of risk reduction in the fire rescue department of the city is hereby established which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire rescue department. 
(b)  The chief of the fire rescue department shall designate a member of the fire rescue department as bureau chief of the risk reduction bureau and may change the designation at his/her discretion. The bureau chief will function as the fire official per the Florida Fire Prevention Code and Florida Building Code. 
(Code 1960, § 13-2; Ord. No. 971173, § 1, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 080841, § 1, 5-7-09)  
Sec. 10-2. - Same—Authority to allow variances from code. 
The bureau chief of the risk reduction bureau shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code by application in writing by the owner or lessee or his/her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in conforming to the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, the public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of the modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the bureau chief of the risk reduction bureau thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 1960, § 13-3; Ord. No. 080841, § 1, 5-7-09)  
Sec. 10-3. - Amendments. 
The chief of the fire department shall recommend any amendments to this chapter which in his/her judgment shall be desirable. 
(Code 1960, § 13-4)  
Sec. 10-4. - State fire marshal's regulations to be enforced. 
All regulations issued by the state fire marshal under authority of F.S. Ch. 633 shall be enforceable by the proper authorities of the city. The chief of the fire department is hereby authorized to perform within the corporate limits of the city; any duties that may be imposed upon him/her by such law or in accordance therewith and to have such assistance as he/she may find necessary from other officials of the city in the discharge of such duties. 
(Code 1960, § 13-5) 
State Law reference— Authority of local fire chief to enforce laws and rules of state fire marshal, F.S. § 633.121.  
Sec. 10-5. - Site plans, developments, building permits. 
(a)  No site plan or development plan shall be approved by any official or agency of the city unless the fire official has stated in writing that the plans submitted demonstrated that the proposed construction will be able to satisfy the requirements of this chapter and any and all codes or ordinances adopted by the city to prevent or control fire loss within buildings or the city. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building unless the fire official has stated in writing that the proposed work will satisfy the requirements of this chapter and any and all codes or ordinances adopted by the city to prevent or control fire loss within buildings or the city. No building permit shall be issued for the alteration of any building unless the fire official has stated in writing that the proposed work will satisfy the requirements of this chapter and any and all codes or ordinances adopted by the city to prevent or control fire loss within buildings or the city. 
(Code 1960, § 13-6)  
Sec. 10-6. - Certificate of occupancy. 
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city unless the fire chief certifies by affixation of signature on the certificate of occupancy that the business, profession or occupation for which the certificate of occupancy sought is in full compliance with all the rules, codes and ordinances of the city relating to fire protection at the particular location that the license is to be issued for. 
(Code 1960, § 13-15)  
Sec. 10-7. - Report of violation. 
Police officers and firefighters shall report all violations of this chapter to the chief of police or to the chief of the fire department. Such officers shall see that all violations are prosecuted. 
(Code 1960, § 13-14; Ord. No. 002251, § 1, 9-9-02)  
Sec. 10-8. - Penalty for violations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-9. 
(Code 1960, § 13-14; Ord. No. 002251, § 1, 9-9-02)  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODES 
 
Sec. 10-9. - Florida Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code adopted. 
The Florida Fire Prevention Code and the Life Safety Code adopted by the state fire marshal, which shall operate in conjunction with the Florida Building Code, are hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and explosion, as fully as if set out at length herein. Except as modified in this chapter, the provisions herein adopted shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. The minimum fire safety codes shall not apply to buildings and structures subject to the uniform fire safety standards under F.S. § 633.206, and buildings and structures subject to the minimum fire safety standards adopted pursuant to F.S. § 394.879. 
(Code 1960, § 13-1; Ord. No. 3113, § 1, 3-18-85; Ord. No. 3388, § 1, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 3723, § 1, 5-20-91; Ord. No. 3783, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. 960200, § 1, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 002251, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 080841, § 2, 5-7-09; Ord. No. 140495 , § 2, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-10. - Amendments to NFPA 1 Section 13.1.3 of the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
NFPA 1 Section 13.1.3 is amended by adding the following: 
Interfering with fire hydrants prohibited; exception. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the fire hydrants in the city by unscrewing the caps on same or by taking water therefrom for private or personal use, except with the written consent of the fire chief. 
(Code 1960, § 13-1; Ord. No. 3388, § 1, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 3723, § 2, 5-20-91; Ord. No. 980293, § 3, 2-8-99; Ord. No. 002251, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 080841, § 3, 5-7-09; Ord. No. 120051, § 1, 9-6-12; Ord. No. 140495 , § 3, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-11. - Amendments to NFPA 1 Sections 18.3, 18.4, and 18.5 of the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
NFPA 1 Sections 18.3, 18.4, and 18.5 are amended by adding the following: 
(1)  Every water supply for fire protection use shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Gainesville Regional Utilities "Potable Water, Wastewater & Reclaimed Water Design Standards and Construction Details, and Material Standards Manual." 
(2)  The fire protection water supply for a building equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be designed and installed so as to provide an adequate fire flow in accordance with Section 18.4 of the 2012 edition of NFPA 1. The fire protection water supply for a building not equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be designed and installed so as to provide an adequate fire flow in accordance with the greater requirement of either Section 18.4 of the 2012 edition of NFPA 1, or the 2008 edition of the Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow, published by Insurance Service Office. One copy of the ISO guide and one copy of Section 18.4 of the 2012 edition of NFPA 1 shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk for public use, inspection and examination. The provisions of this subsection notwithstanding, the fire flow requirements may be varied at the discretion of the Fire Chief or designee if such official finds that adequate fire protection can be provided without such fire flow and/or the building is provided with a fully automatic fire extinguishing system. 
(3)  Where the fire protection water supply is not provided by the central water distribution system, it shall be separate and distinct from any domestic water supply provided by the central water distribution system. 
(4)  The installation of the fire protection water supply shall be coordinated with the installation of other underground utilities to be located on the property. A water supply for fire protection, either temporary or permanent, shall be made available as soon as combustible material accumulates. Where underground water mains and hydrants are to be provided, they shall be installed, completed, and in service prior to building construction work. 
(5)  Where the fire protection water supply is provided by an extension of the central water distribution system, the extension, if approved and accepted by GRU, shall be conveyed to the city, at no cost to the city, together with any necessary easements to permit city maintenance of the water supply. 
(6)  All costs associated with the construction and installation of a water distribution system extension, including the cost of inspection services performed by the city, shall be paid in full by the owner or developer prior to acceptance of the extension by the city. 
(7)  The number of fire hydrants required for a project will be determined based on the fire flow demand calculations identified in (2) above. One hydrant will be required for each 1,000 GPM of demand, with at least one hydrant located within 500 feet of the most remote point of the building, as the fire truck drives. The remaining hydrants shall be located within 1,000 feet of the most remote point of the building, as the fire truck drives. All fire hydrants shall meet the fire hydrant standards of this section and the Gainesville Regional Utilities "Potable Water, Wastewater & Reclaimed Water Design Standards and Construction Details, and Material Standards Manual." 
(8)  The provisions in subsection (7) notwithstanding, the fire hydrant requirements may be varied at the discretion of the Fire Chief or designee if adequate fire protection can be provided from an approved fire hydrant that does not meet such requirements and/or a fully automatic fire extinguishing system. 
(9)  No hydrant shall be installed that is not capable of providing at minimum a 1,000 GPM or greater flow. The water distribution system supplying the hydrants must be capable of providing at minimum a 1,500 GPM or greater flow. 
(10)  Cost of reconstruction. Where a portion of the central water distribution system must be reconstructed to meet the requirements of this section, the owner or developer will be assessed any costs incurred by the city in accordance with Section 27-99 of the City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances. 
(11)  Access during construction or alteration. During construction or alteration of any building, access to the building and any hydrant that serves any portion of the building shall be provided for fire protection purposes without interference or obstruction. 
(12)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, or cause to be constructed, any building that does not meet the requirements of this section unless the requirements have been varied by the Fire Chief designated in this article as being authorized to vary such requirements. It shall also be unlawful to alter, cause to be altered, occupy or allow to be occupied any building constructed after August 10, 1981, that does not meet the requirements of this section unless the requirements have been varied as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 002251, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 080841, § 4, 5-7-09; Ord. No. 120051, § 2, 9-6-12; Ord. No. 140495 , § 4, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-12. - Amendments to NFPA 1 Section 18.5.5 of the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
NFPA 1 Section 18.5.5 is amended by adding the following: 
When required, protective posts shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Be a minimum of three-inch diameter schedule 40 PVC or three-inch diameter steel pipe set in 36 inches depth of concrete at least 15 inches in diameter. The inside of the pipe shall be filled with solid concrete; 
b.  Be located at least three feet from the fire hydrant; 
c.  Extend above ground to a minimum of fire hydrant height; and 
d.  Be spaced a minimum of three linear feet to protect the fire hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 002251, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 080841, § 5, 5-7-09; Ord. No. 120051, § 3, 9-6-12; Ord. No. 140495 , § 5, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-13. - Amendments to NFPA 1 Section 18.4.5 of the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
NFPA 1 Section 18.4.5 is amended by adding the following: 
The Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) reserves the right to establish needed fire flow for structures not meeting the definition of a building in NFPA 1 Section 3.3.30 that based upon stock, supplies, equipment, or content, presents a significant fire suppression load. 
(Ord. No. 002251, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 080841, § 6, 5-7-09; Ord. No. 120051, § 4, 9-6-12; Ord. No. 140495 , § 6, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-14. - Firesafety board of adjustment. 
(a)  Firesafety board of adjustment. The firesafety board of adjustment is hereby authorized to hear appeals regarding application of the fire code and/or conflicts between the fire code and the building code. The board shall consist of five members appointed by the city commission who are qualified, to the greatest extent possible, by training and experience in building construction and firesafety standards. Each member shall be appointed for overlapping terms of three years and shall hold office until a successor has been appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant. 
(b)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of four members. A majority vote of the quorum present shall be required for the transaction of all business; however, a smaller number may adjourn a meeting. 
(c)  Meetings. The board shall meet at least quarterly and at such additional times as deemed necessary for the proper performance of its duties. 
(d)  Chair. The board shall annually elect a chair who shall serve in that capacity for a one-year term. 
(e)  Secretary. The fire official, or his/her authorized representative, shall act as secretary of the board. 
(f)  Decisions. 
(1)  Every decision of the board shall be final and binding on all persons, subject, however, to the authority of the state fire marshal or the Florida building commission pursuant to F.S. §§ 633.104, 553.76, and 553.77, and to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. All decisions of the local building official and local fire official and all decisions of the board shall be in writing and decisions by the board shall indicate the vote upon the decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in the office of the fire official and shall be open to public inspection; a certified copy shall be sent to appellant and a copy shall be kept in the office of the fire official. Decisions of general application shall be indexed by building and fire code sections and shall be available for inspection by the public during normal business hours. 
(2)  The board shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. The fire official and building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. 
(g)  Basis for decisions. An affected property owner or an affected property owner's duly authorized agent shall submit, in writing on such form as prescribed by the city, any notice of appeal within 30 days after the decision to be appealed is rendered. 
(1)  Application of fire code. An affected property owner or an affected property owner's duly authorized agent may appeal a decision of the fire official to the firesafety board of adjustment when such person claims that any of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The true intent of the fire code has been incorrectly interpreted; 
b.  The provisions of the fire code do not fully apply; or 
c.  The fire official's decision is unreasonable or arbitrary as it applies to alternatives or new materials. 
In deciding whether to affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the fire official as it relates to one of the above claims, the firesafety board of adjustment: 
a.  Shall ensure that the intent of the fire code is complied with and public safety is secured; 
b.  Shall not have authority to waive the requirements of the fire code; 
c.  May allow alternatives to specific requirements of the fire code if the use of alternative systems, methods, or devices provides equivalent or superior quality, strength, fire resistance, effectiveness, durability, and safety; and 
d.  May allow modifications to any of the provisions of the fire code if there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the provisions of the fire code, provided that the intent of the fire code is complied with and public safety secured. 
(2)  Conflict between fire code and building code. In the event of a conflict between the fire code and the building code as applied to a specific project, the conflict shall be resolved by agreement between the fire official and the building official in favor of the applicable code provision that offers the greatest degree of lifesafety or alternatives that would provide at least an equivalent degree of lifesafety and an equivalent method of construction. 
a.  If the fire official and the building official agree on a resolution of the conflict between the fire code and the building code, an affected property owner or an affected property owner's duly authorized agent may appeal the decision to the firesafety board of adjustment. The firesafety board of adjustment may alter the decision of the fire official and the building official only if the board determines that the decision is not reasonable. In such a case, the board shall resolve the conflict between the fire code and the building code in favor of the applicable code provision that offers the greatest degree of lifesafety or alternatives that would provide at least an equivalent degree of lifesafety and an equivalent method of construction. 
b.  If the fire official and the building official are unable to agree on a resolution of the conflict between the fire code and the building code, the firesafety board of adjustment shall resolve the conflict in favor of the code that offers the greatest degree of lifesafety or alternatives that would provide at least an equivalent degree of lifesafety and an equivalent method of construction. 
(Ord. No. 002251, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 130978, § 1, 9-18-14)  
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY ACCESS TO GATED DEVELOPMENTS AND RESTRICTED ACCESS OCCUPANCIES 
 
Sec. 10-15. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.] 
Emergency vehicle means any marked or unmarked police cars or vans, fire trucks, fire rescue vehicle, emergency rescue vehicles, fire staff vehicles, ambulances and ambulance staff vehicles, or city regional utility vehicles. 
Emergency vehicle access system means Opticom and compatible technology, or other emergency access technology approved by Gainesville Fire Rescue. 
Gated development means any residential or commercial development that may be fenced and has a secured gate at the roadway entrance to the facility preventing free access by the public. 
Residential development does not include individual homes or one- and two-family occupancies with individual gates. 
Restricted access occupancy means any multiple residential occupancy with interior corridors for access to the individual residential units and restricted access that prevents the general public from accessing the interior corridors. 
(Ord. No. 000863, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 140495 , § 7, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-16. - Uniform emergency access to gated developments and restricted access occupancies. 
(a)  Each new or existing residential or commercial development that has access limited by any gates that are not attended on a 24-hour basis, shall install an emergency vehicle access system as herein designated. 
(b)  Each new or existing restricted access occupancy that does not have a person on premises 24 hours a day to provide access shall install a Knox Box keyed with the City of Gainesville system code. 
(Ord. No. 000863, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 140495 , § 8, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-17. - Emergency access system. 
(a)  Equipment. An emergency access system shall consist of: 
(1)  An alarmed Knox Box, keyed with the City of Gainesville system code and containing a key to the building, that shall be affixed to the building in a location approved by the fire official; or 
(2)  Opticom and compatible technology or other emergency access technology approved by Gainesville Fire Rescue. 
(b)  Personnel. The fire official shall develop and administer procedures to assure the security of the emergency access system. 
(Ord. No. 000863, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 140495 , § 9, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-18. - Approval, maintenance and inspections. 
No security gate required to incorporate an emergency access system shall be installed prior to, or maintained absent, obtaining written certification from the fire official that it meets the requirements of this article. Each emergency vehicle access system shall be maintained in working condition at all times so that timely access by emergency vehicles is provided during an emergency. Authorized emergency personnel may conduct inspections at any reasonable time to insure reliable operation of a system. 
(Ord. No. 000863, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 140495 , § 10, 3-5-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 140495 , § 10, adopted March 5, 2015, repealed § 10-18 and renumbered the former §§ 10-19 and 10-20 as §§ 10-18 and 10-19 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. The former § 10-18 pertained to time for compliance and derived from Ord. No. 000863, § 1, adopted Sept. 9, 2002.  
Sec. 10-19. - Minimum access. 
The provisions of this article are intended to insure a minimum level of access for emergency vehicles and personnel during emergencies and shall not be construed to warrant or guarantee the safety of a gated development or restricted access occupancy during an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 000863, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 140495 , § 10, 3-5-15) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 10-18.  
Secs. 10-20—10-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FALSE ALARMS 
 
Sec. 10-30. - Short title. 
This article shall be referred to as the "City of Gainesville False Fire Alarm Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05)  
Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automated dialing device means a fire alarm system, which automatically sends, via telephone, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation. 
Cancellation of fire alarm response means the process by which a fire alarm company providing monitoring services verifies with the fire alarm operator or responsible party that there is not an existing situation at the fire alarm site requiring the fire department response and requests fire department officials to cancel the dispatch when such request occurs prior to the fire department's dispatch to the scene. 
Commercial premises means any structure or area not otherwise defined in this section as governmental or residential premises. 
Conversion means a transaction or process by which one fire alarm company begins monitoring and/or servicing either a previously unmonitored alarm system or a system previously monitored and/or serviced by another fire alarm company. 
Deactivated fire alarm means a fire alarm system that has the primary and secondary power and the phone line disconnected at the fire alarm control panel. 
Deterrent system means: 
(1)  Fire alarm pull station with associated audio alarm; 
(2)  Fire alarm pull station with associated ink identification; 
(3)  Fire alarm pull station with photo identification; 
(4)  Fire alarm pull station with associated video identification; 
(5)  Other fire alarm systems with malicious pull deterrent features approved as effective, after inspection by fire rescue department. 
(6)  Other fire alarm systems with malicious pull deterrent features, as described on the list of approved systems maintained by the fire rescue department. 
False fire alarm means a fire alarm dispatch or other response by the fire department, when the responding unit(s) find no evidence of a fire or attempted fire offense after having completed an investigation of the site. Excluded from this definition are: 
(1)  Fire alarms occurring as a result of lightning, wind, or other meteorological event, where there is clear evidence of physical damage to the fire alarm system verified by an alarm technician; or 
(2)  Disruption of the telephone circuit beyond the control of the fire alarm operator or its agents, verified by written communication from the telephone company; or 
(3)  An electrical power disruption or failure in excess of four hours. 
(4)  Fire alarm activations on property through a registered fire alarm pull station with two or more deterrent systems where one or more of the deterrent systems have been utilized. 
Fire alarm system means any device that emits, transmits or relays a signal intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon, fire department services to the fire alarm site. Fire alarm system does not include: 
(1)  A device installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is permanently located on the site; or 
(2)  A device designed to alert only the inhabitants of the device site, and that is not audible or visible from the exterior of the structure; or 
(3)  A device designed for a purpose other than to alert for fire. 
Fire alarm system contractor means a person licensed under F.S. ch. 489, as an electrical or fire alarm system contractor who installs, maintains, repairs, alters, services or monitors fire alarm systems for compensation. 
Fire alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the city manager to administer, control and review fire alarm applications, registrations and false fire alarm reduction efforts. 
Fire alarm monitoring company means a person or entity performing the service of monitoring as defined in F.S. ch 489, for fire alarms, and having customers within the City of Gainesville. 
Fire alarm operator means any owner, tenant or other person or entity that uses or is in control of a fire alarm system, including governmental entities. 
Fire alarm operator awareness class means a class conducted by the designated authority for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use and operation of alarm systems and problems created by false alarms. 
Fire alarm review authority means the city manager or designee. 
Fire alarm site means the individual location of each fire alarm system. 
Governmental premises means a structure or area owned and maintained by a government entity. 
Local fire alarm system means a fire alarm system that emits a signal at a fixed fire alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of the alarmed structure. 
Panic alarm means an audible or silent alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response. 
Registration year means the period starting from the date of issuance of a fire alarm registration and ending one year from that date. At the discretion of the city manager or designee, the registration year for the initial registration period may be not less than 12 months nor more than 24 months. 
Residential premises means any structure serving as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one person or by two or more persons who maintain a common household. 
Response fee means a fee charged by the city manager or designee when a fire response is determined by city manager or designee to be false. 
Takeover means a transaction or process by which a fire alarm company takes over control of an existing fire alarm system previously controlled by another fire alarm company. 
Verify means an attempt by the fire alarm monitoring company or its representative to contact the alarm site by telephone to determine the validity of the alarm. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 090529, § 1, 1-7-10; Ord. No. 150872 , § 1, 5-4-17)  
Sec. 10-32. - Alarm operator registration and fee. 
(a)  Except as otherwise proved under the definition of "registration year," every fire alarm operator shall annually apply to the fire alarm administrator for a nontransferable fire alarm operator registration. The operator registration shall be valid for one registration year and then expire. 
(b)  In accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A, a fee shall accompany each application or renewal for fire alarms on residential, commercial or governmental premises. The fee shall be proportionately adjusted for those operator registrations that have an initial period greater than one year. If an operator of a single-family residential has a valid permit for a burglar system, and the burglar alarm system and fire alarm system are a single integrated unit, then no separate fire alarm operator registration fee is required. One single fee as established at Appendix A shall suffice for both systems. The fire alarm administrator shall provide operator registration application forms that shall encompass both burglar alarm and fire alarm systems. 
(c)  The fire alarm operator shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant(s); 
(2)  The address of the fire alarm site; 
(3)  The classification of the fire alarm site as residential, commercial, governmental; 
(4)  The type of system(s), such as addressable; monitored; etc.; 
(5)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of two persons who have access to the premises, the ability to reset the alarm, and who, upon request of the fire department, will respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes of notification; 
(6)  The name, address, and telephone numbers of the fire alarm monitoring company, if any; 
(7)  The name, address, and telephone number of the installer and date of installation, if known; 
(8)  The name, address and telephone number of the commercial entity that last performed maintenance on the fire alarm system, if known; 
(9)  Any dangerous conditions present at the fire alarm site; 
(d)  No operator registration will be issued when a fine or fees are outstanding, when a reason for a previous operator registration revocation has not been corrected, or if the applicant provides false information. 
(e)  The fire alarm operator shall submit interim updated application information within 15 days of when the on-file information has changed. An operator registration may be revoked if it is found to contain inaccuracies. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 150872 , § 2, 5-4-17)  
Sec. 10-33. - False fire alarm fees and fines. 
(a)  Responsibility for false fire alarms shall be borne by the alarm operator. 
(b)  In accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A, fees shall be assessed or fines shall be levied for each false fire alarm per fire alarm site within one registration year. Only fines for responses will be dropped for attending the class. 
Additional fees shall be assessed for false fire alarms from a fire alarm system which has not been registered with the fire alarm administrator, or from a fire alarm system with a suspended or revoked operator registration, as established in Appendix A. Such fees will be reduced if an application of a fire alarm system is filed within ten days of the false fire alarm and an operator registration is issued within ten days thereafter. 
(c)  The fire alarm administrator will offer an alarm awareness class to fire alarm operators. Fire alarm operators may attend the class in lieu of paying one fee per registration year. 
(d)  After responding to a fire alarm, the city manager or designee shall leave written notice at the fire alarm site that the fire department has responded to a fire alarm. The notice shall include the identity of the fire officer, time of event, and the officer's determination as to whether the fire alarm was false. If the city manager or designee ascertains that the false fire alarm appears to be the result of an alarm system malfunction, the fire department, prior to leaving the premises, may issue a notification to the operator that the system must be serviced or repaired, and shall provide the operator with "Certification of Service/Repair" form which must be filled out by the service or repair personnel and returned by the occupant to within 15 business days. Failure to obtain and provide such documentation within the specified time period shall result in the assessment of a fee in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. Provision of timely documentation of service/repair shall cause the fee assessed for the false alarm to be reduced as provided in Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 150872 , § 3, 5-4-17)  
Sec. 10-34. - Suspension, revocation, or reinstatement of alarm operator registration. 
(a)  In addition to the assessment of fees or levy of fines as provided for in this article, the eighth false fire alarm response in a registration year shall result in a suspension of the fire alarm operator registration. 
(b)  A fee or fine that remains unpaid in excess of 30 days shall result in a suspension of the fire alarm operator registration. 
(c)  A suspension shall remain in effect until such time as: 
(1)  The fire alarm operator has taken action to remedy the causes of the false fire alarms; and 
(2)  The fire alarm administrator has reinstated the operator registration. 
(d)  During the period in which an operator registration is under suspension, the fee for all false alarm responses by the fire department will be in accordance with the fee prescribed in Appendix A. 
(e)  The fire alarm administrator may revoke a fire alarm operator registration if it is determined that: 
(1)  There is a false statement of a material matter in the operator registration application; or 
(2)  Ten or more false fire alarms have occurred from the fire alarm site within a permit year. 
(f)  A person whose fire alarm operator registration has been revoked may be issued a new operator registration if that person: 
(1)  Submits documentation from the fire alarm system contractor that services the fire alarm system that it is operating properly, or that the fire alarm operator has received training in the use of the system or both if applicable, written documentation from the alarm company is required; and 
(2)  Pays all fees assessed or fines issued to the person under this article; and 
(3)  Submits a new application, and pays a reinstatement fee in accordance with the fee schedule established in Appendix A. 
(g)  The fire alarm administrator shall give written notification to the fire alarm operator of a suspension, revocation, or reinstatement of the operator registration. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 150872 , § 4, 5-4-17)  
Sec. 10-35. - Appeals of fees, suspensions, and revocations. 
(a)  A fire alarm operator may appeal the assessment of a response fee, an operator registration suspension or revocation under this article. The fire alarm operator shall notify the fire alarm administrator in writing within ten business days of receipt of notice of fine, suspension or revocation that such fine, suspension or revocation is being appealed. Proper notification shall stay the imposition of a fee, suspension or revocation, until a decision is made by the fire alarm review authority. 
(b)  The fire alarm review authority shall conduct a hearing and consider evidence presented by the alarm operator and by other interested persons. The fire alarm review authority shall make a decision based on the preponderance of the evidence standard. The decision of the alarm review authority is the final administrative remedy for the city. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 150872 , § 5, 5-4-17)  
Sec. 10-36. - Response to fire alarm. 
(a)  The fire alarm operator or an authorized responder listed on the alarm registration shall respond to the fire alarm site within 30 minutes from the time of notification by the fire department of the activation of the fire alarm, whether false or not. The failure to respond, when requested by the fire department, shall be deemed a violation by the fire alarm operator, and fee shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule established in Appendix A. The fire alarm operator shall repair a fire alarm system that is not operating properly and shall establish a fire watch until repairs are completed and confirmed by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(b)  Unless the fire alarm monitoring company has verified the false fire alarm and has notified the fire department prior to dispatch, it shall be unlawful for an activated fire alarm system to be reset by any person prior to the arrival of a member of the fire department and the department's determination of the apparent cause of the alarm activation. The resetting of an activated false alarm shall be assessed with a fine in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 140495 , § 11, 3-5-15; Ord. No. 150872 , § 6, 5-4-17)  
Sec. 10-37. - Deactivation of audible alarms. 
The fire alarm operator shall not deactivate the fire alarm until either a false alarm is verified or a fire is extinguished and conditions are determined by the fire department to be safe. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05)  
Sec. 10-38. - Fire alarm monitoring companies. 
(a)  All fire alarm monitoring companies shall register annually with the fire alarm administrator. Each fire alarm monitoring company shall pay a fee in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A unless it is regulated by the department of business and professional regulation and has paid a local business tax for the current year to the county or municipality in the state where its permanent business location or branch office is maintained. Each monitoring company registration shall be valid for 12 months. Failure to register, or pay a fee, if applicable, shall result in a fine levied in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. 
(b)  The fire alarm monitoring company shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name, street address and telephone number of the fire alarm monitoring company; 
(2)  The names, street addresses and telephone numbers of all fire alarm operators contracted with within the territorial jurisdiction of this article; 
(3)  The procedure used to verify the legitimacy of a fire alarm prior to notification to the fire department; 
(4)  The name, street address and telephone number of the qualifying agent; and 
(5)  Updated customers' telephone numbers for responsible key holder. Must meet the 30-minute response time as provided in section 10-36. 
(c)  Upon registration, the fire alarm monitoring company shall be provided with a telephone number for use when reporting a fire alarm. 
(d)  Fire alarm monitoring companies shall maintain records relating to fire alarm notification for a period of at least two years, and shall provide such records to the fire alarm administrator upon request. 
(e)  Fire alarm monitoring companies shall monitor in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
(f)  Failure to comply with subsection (a), (b), (d) or (e) of this section shall result in a fine being levied in accordance with the schedule established at Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 070022, § 3, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 140495 , § 12, 3-5-15; Ord. No. 150872 , § 7, 5-4-17) 
State Law reference— Business organizations, F.S. § 489.511  
Sec. 10-39. - Fire alarm verification calls required. 
All fire alarm systems that have central monitoring shall have a central monitoring verification call made to the fire alarm site, prior to fire alarm monitor personnel contacting a fire department for fire alarm dispatch, or a fee shall be levied in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. If, however, the fire alarm has properly operating visual or auditory sensors that enable the monitoring company to verify the fire alarm signal, verification calling is not required. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 090529, § 2, 1-7-10)  
Sec. 10-40. - Fire alarm system contractors. 
(a)  All fire alarm system contractors shall register annually with the fire alarm administrator. Each fire alarm system contractor shall pay a fee in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A unless it is regulated by the department of business and professional regulation and has paid a local business tax for the current year to the county or municipality in the state where it's permanent business location or branch office is maintained. Each registration shall be valid for 12 months. Failure to register, or pay a fee if applicable, shall result in a fine levied in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. 
(b)  No person shall install, maintain, repair, alter, service or monitor fire alarm systems for compensation without being a licensed fire alarm system contractor in the State of Florida, or a fine shall be levied as established at Appendix A. 
(c)  All licensed fire alarm system contractors shall furnish each of its agents with identification cards in accordance with F.S. Ch. 489, or a fine shall be levied for each violation in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. 
(d)  Fire alarm system contractors shall install systems or equipment and use methods of installation that meet or exceed minimum Underwriters Laboratories or National Fire Protection Association 72 requirements for the appropriate installation and use control panels tested for conformance to the Security Industry Association's Control Panel Standard, or a fine shall be levied for each violation, in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. 
(e)  Fire alarm system contractors shall notify fire alarm operators of the need to register an unpermitted fire alarm upon installing, activating, reactivating, maintaining, repairing, altering or servicing an unregistered alarm system. 
(f)  Fire alarm contractors shall not cause a false alarm during the servicing, repairing, testing or inspection of an alarm system. The fire alarm operator shall not be charged with such false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 070022, § 3, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 140495 , § 13, 3-5-15; Ord. No. 150872 , § 8, 5-4-17)  
Sec. 10-41. - Prohibited fire alarm devices. 
It is unlawful for a person to operate a fire alarm system equipped with an automatic dialing device programmed to connect directly to the fire department or public safety combined communications center. All automatic dialing systems and radio systems shall communicate fire alarm notifications to a person who has accepted the responsibility of relaying the fire alarm or to a business licensed by the State of Florida to engage in the relaying of fire alarm notifications. A fine shall be levied in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A for violation of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 140495 , § 14, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-42. - Auxiliary power supply. 
A fire alarm operator shall not operate a fire alarm system which does not have a minimum 24-hour auxiliary power supply, or a fine in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A shall be levied for noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05)  
Sec. 10-43. - Civil citation; collection of fees. 
(a)  The fire officials and code enforcement officers may issue a civil citation for violations of subsections 10-33(b)(6); 10-38(a) and (d); 10-39; 10-40(b) through (e); 10-41 and 10-42. The citation shall be issued in accordance with chapter 2, article V, division 6, of this Code and F.S. § 162.21. 
(b)  In addition to other available remedies, any fee assessed or fines levied pursuant to this article that remains unpaid may be collected in accordance with the city policies regarding delinquent accounts. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05)  
Sec. 10-44. - Disposition of fees and fines. 
Fees and fines collected by the fire alarm review authority pursuant to this article shall first be applied to the administration of this article and then to the cost of responding to false fire alarms and for no other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 021198, § 1, 5-23-05)  
Secs. 10-45—10-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ASSEMBLY OCCUPANCY SAFETY 
 
Sec. 10-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assembly occupancy owner shall refer to the owner of the business providing direct services relating to the activities that occur within the building, and shall refer to the owner of the property that may have leased the structure to the individual owning the business. 
Crowd manager, as required by section 20.1.5.6, NFPA 1, means an individual who has successfully completed a crowd manager program, approved by the Gainesville Fire Rescue Department, and has obtained an official identification card. 
Fire department connection means a connection to the automatic sprinkler system or standpipe system of a structure that is utilized by fire rescue to provide additional water pressure for the system to work at capacity due to hose streams or inadequate supply. 
(Ord. No. 080841, § 7, 5-7-09; Ord. No. 120051, § 5, 9-6-12; Ord. No. 140495 , § 15, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-51. - Requirements for assembly occupancy owners and crowd managers. 
(a)  Each assembly occupancy owner shall ensure that a credentialed crowd manager is on duty when 50 or more individuals are present within a facility or special permitted area, and that an additional crowd manager(s) is on duty when an occupancy reaches 250 and for every additional 250 thereafter. Each assembly occupancy owner shall ensure that all crowd managers are equipped with the supplies listed within subsections (b) and (c) of this section, and shall ensure that the crowd manager(s) is ensuring compliance with subsections (d), (e), and (f) of this section. 
(b)  Each crowd manager on duty shall have a valid GFR Risk Reduction Bureau issued crowd manager identification card available on premises and a counting device for keeping track of the occupant load. 
(c)  Each crowd manager, designated by the assembly owner, shall ensure an accurate count of occupant load is maintained at all times the business is open to the public, for the purpose of preventing overcrowding. 
(d)  Each crowd manager, designated by the assembly owner, shall ensure all exits are open and free of obstruction. 
(e)  Each crowd manager, designated by the assembly owner, shall ensure a mechanism for alerting the crowd and providing evacuation instructions are operational and available for use. 
(f)  Each crowd manager, designated by the assembly owner, shall maintain an accurate crowd count to ensure that overcrowding does not occur. 
(Ord. No. 080841, § 7, 5-7-09; Ord. No. 120051, § 6, 9-6-12; Ord. No. 140495 , § 16, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-52. - Fire department connections. 
Assembly occupancies shall ensure the security of all fire department connections, utilizing an approved fire department connection securing device that prevents tampering, prevents debris from entering the sprinkler or standpipe system, and prevents the caps from theft. 
(Ord. No. 080841, § 7, 5-7-09; Ord. No. 120051, § 7, 9-6-12)  
Sec. 10-53. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 080841, § 7, 5-7-09)  
Secs. 10-54—10-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OPEN AND OUTDOOR BURNING 
 
Sec. 10-60. - Purpose. 
This article is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of Gainesville by regulating the air pollution and fire hazards of open burning and outdoor burning. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09)  
Sec. 10-61. - Applicability; exceptions. 
This article applies to all outdoor burning and open burning within the City of Gainesville, except the following: 
(a)  Grilling or cooking food using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances. 
(b)  The use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device that is third party tested and intended for heating, construction or maintenance activities. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 140495 , § 17, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-62. - Definitions. 
Clean wood means natural wood which has not been painted, varnished or coated with a similar material; has not been pressure treated with preservatives; and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products. 
Construction and demolition waste means building waste materials, including but not limited to waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated wood, painted wood, wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubble that results from construction, demolition operations on a house, commercial or industrial building, or other structure, remodeling, repair, and 
Fire chief means the Chief of Gainesville Fire Rescue or other person designated by the fire chief. 
Municipality means the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
Open burning means kindling or maintaining a fire where the products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or a chimney. This includes burning in a burn barrel. 
Outdoor burning means open burning or burning in an outdoor wood-fired boiler or patio wood burning unit. 
Outdoor wood-fired boiler means a wood-fired boiler, stove or furnace that is not located within a building intended for habitation by humans or domestic animals. 
Patio wood-burning unit means a chimney, patio warmer, or other portable wood-burning device used for outdoor recreation and/or heating. 
Prescribed burning means the burning, in compliance with a prescription and to meet planned fire or land management objectives, of a continuous cover of fuels. 
Prescription means a written plan establishing the criteria necessary for starting, controlling, and extinguishing a burn. 
Refuse means any waste material except trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves, grass clippings, and other vegetative matter. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 100840, § 1, 5-19-11)  
Sec. 10-63. - General prohibition on outdoor burning and open burning. 
Open burning and outdoor burning are prohibited in the City of Gainesville unless otherwise specifically permitted as provided by this article. Open burning of the following materials is expressly prohibited and shall not be permitted: 
(a)  Refuse and/or household garbage. 
(b)  Construction and demolition waste. 
(c)  Hazardous substances including but not limited to batteries, household chemicals, pesticides, used oil, gasoline, paints, varnishes, and solvents. 
(d)  Furniture and appliances. 
(e)  Tires. 
(f)  Any plastic materials including but not limited to nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic containers. 
(g)  Newspaper. 
(h)  Corrugated cardboard, container board, boxes, books, magazines, printed materials, or office paper. 
(i)  Treated or painted wood including but not limited to plywood, composite wood products or other wood products that are painted, varnished or treated with preservatives. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 100840, § 2, 5-19-11; Ord. No. 140495 , § 18, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-64. - Burning of trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves, and grass clippings. 
Except as may be authorized by F.S. Ch. 590 and Rule 51-2, Florida Administrative Code, open burning of trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves, and grass clippings is prohibited, except that commercial land clearing debris burning is permitted if, prior to the burn, an application is submitted with the appropriate fee and the Risk Reduction Bureau inspects the site and issues a burn permit with any necessary conditions. A permit may be terminated for noncompliance upon notice to the holder of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 140495 , § 19, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-65. - Agricultural burning. 
Open burning of weeds, brush, and crop stubble on agricultural lands is allowed if conducted in accordance with other applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09)  
Sec. 10-66. - Prescribed burning. 
Fires set for forest, prairie, and wildlife habitat management are allowed only if conducted in accordance with F.S. § 590.125 and Rule 51-2, Florida Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 140495 , § 20, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-67. - Outdoor wood-fired boilers. 
An outdoor wood-fired boiler may be installed and used in the City of Gainesville only in accordance with all of the following provisions: 
(a)  The owner of the outdoor wood-fired boiler shall obtain an annual permit from the fire chief in accordance with section 10-70(d) of this article provided the boiler is located at least 1,000 feet from the property line. 
(b)  The outdoor wood-fired boiler shall be located at least 500 feet from the nearest building which is not on the same property as the outdoor wood-fired boiler. 
(c)  The outdoor wood-fired boiler shall be installed and used only in an area zoned for agricultural use. 
(d)  The outdoor wood-fired boiler shall not be used to burn refuse. 
(e)  The outdoor wood-fired boiler shall have a chimney that extends at least 15 feet above the ground surface. If there are any residences within 500 ft, the chimney shall also extend at least as high above the ground surface as the height of the roofs of all such residences. The fire chief may approve a lesser height on a case-by-case basis if necessary to comply with manufacturer's recommendations and if the smoke from the lower chimney height does not create a hazard or other create a nuisance for neighboring property. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09)  
Sec. 10-68. - Patio wood-burning units. 
A patio wood-burning unit may be installed and used in the City of Gainesville only in accordance with the following provisions: 
(a)  The patio wood-burning unit shall not be used to burn refuse. 
(b)  The patio wood-burning unit shall burn only clean wood or a commercially prepared log product designed for outdoor burning. 
(c)  The patio wood-burning unit shall be located at least 25 feet from the nearest structure that is not on the same property as the patio wood-burning unit. 
(d)  The patio wood-burning unit shall not cause a hazard or otherwise create a nuisance to neighboring property. 
(e)  Commercially prepared log product shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 100840, § 3, 5-19-11; Ord. No. 140495 , § 21, 3-5-15)  
Sec. 10-69. - Fire suppression training. 
Notwithstanding section 10-63 of this article, structures and other materials may be burned for fire suppression training only in accordance with all of the following provisions. 
(a)  The burn must be exclusively for fire prevention training. The burning shall not be used as a means to dispose of waste material including tires and other hazardous materials. 
(b)  Any standing structure that will be used in a fire suppression training must be inspected and should be inspected by a licensed asbestos inspector. A notification of this inspection must be submitted to the state department of environmental protection, air quality division, at least ten business days prior to burning a standing structure. The notification must be submitted using form "Notification of Intent to Renovate/Demolish." 
(c)  All asbestos must be removed prior to conducting the fire suppression training. If the structure is a residential dwelling, the owner may remove the asbestos or have it removed by a licensed abatement contractor. If it is a commercial building, all asbestos must be removed by a licensed abatement contractor. 
(d)  All ash shall be disposed of in an approved landfill or at an alternate location approved by the state department of environmental protection. 
(e)  Asphalt shingles and asphalt or plastic siding shall be removed prior to the practice burn unless the fire chief determines that they are necessary for the fire practice. 
(f)  At least 48 hours before a planned practice burn, residents within 1,000 feet of the site of the proposed burn shall be notified. 
(g)  All fire suppression training should conform to the guidelines established by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard on Live Fire Training Evolutions (NFPA 1403). 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09)  
Sec. 10-70. - Burning permits. 
(a)  Except for burns conducted pursuant to valid authorization under F.S. Ch. 590 and Rule 5I-2, Florida Administrative Code, no person shall start or maintain any outdoor burning or open burning regulated under this article without a burning permit issued by the risk reduction bureau of the city fire rescue. 
(b)  Any person responsible for residential or commercial burning leaves, brush, clean wood or other vegetative debris under section 10-64 of this article shall obtain a one-time burning permit before starting the fire. The fee for each one-time burning permit shall be as set out in Appendix A, Schedule of Fees, Rates and Charges. 
(c)  The owner or occupant of the property shall obtain a burning permit for an outdoor wood-fired boiler before using the outdoor wood-fired boiler. The fee for each annual burning permit shall be as set out in Appendix A, Schedule of Fees, Rates and Charges. 
(d)  When weather conditions warrant, the fire chief or his designee may temporarily suspend issuing burning permits and may temporarily suspend previously issued burning permits for open and outdoor burning. 
(e)  A burning permit issued under this section shall require compliance with all applicable provisions of this article and any additional special restrictions deemed necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(f)  Any violation of the conditions of a burning permit shall be deemed a violation of this article. Any violation of this article or the burning permit shall void the permit. 
(1)  Any person who is notified that a burning permit has been voided may within five business days request a review by the fire chief, or designee, and present any information which demonstrates that this article or the terms of the permit were not violated. 
(2)  The fire chief, or designee, shall send notice of the determination by regular U.S. mail within three business days as to whether the voided permit has been reinstated. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 100840, § 4, 5-19-11)  
Sec. 10-71. - Pyrotechnic displays. 
Any person, business or group that engages in any pyrotechnic display shall require a one-time permit. The cost of the permit shall be as set out in Appendix A, Schedule of Fees, Rates and Charges. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09)  
Sec. 10-72. - Liability. 
A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage caused by the fire. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09)  
Sec. 10-73. - Right of entry and inspection. 
The fire chief or any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative of the city fire rescue department who presents credentials may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09)  
Sec. 10-74. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The fire chief and/or his or her designee, and any law enforcement officer with the city police department, are authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or governmental entity to engage open and/or outdoor burning without compliance with requirements of this article. 
(c)  Penalties. Violations of any section of this article may be enforced as provided in section 1-9 of this Code, or by civil citation as provided in sections 2-336 through 2-339 of this Code. Any person not in compliance with any section of this article shall be subject to the penalties designated in sections 1-9 or 2-339 of this Code. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense, which can be prosecuted separately. 
(Ord. No. 090326, § 1, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 100840, § 5, 5-19-11)  
Chapter 11 - FIRE SERVICES ASSESSMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of Ch. 11 by Ord. No. 070623, adopted June 9, 2008, section 6 of Ord. No. 3777, adopted June 10, 1992, repealed former Ch. 11, which pertained to flood control and consisted of §§ 11-1—11-13.1 and 11-15—11-17. Chapter 11 was derived from §§ 30-1—30-9 of the 1960 Code and the following ordinances: Ord. No. 3047, § 4, adopted Sept. 10, 1984; Ord. No. 3333, §§ 1—16, adopted Mar. 23, 1987; and Ord. No. 3657, §§ 3—8, adopted Sept. 17, 1990. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly otherwise requires: 
Annual rate resolution means the resolution described in section 11-38, establishing the rate at which a fire services assessment for a specific fiscal year will be computed. The final assessment resolution shall constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year in which a fire services assessment is imposed or reimposed. 
Assessed property means all parcels of land included on the assessment roll that receive a special benefit from the delivery of the fire services, programs or facilities identified in the initial assessment resolution or a subsequent preliminary rate resolution. 
Assessment roll means the special assessment roll relating to a fire services assessment approved by a final assessment resolution pursuant to section 11-36 or an annual rate resolution pursuant to section 11-38. 
Building means any structure, whether temporary or permanent, built for support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattel, or property of any kind, including mobile homes. This term shall include the use of land in which lot or spaces are offered for use, rent or lease for the placement of mobile homes, travel trailers, or the like for residential purposes. 
Certificate of occupancy means the written certification issued by the city that a building is ready for occupancy for its intended use. For the purposes of this chapter, a set up or tie down permit or its equivalent issued for a mobile home shall be considered a certificate of occupancy. 
City means the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
City clerk means the clerk of the city commission. 
City commission means the city commission of the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
City manager means the chief administrative officer of the city, designated by the city commission to be responsible for coordinating fire services assessments or such person's designee. 
County means Alachua County, Florida. 
Final assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 11-36 hereof which shall confirm, modify, or repeal the initial assessment resolution and which shall be the final proceeding for the initial imposition of fire services assessments. 
Fire services assessment means a special assessment lawfully imposed by the city commission against assessed property to fund all or any portion of the cost of the provision of fire services, facilities, or programs providing a special benefit to property as a consequence of possessing a logical relationship to the value, use, or characteristics of the assessed property. 
Fire services assessed cost means the amount determined by the city commission to be assessed in any fiscal year to fund all or any portion of the cost of the provision of fire services, facilities, or programs which provide a special benefit to assessed property, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following components: 
(1)  The cost of physical construction, reconstruction or completion of any required facility or improvement; 
(2)  The costs incurred in any required acquisition or purchase; 
(3)  The cost of all labor, materials, machinery, and equipment; 
(4)  The cost of fuel, parts, supplies, maintenance, repairs, and utilities; 
(5)  The cost of computer services, data processing, and communications; 
(6)  The cost of all lands and interest therein, leases, property rights, easements, and franchises of any nature whatsoever; 
(7)  The cost of any indemnity or surety bonds and premiums for insurance; 
(8)  the cost of salaries, volunteer pay, workers' compensation insurance, or other employment benefits; 
(9)  The cost of uniforms, training, travel, and per diem; 
(10)  The cost of construction plans and specifications, surveys, and estimates of costs; 
(11)  The cost of engineering, financial, legal, and other professional services; 
(12)  The cost of compliance with any contracts or agreements entered into by the city to provide fire services; 
(13)  All costs associated with the structure, implementation, collection, and enforcement of the fire services assessments, including any service charges of the tax collector, or property appraiser and amounts necessary to off-set discounts received for early payment of fire services assessments pursuant to the uniform assessment collection act or for early payment of fire services assessments collected pursuant to section 11-62; 
(14)  All other costs and expenses necessary or incidental to the acquisition, provision, or construction of fire services, facilities, or programs, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any related financing authorized by the city commission by subsequent resolution; 
(15)  A reasonable amount for contingency and anticipated delinquencies and uncollectible fire services assessments; and 
(16)  Reimbursement to the city or any other person for any moneys advanced for any costs incurred by the city or such person in connection with any of the foregoing components of fire services assessed cost. 
In the event the city also imposes an impact fee upon new growth or development for fire services related capital improvements, the fire services assessed cost shall not include costs attributable to capital improvements necessitated by new growth or development that will be paid by such impact fees. The fire services assessed cost shall also not include costs for the provision of emergency medical services by the city. 
Fiscal year means that period commencing October 1st of each year and continuing through the next succeeding September 30th, or such other period as may be prescribed by law as the fiscal year for the city. 
Initial assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 11-32 which shall be the initial proceeding for the identification of the fire services assessed cost for which an assessment is to be made and for the imposition of a fire services assessment. 
Maximum assessment rate means the highest rate of a fire services assessment established by the city commission in an initial assessment resolution or preliminary rate resolution and confirmed by the city commission in the final assessment resolution or annual rate resolution. 
Ordinance means the fire services assessment ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Owner shall mean the person reflected as the owner of assessed property on the tax roll. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, organization, corporation, association, or any other legal entity, whether singular or plural, masculine or feminine, as the context may require. 
Preliminary rate resolution means the resolution described in section 11-38 initiating the annual process for updating the assessment roll and directing the reimposition of fire services assessments pursuant to an annual rate resolution. 
Property appraiser means the Alachua County Property Appraiser. 
Tax collector means the Alachua County Tax Collector. 
Tax roll means the real property ad valorem tax assessment roll maintained by the property appraiser for the purpose of the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes. 
Uniform Assessment Collection Act means F.S. §§ 197.3632 and 197.3635, or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of non-ad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(1.01), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-2. - Interpretation. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, words importing the singular number include the plural number, and vice versa; the terms "hereof," "hereby," "herein," "hereto", "hereunder," and similar terms refer to this chapter; and the term "hereafter" means after, and the term "heretofore" means before, the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. Words of any gender include the correlative words of the other genders, unless the sense indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(1.02), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-3. - General findings. 
It is hereby ascertained, determined, and declared that: 
(1)  Pursuant to Article VIII, section 2(b), Florida Constitution, the Charter Laws of the City of Gainesville, a special act of the Laws of Florida, and F.S. §§ 166.021 and 166.041, the city commission has all powers of local self government to perform municipal functions and to render municipal services in a manner not inconsistent with law, and such power may be exercised by the enactment of City ordinances. 
(2)  The city commission may exercise any governmental, corporate, or proprietary power for a municipal purpose except when expressly prohibited by law, and the city commission may legislate on any subject matter on which the Florida Legislature may act, except those subjects described in of F.S. § 166.021(3) (a), (b), (c), and (d). The subject matter of F.S. § 166.021(3)(a), (b), (c), and (d), are not relevant to the imposition of assessments related to fire services, facilities or programs of the city. 
(3)  The purpose of this chapter is to: 
a.  Provide procedures and standards for the imposition of citywide fire services assessments under the general home rule powers of a municipality to impose special assessments; 
b.  Authorize a procedure for the funding of fire services, facilities, or programs providing special benefits to property within the city; and 
c.  Legislatively determine the special benefit provided to assessed property from the provision of the city's fire services. 
(4)  The annual fire services assessments, to be imposed using the procedures provided in this chapter, shall constitute non-ad valorem assessments within the meaning and intent of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(5)  The fire services assessments to be imposed using the procedures provided in this chapter are imposed by the city commission, not the Alachua County Board of County Commissioners, property appraiser or tax collector. The duties of the property appraiser and tax collector under the provisions of this chapter and the Uniform Assessment Collection Act are ministerial. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(1.03), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-4. - Legislative determinations of special benefit. 
It is hereby ascertained and declared that the fire services, facilities, and programs provide a special benefit to property because fire services possess a logical relationship to the use and enjoyment of property by: 
(1)  Protecting the value and integrity of the improvements and structures through the provision of available fire services; 
(2)  Protecting the life and safety of intended occupants in the use and enjoyment of property; 
(3)  Lowering the cost of fire insurance by the presence of a professional and comprehensive fire program within the city; and 
(4)  Containing the spread of fire incidents occurring on unimproved property with the potential to spread and endanger the structures and occupants of improved property. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(1.04), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-5. - Applicability. 
This chapter and the city commission's authority to impose assessments pursuant hereto shall be applicable throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(4.01), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-6. - Alternative method. 
(a)  This chapter shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized hereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing or which may hereafter come into existence. This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the inhabitants of the city, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall preclude the city commission from directing and authorizing, by resolution, the combination with each other of: 
(1)  Any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper, necessary, or convenient by the city; 
(2)  Any notice required by this chapter; or 
(3)  Any notice required by law, including the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(4.02), 6-9-08)  
Secs. 11-7—11-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANNUAL FIRE SERVICES ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 11-31. - General authority. 
(a)  The city commission is hereby authorized to impose an annual fire services assessment to fund all or any portion of the fire services assessed cost upon benefited property at a rate of assessment based on the special benefit accruing to such property from the city's provision of fire services, facilities, or programs. All fire services assessments shall be imposed in conformity with the procedures set forth in this article. 
(b)  The amount of the fire services assessment imposed in a fiscal year against a parcel of assessed property shall be determined pursuant to an apportionment methodology based upon a classification of property designed to provide a fair and reasonable apportionment of the fire services assessed cost among properties on a basis reasonably related to the special benefit provided by fire services, facilities, or programs funded with assessment proceeds. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.01), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-32. - Initial proceedings. 
The initial proceeding for the imposition of a fire services assessment shall be the adoption of an initial assessment resolution by the city commission: 
(1)  Containing a brief and general description of the fire services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(2)  Determining the fire services assessed cost to be assessed; 
(3)  Describing the method of apportioning the fire services assessed cost and the computation of the fire services assessment for specific properties; 
(4)  Establishing an estimated assessment rate for the applicable fiscal year; 
(5)  Establishing a maximum assessment rate, if desired by the city commission; and 
(6)  Directing the city manager to: 
a.  Prepare the initial assessment roll, as required by section 11-33; 
b.  Publish the notice required by section 11-34; and 
c.  Mail the notice required by section 11-35 using information then available from the tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.02), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-33. - Initial assessment roll. 
(a)  The city manager shall prepare, or direct the preparation of, the initial assessment roll, which shall contain the following: 
(1)  A summary description of all assessed property conforming to the description contained on the tax roll. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the assessed property. 
(3)  The amount of the fire services assessment to be imposed against each such parcel of assessed property. 
(b)  The initial assessment roll shall be retained by the city manager and shall be open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the assessment roll be in printed form if the amount of the fire services assessment for each parcel of property can be determined by use of a computer terminal available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.03), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-34. - Notice by publication. 
(a)  Upon completion of the initial assessment roll, the clerk of the city commission shall publish, or direct the publication of, once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice stating that at a meeting of the city commission on a certain day and hour, not earlier than 20 calendar days from such publication, which meeting shall be a regular, adjourned, or special meeting, the city commission will hear objections of all interested persons to the final assessment resolution which shall establish the rate of assessment and approve the aforementioned initial assessment roll. 
(b)  The published notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Such notice shall include: 
(1)  A geographic depiction of the property subject to the fire services assessment; 
(2)  A brief and general description of the fire services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(3)  The rate of assessment including a maximum assessment rate in the event one was adopted; 
(4)  The procedure for objecting provided in section 11-36; 
(5)  The method by which the fire services assessment will be collected; and 
(6)  A statement that the initial assessment roll is available for inspection at the office of the city manager and all interested persons may ascertain the amount to be assessed against a parcel of assessed property at the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.04), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-35. - Notice by mail. 
(a)  In addition to the published notice required by section 11-34, the city manager shall provide notice, or direct the provision of notice, of the proposed fire services assessment by first class mail to the owner of each parcel of property subject to the fire services assessment. 
(b)  Such notice shall include: 
(1)  The purpose of the fire services assessment; 
(2)  The rate of assessment to be levied against each parcel of property, including a maximum assessment rate in the event one was adopted; 
(3)  The unit of measurement applied to determine the fire services assessment; 
(4)  The number of such units contained in each parcel of property; 
(5)  The total revenue to be collected by the city from the fire services assessment; 
(6)  A statement that failure to pay the fire services assessment will cause a tax certificate to be issued against the property or foreclosure proceedings to be instituted, either of which may result in a loss of title to the property; 
(7)  A statement that all affected owners have a right to appear at the hearing and to file written objections with the city commission within 20 days of the notice; and 
(8)  The date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(c)  The mailed notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Notice shall be mailed at least 20 calendar days prior to the hearing to each owner at such address as is shown on the tax roll. Notice shall be deemed mailed upon delivery thereof to the possession of the United States Postal Service. The city manager may provide proof of such notice by affidavit. Failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a fire services assessment imposed by the city commission pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.05), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-36. - Adoption of final assessment resolution. 
(a)  At the public hearing as noticed pursuant to sections 11-34 and 11-35, or to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken by the city commission, the city commission shall receive any oral or written objections of interested persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the city commission adopt the final assessment resolution which shall: 
(1)  Confirm, modify, or repeal the initial assessment resolution with such amendments, if any, as may be deemed appropriate by the city commission; 
(2)  Establish the rate of assessment to be imposed in the upcoming fiscal year; 
(3)  Establish a maximum assessment rate that may be imposed in the event such rate was adopted; 
(4)  Approve the initial assessment roll, with such amendments as it deems just and right; and 
(5)  Determine the method of collection. 
(b)  The adoption of the final assessment resolution by the city commission shall constitute a legislative determination that all parcels assessed derive a special benefit from the fire services, facilities, or programs to be provided or constructed and a legislative determination that the fire services assessments are fairly and reasonably apportioned among the properties that receive the special benefit. 
(c)  All written objections to the final assessment resolution shall be filed with the city manager at or before the time or adjourned time of such hearing. The final assessment resolution shall constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year in which fire services assessments are imposed or reimposed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.06), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-37. - Effect of final assessment resolution. 
The fire services assessments for the initial fiscal year shall be established upon adoption of the final assessment resolution. The adoption of the final assessment resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit and fair apportionment to the assessed property; the method of apportionment and assessment; the initial rate of assessment; the maximum assessment rate, if any; the initial assessment roll; and the levy and lien of the fire services assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the city commission action on the final assessment resolution. The initial assessment roll, as approved by the final assessment resolution, shall be delivered to the tax collector, as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in section 11-62 is used to collect the fire services assessments, such other official as the city commission by resolution shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.07), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-38. - Adoption of annual rate resolution. 
(a)  The city commission shall adopt an annual rate resolution during its budget adoption process for each fiscal year following the initial fiscal year for which a fire services assessment is imposed hereunder. 
(b)  The initial proceedings for the adoption of an annual rate resolution shall be the adoption of a preliminary rate resolution by the city commission: 
(1)  Containing a brief and general description of the fire services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(2)  Determining the fire services assessed cost to be assessed for the upcoming fiscal year; 
(3)  Establishing the estimated assessment rate for the upcoming fiscal year; 
(4)  Establishing or increasing a maximum assessment rate, if desired by the city commission; 
(5)  Authorizing the date, time, and place of a public hearing to receive and consider comments from the public and consider the adoption of the annual rate resolution for the upcoming fiscal year; and 
(6)  Directing the city manager to: 
a.  Update the assessment roll; 
b.  Provide notice by publication and first class mail to affected owners in the event circumstances described in subsection (f) of this section so require; and 
c.  Directing and authorizing any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper, necessary or convenient by the city. 
(c)  The annual rate resolution shall (1) establish the rate of assessment to be imposed in the upcoming fiscal year and (2) approve the assessment roll for the upcoming fiscal year with such adjustments as the city commission deems just and right. The assessment roll shall be prepared in accordance with the method of apportionment set forth in the initial assessment resolution, or any subsequent preliminary rate resolution, together with modifications, if any, that are provided and confirmed in the final assessment resolution or any subsequent annual rate resolution. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall preclude the city commission from providing annual notification to all owners of assessed property in the manner provided in sections 11-34 and 11-35 or any other method as provided by law. 
(e)  The city commission may establish or increase a maximum assessment rate in an initial assessment resolution or preliminary rate resolution and confirm such maximum assessment rate in the event notice of such maximum rate assessment has been included in the notices required by sections 11-34 and 11-35. 
(f)  In the event (1) the proposed fire services assessment for any fiscal year exceeds the rates of assessment adopted by the city commission including a maximum assessment rate, if any, that were listed in the notices previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 11-34 and 11-35, (2) the purpose for which the fire services assessment is imposed or the use of the revenue from the fire services assessment is substantially changed from that represented by notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 11-34 and 11-35, (3) assessed property is reclassified or the method of apportionment is revised or altered resulting in an increased fire services assessment from that represented by notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 11-34 and 11-35, or (4) an assessment roll contains assessed property that was not included on the assessment roll approved for the prior fiscal year, notice shall be provided by publication and first class mail to the owners of such assessed property as provided by law. Such notice shall substantially conform with the notice requirements set forth in sections 11-34 and 11-35 and inform the owner of the date, time, and place for the adoption of the annual rate resolution. The failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a fire services assessment imposed by the city commission pursuant to this chapter. 
(g)  As to any assessed property not included on an assessment roll approved by the adoption of the final assessment resolution or a prior year's annual rate resolution, the adoption of the succeeding annual rate resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented as to such assessed property (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit and fair apportionment to the assessed property, the method of apportionment and assessment, the rate of assessment, the establishment or increase of a maximum assessment rate, the assessment roll, and the levy and lien of the fire services assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the city commission action on the annual rate resolution. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to affect the finality of any fire services assessment not challenged within the required 20-day period for those fire services assessments previously imposed against assessed property by the inclusion of the assessed property on an assessment roll approved in the final assessment resolution or any subsequent annual rate resolution. 
(h)  The assessment roll, as approved by the annual rate resolution, shall be delivered to the tax collector as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in section 11-62 is used to collect the fire services assessments, such other official as the city commission by resolution shall designate. if the fire services assessment against any property shall be sustained, reduced, or abated by the court, an adjustment shall be made on the assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.08), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-39. - Lien of fire services assessments. 
Upon the adoption of the assessment roll, all fire services assessments shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims, until paid. The lien for a fire services assessment shall be deemed perfected upon the city commission's adoption of the final assessment resolution or the annual rate resolution, whichever is applicable. The lien for a fire services assessment collected under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act shall attach to the property included on the Assessment Roll as of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the tax roll. The lien for a fire services assessment collected under the alternative method of collection provided in section 11-62 shall be deemed perfected upon the city commission's adoption of the final assessment resolution or the annual rate resolution, whichever is applicable, and shall attach to the property on such date of adoption. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.09), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-39.1. - Economic hardship program. 
(a)  There is hereby created an economic hardship program to assist residential property owners. The city commission, in its sole discretion, shall determine on an annual basis whether to fund a program of hardship assistance to city residents who are living below or close to the poverty level and are at risk of losing title to their homes as a result of the imposition of the fire services special assessment. 
(b)  On an annual basis the city commission shall designate the funds available to provide any hardship assistance. The provision of hardship assistance in any one year shall in no way establish a right or entitlement to such assistance in any subsequent year and the provision of funds in any year may be limited to the extent funds are available and appropriated by the city commission. Any funds designated for hardship assistance shall be paid by the city from funds other than those generated by the fire services special assessment. 
(c)  The city manager shall establish guidelines and administer the hardship program. 
(Ord. No. 100244, § 1, 9-16-10)  
Sec. 11-40. - Revisions to fire services assessments. 
If any fire services assessment made under the provisions of this chapter is either in whole or in part annulled, vacated, or set aside by the judgment of any court, or if the city commission is satisfied that any such fire services assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the city commission has failed to include or omitted any property on the assessment roll, which property should have been so included, the city commission may take all necessary steps to impose a new fire services assessment against any property benefited by the fire services assessed costs, following as nearly as may be practicable, the provisions of this chapter and in case such second fire services assessment is annulled, vacated, or set aside, the city commission may obtain and impose other fire services assessments until a valid fire services assessment is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.09), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-41. - Procedural irregularities. 
Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any fire services assessment under the provisions of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any fire services assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such fire services assessment was duly levied, that the fire services assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings adequate to such fire services assessment were duly had, taken, and performed as required by this chapter; and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.10), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-42. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(a)  No act of error or omission on the part of the property appraiser, tax collector, city manager, city commission, or their deputies or employees, shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment of a fire services assessment imposed by the city commission under the provision of this chapter. 
(b)  When it shall appear that any fire services assessment should have been imposed under this chapter against a parcel of property specially benefited by the provision of fire services, facilities, or programs, but that such property was omitted from the assessment roll; or such property was erroneously assessed; or was not listed on the tax roll as an individual parcel of property as of the effective date of the assessment roll approved by the annual rate resolution for any upcoming fiscal year, the city commission may, upon provision of a notice by mail provided to the owner of the omitted or erroneously assessed parcel in the manner and form provided in section 11-35, impose the applicable fire services assessment for the fiscal year in which such error or omission is discovered, in addition to the applicable fire services assessment due for the prior two fiscal years. Such fire services assessment shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims in and to or against the real property involved, shall be collected as provided in Article III of this chapter, and shall be deemed perfected on the date of adoption of the resolution imposing the omitted or delinquent assessments. 
(c)  Prior to the delivery of the assessment roll to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the city manager shall have the authority at any time, upon his or her own initiative or in response to a timely filed petition from the owner of any property subject to a fire services assessment, to reclassify property based upon presentation of competent and substantial evidence, and correct any error in applying the fire services assessment apportionment method to any particular parcel of property not otherwise requiring the provision of notice pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any such correction shall be considered valid ab initio and shall in no way affect the enforcement of the fire services assessment imposed under the provisions of this chapter. All requests from affected property owners for any such changes, modifications or corrections shall be referred to, and processed by, the city manager and not the property appraiser or tax collector. 
(d)  After the assessment roll has been delivered to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, any changes, modifications, or corrections thereto shall be made in accordance with the procedures applicable to correcting errors and insolvencies on the tax roll upon timely written request and direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.12), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-43. - Interim assessments. 
(a)  An interim fire services assessment may be imposed against all property for which a certificate of occupancy is issued after the adoption of the annual rate resolution. The amount of the interim fire services assessment shall be calculated upon a monthly rate, which shall be one-twelfth of the annual rate for such property computed in accordance with the annual rate resolution for the fiscal year for which the interim fire services assessment is being imposed. Such monthly rate shall be imposed for each full calendar month remaining in the fiscal year. In addition to the monthly rate, the interim fire services assessment may also include an estimate of the subsequent fiscal year's fire services assessment. 
(b)  Issuance of the certificate of occupancy without the payment in full of the interim fire services assessment shall not relieve the owner of such property of the obligation of full payment. Any interim fire services assessment not collected prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act as provided in section 11-61 of this chapter, under the alternative collection method provided in section 11-62 or by any other method authorized by law. 
(c)  Any interim fire services assessment shall be deemed due and payable on the date the certificate of occupancy was issued and shall constitute a lien against such property as of that date. Said lien shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved and shall be deemed perfected upon the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(2.13), 6-9-08)  
Secs. 11-44—11-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION AND USE OF FIRE SERVICES ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 11-61. - Method of collection. 
(a)  Unless otherwise directed by the city commission, the fire services assessments shall be collected pursuant to the uniform method provided in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and the city shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any hearing or notice required by this chapter may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act or other provision of law. 
(b)  The amount of a fire services assessment to be collected using the uniform method pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act for any specific parcel of benefited property may include an amount equivalent to the payment delinquency, delinquency fees and recording costs for a prior year's assessment for a comparable service, facility, or program provided: 
(1)  The collection method used in connection with the prior year's assessment did not employ the use of the uniform method of collection authorized by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; 
(2)  Notice is provided to the owner as required under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; and 
(3)  Any lien on the affected parcel for the prior year's assessment is supplanted and transferred to such fire services assessment upon certification of a non-ad valorem roll to the tax collector by the city. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(3.01), 6-9-08)  
Sec. 11-62. - Alternative method of collection. 
In lieu of using the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the city commission may elect to collect the fire services assessments by any other method which is authorized by law or under the alternative collection method provided by this section: 
(1)  The city manager shall provide fire services assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of property that is subject to the fire services assessment. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
a.  A brief explanation of the fire services assessment; 
b.  A description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the fire services assessment; 
c.  The number of units contained within the parcel; 
d.  The total amount of the fire services assessment imposed against the parcel for the appropriate period; 
e.  The location at which payment will be accepted; 
f.  The date on which the fire services assessment is due; and 
g.  A statement that the fire services assessment constitutes a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. 
(2)  The city commission shall have the right to foreclose and collect all delinquent fire services assessments in the manner provided by law for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property or appoint or retain an agent to institute such foreclosure and collection proceedings. A fire services assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date payment was due, as identified in accordance with subsection (1)f. of this section. The city manager or his or her designee shall notify any property owner who is delinquent in payment of his or her fire services assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state in effect that the city manager or his or her designee will either (1) initiate a foreclosure action or suit in equity and cause the foreclosure of such property subject to a delinquent fire services assessment in a method now or hereafter provided by law for foreclosure of mortgages on real property, or (2) cause an amount equivalent to the delinquent fire services assessment, not previously subject to collection using the uniform method under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, to be collected on the tax bill for a subsequent year. 
(3)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any foreclosure action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the city may be the purchaser to the same extent as any person. The city manager or his or her designee may join in one foreclosure action the collection of fire services assessments against any or all property assessed in accordance with the provisions hereof. All delinquent owners whose property is foreclosed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city and its agents, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent fire services assessments and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent fire services assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(4)  In lieu of foreclosure, any delinquent fire services assessment and the costs, fees and expenses attributable thereto, may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided however, that (1) notice is provided to the owner in the manner required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and this chapter, and (2) any existing lien of record on the affected parcel for the delinquent fire services assessment is supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of the assessment roll, as applicable, to the tax collector. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the city commission's use of an alternative method of collection, the city manager shall have the same power and authority to correct errors and omissions as provided to the city manager or other city officials in section 11-42. 
(Ord. No. 070623, § 1(3.02), 6-9-08)  
Chapter 11.5 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; cemeteries, Ch. 7; housing, Ch. 13; noise, Ch. 15; nuisances, Ch. 16; vending booths, § 19-91 et seq.; garbage and refuse disposal, § 27-71 et seq.; water and sewerage, § 27-96 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11.5-1. - Availability of potable water. 
Potable water must be available without charge upon request of patron, guests and invitees at all buildings, structures, or parts of buildings or structures that have an assembly (Group A) occupancy, as that term is defined in the building code, and that are not otherwise required by the building code to have, or do not have, one or more drinking fountains. The water may come from a water cooler, sink, or in individual bottles or cans. If water is not available from a drinking fountain, but is available from a water cooler or sink, free unused disposable or clean cups must also be made available. If water is not available from a drinking fountain, but is available in bottles or cans, the seal of the bottle or can must not be broken at the time it is given to the patron, guest or invitee. 
(Ord. No. 990697, § 1, 1-10-00)  
Secs. 11.5-2—11.5-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 130679 , §§ 1 and 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2014, repealed Art. II and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. II, §§ 11.5-16—11.5-26, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3070, § 1(4A-1—4A-8), adopted Nov. 5, 1984, and Ord. No. 3147, § 1, adopted July 15, 1985. 
Cross reference— Miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 14.5. 
 
Sec. 11.5-16. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to limit the use of nicotine dispensing devices to the areas where the use of lighted tobacco products is allowed pursuant to state law. 
Regulation of indoor smoking of lighted tobacco products is preempted to the state in F.S. Ch. 386, and the delivery to and possession of nicotine dispensing devices by a minor is prohibited in F.S. § 877.112. However, regulation of where the use of nicotine dispensing devices by adults is allowed is not preempted to the state. The city finds that it is in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare to further regulate the use of nicotine dispensing devices within the city. 
(Ord. No. 130679 , § 2, 11-20-14; Ord. No. 150406 , § 1, 3-16-17)  
Sec. 11.5-17. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings given herein: 
Liquid nicotine means any liquid product composed either in whole or part of pure nicotine and other substances and manufactured for use with nicotine dispensing devices. 
Nicotine dispensing device means any nicotine dispensing device as defined in F.S. § 877.112. 
Nicotine product means nicotine product as defined in F.S. § 877.112. 
Smoking means smoking as defined in F.S. § 386.203. 
Use of a nicotine dispensing device means the activation, heating or ignition of a nicotine dispensing device which creates a vapor of liquid nicotine and/or other substances which the user can inhale in simulation of smoking. 
(Ord. No. 130679 , § 2, 11-20-14)  
Sec. 11.5-18. - Use of a nicotine dispensing device where smoking prohibited; penalty. 
(1)  The use of a nicotine dispensing device is prohibited at all locations within the city at which smoking is prohibited under F.S. Ch. 386. 
(2)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties of section 2-339. 
(Ord. No. 130679 , § 2, 11-20-14)  
Secs. 11.5-19—11.5-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INCIDENT COST RECOVERY 
 
Sec. 11.5-27. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Hazardous Material Incident Cost Recovery Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 980747, § 1, 7-12-99)  
Sec. 11.5-28. - Authority. 
The city has the authority to adopt this article pursuant to and in accordance with the provision of F.S. Chs. 166 and 252. 
(Ord. No. 980747, § 1, 7-12-99)  
Sec. 11.5-29. - Intent and purpose. 
This article is intended to provide for recovery by the city of costs incurred in the response and recovery efforts related to hazardous material incidents. This article is also intended to provide for recovery of costs incurred by entities other than the city, which are requested by the city to assist during a hazardous material incident. In addition, it is intended to provide for cost recovery for damages to government-owned properties. 
(Ord. No. 980747, § 1, 7-12-99)  
Sec. 11.5-30. - Rules of construction. 
The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 980747, § 1, 7-12-99)  
Sec. 11.5-31. - Definitions. 
Cost(s) shall mean and include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  All costs incurred for response, containment and/or removal and disposal of hazardous materials or initial remedial action. 
(2)  Costs of any health assessment or health effects study and related treatment carried out for responding personnel as a necessity resulting from a hazardous material incident. 
(3)  Labor, including benefits, overtime and administrative overhead, exclusive of normal departmental operations. 
(4)  The cost of operating, leasing, maintaining, repairing, and replacement where necessary of any equipment. 
(5)  Contract labor and equipment. 
(6)  Materials, including but not limited to, absorbents, foam, dispersants, overpack drums, or containers. 
(7)  Supervision of clean up and abatement. 
(8)  Labor and equipment obtained directly by the city, their agencies or agents, and other agencies. 
(9)  A fee as set forth in Appendix A for the use of a basic air monitoring device when an abnormal value is identified in the atmosphere or substance. The fee represents a portion of the cost associated with replacement of the sensors within the basic air monitoring device. 
Fire chief shall mean the chief of the fire department or fire district that responded to a hazardous material incident. 
Hazardous material shall mean any substance or material in any form or quantity that poses an unreasonable risk to safety, health, or property. 
Hazardous substance shall mean any material which when discharged may be harmful to the public health or welfare, including, but not limited to, fish, shellfish, wildlife, and public or private property, shorelines and beaches. 
Hazardous material incident shall mean actual or threatened release of hazardous substances or materials that pose an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the population, including hazardous waste. 
Incident commander shall mean the senior fire official at the site of the hazardous material incident; or the initial senior on-scene response official in the absence of the senior fire official; or a unified command structure which delegates control to officials from more than one agency. 
Release shall mean any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the environment (including the abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers, and other receptacles containing any hazardous material or substance or waste or pollutant or contaminant). 
Response shall mean a phase of emergency management that occurs during and immediately following an incident. Provides emergency assistance to victims of the event and reduces the likelihood of secondary damage. 
Responsible party shall mean the person(s) whose negligent or intentional act or omission caused a release; or, the person(s) who owned or had custody or control of, the hazardous substance or waste at the time of such release without regard to fault or proximate cause; or, the person(s) who owned or had custody or control of the container which held the hazardous substance at the time of or immediately prior to such release without regard to fault or proximate cause. "Responsible party" may also include a corporation or partnership, facility, or other type of business entity. 
(Ord. No. 980747, § 1, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 130196, § 2, 9-19-13)  
Sec. 11.5-32. - Hazardous materials incidents liability for costs. 
The incident commander or fire chief is hereby duly authorized to take all reasonable measures to respond to and stabilize the hazardous material incidents. Any responsible party who causes a hazardous material incident shall be liable to the city for the payment of all reasonable direct costs incurred in response to, stabilization of, and any necessary monitoring of such an incident. 
The city will seek all available remedies at law including the provisions of this article, against any parties responsible for any hazardous material incident, to include those actions and remedies available under the United States Bankruptcy Code relating to such matters. 
(Ord. No. 980747, § 1, 7-12-99)  
Sec. 11.5-33. - Collection and disbursement of funds for cost recovery. 
The city fire rescue department shall serve as the city's agent for collecting invoices and billing the responsible party for costs. Agencies of the city or organizations responding to a hazardous material incident according to the responsibilities set forth in the LEPC Region 3 Hazardous Materials Response Plan or at the request of the city, will be eligible to submit bills. 
Invoices that identify eligible costs under this article shall be submitted to the fire chief or designee within ten working days after the costs were incurred or identified. Submitted invoices should include sufficient documentation for cost reimbursement (i.e., copies of time sheets for specific personnel, copies of bills for materials, equipment, and supplies procured or used, etc.). Accepting invoices from agencies outside the city shall not incur liability to the city to pay costs from such agencies until payment has been received by the city from the responsible party. 
The fire chief or his designee shall submit one or a series of consolidated invoice(s) to the responsible party identifying agencies or agents and their specific costs for reimbursement. The responsible party shall issue a certified check to the city within 60 days of receiving any invoice. All funds received under the authority of this article shall be disbursed according to the claims submitted. Where the reimbursement is less than the requested amount, each agency shall receive a pro rate share of such reimbursement as the agencies reimbursable costs bear to the total reimbursable cost. The city shall not be liable to the agency for any deficiency. 
(Ord. No. 980747, § 1, 7-12-99)  
Sec. 11.5-34. - Supervision. 
In the event that any person(s) undertakes, upon order or direction of the incident commander or fire chief, to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous material unlawfully released into the environment, the incident commander or fire chief may take any action necessary to supervise such cleanup or abatement. The person(s) described in section 11.5-32 of this article shall be liable to the city for all costs incurred as a result of such supervision except when a federal, state or other governmental agency is supervising or abating any such release, unless the incident commander or fire chief is requested by any such agency to take action. 
(Ord. No. 980747, § 1, 7-12-99)  
Sec. 11.5-35. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the requirements or provisions of this article are in conflict with the requirements or provisions of any other lawfully adopted ordinance, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
Further, this article shall not restrict or replace cost recovery from funding sources available under state and federal regulations such as the revolving fund established under Section 311 (K) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1321 k); the Hazardous Substance Response Trust Fund established under Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (42 USC 9611); and the Florida Coastal Protection Trust Fund established under F.S. Ch. 376. 
(Ord. No. 980747, § 1, 7-12-99)  
Secs. 11.5-36—11.5-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESTRICTION OF OUTDOOR SMOKING AT CERTAIN CITY FACILITIES AND CITY PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 150406, § 2, adopted March 16, 2017 , amended article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article IV, §§ 11.5-40—11.5-43, pertained to restriction of outdoor smoking at a city facility and at RTS Bus Stops and Bus Shelters. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 11.5-40. - Purpose and definitions. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate outdoor smoking at city facilities and property. Outdoor smoking at city facilities and property is a danger to health and is a material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort, and health hazard to employees and patrons. This article does not regulate indoor smoking, as stated in section 11.5-16, the regulation of indoor smoking is preempted to the state by F.S. Ch. 386. 
Bus and vehicle shall mean a bus or motor vehicle operated by RTS for the purpose of transporting passengers. 
Bus facility shall mean any designated place where a RTS bus stops to pick up or let off passengers, including bus stops, bus shelters, transfer stations and terminal stations. Bus facilities may be designated by the placement of a sign or bench. 
City parks are those areas listed in chapter 18 of the City Code and any other areas officially designated by the city commission as a park and posted as such. 
Smoke or smoking shall mean the intake and exhalation by a person of smoke from tobacco, a tobacco substitute or other weed or plant, and also possessing, carrying, holding or otherwise having control of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or other lighted smoking equipment. In addition, for purposes of this article, smoke or smoking shall include the use of a nicotine dispensing device as defined in section 11.5-17. 
(Ord. No. 150406 , § 2, 3-16-17)  
Sec. 11.5-41. - Prohibition of smoking at or around all RTS bus facilities. 
(1)  A person shall not smoke outdoors at or within 20 feet of any RTS bus facility; however, the city manager may designate up to ten percent of the total area of a large bus facility such as the Rosa Parks RTS Downtown Station or Butler Plaza Station as a smoking permitted area with signs that delineate the boundaries of the area and state that smoking is permitted in such area. Nothing herein requires the city manager to designate a smoking permitted area. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to pedestrians, drivers or passengers of a motor vehicle, non-motorized vehicle, or bicycle on a public street, sidewalk or thoroughfare while actively passing on the way to another destination. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to persons who are within 20 feet of a bus facility while lawfully occupying private real property. 
(4)  This section is supplemental and in addition to the prohibitions of smoking near school property as provided in F.S. § 386.212. 
(Ord. No. 150406 , § 2, 3-16-17)  
Sec. 11.5-42. - Prohibition of smoking in city parks. 
A person shall not smoke outdoors within a city park. 
(Ord. No. 150406 , § 2, 3-16-17)  
Sec. 11.5-43. - Posting of no smoking signs. 
(1)  The city manager or designee is authorized to install appropriate signage in all locations that smoking is prohibited. 
(2)  Such signage shall consist of "No Smoking" or "Smoke Free" signs with letters not less than one inch in height, or the international "No Smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it. 
(Ord. No. 150406 , § 2, 3-16-17)  
Sec. 11.5-44. - Penalties. 
The provisions of this article IV, may be enforced by civil citation as provided in chapter 2, article V, division 6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 150406 , § 2, 3-16-17)  
Chapter 13 - HOUSING AND COMMERCIAL BUILDING CODES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 990442, § 1, adopted Aug. 28, 2000, changed the title of Ch. 13 from "Housing" to "Housing and Commercial Building Codes." 
Cross reference— Department of community development, § 2-211 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; equal access to places of public accommodations, § 8-66 et seq.; fair housing, § 8-86 et seq.; health and sanitation, Ch. 11.5; state housing initiatives partnership program, Ch. 14; nuisances, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 23; utilities, Ch. 27; land development code, Ch. 30; dormitories and roominghouses, § 30-100; subdivisions, § 30-180 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR FENCES AND WALLS 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this division: 
Fence shall mean a barrier constructed of materials other than masonry, including without limitation, wood, metal, PVC or vinyl, erected for the purpose of protection, confinement, enclosure or privacy. The term "fence" does not include natural barriers, such as, but not limited to, trees, hedges or shrubs. 
Material(s) of professional grade shall mean materials that are manufactured for use in a fence or wall. 
Wall shall mean a barrier constructed, in whole or part, of masonry, including without limitation, stone, brick, block or concrete, for the purpose of protection, confinement, enclosure or privacy. 
(Ord. No. 060630, § 1, 10-2-08; Ord. No. 100198, § 1, 7-21-11)  
Sec. 13-2. - Construction and maintenance. 
(a)  Construction. 
(1)  The construction of a wall requires a building permit and is subject to the applicable codes and review procedures of the building department. 
(2)  All fences and walls shall be constructed of uniform, durable, weather-resistant materials of professional grade. Fences constructed of wood shall be treated to resist wood-destroying organisms. Fences constructed of metal, except galvanized metal, shall have a colored finish coat and be treated to resist rust and corrosion. 
(3)  Fences and walls shall be constructed in a safe, sturdy, workmanship-like manner. Horizontal and vertical support posts shall be placed facing the inside of the fenced area, except where the fence is designed such that both sides are finished with alternating vertical fence supports. 
(4)  No fence or wall may be constructed in a location or manner that obstructs the vision triangle (as defined in section 30-341 of the city land development code). 
(5)  The requirements of this section are minimum requirements and shall not be construed to supersede any fence or wall requirements in the City Code of Ordinances or in state law, such as height limitations or material requirements in the city land development code or specific requirements for fencing around swimming pools. 
(b)  Maintenance. 
(1)  All fences and walls shall be maintained upright and in good condition. For purposes of this section, upright shall mean no vertical structural member shall list or lean to such an extent that a normally vertical structural member shall be more than two inches out of plumb in ten feet or less of vertical distance. For purposes of this section, in good condition means without missing, broken, chipped or cracked elements. 
(2)  Missing elements shall be repaired or replaced with material of professional grade of the same type and quality as the existing fence or wall. 
(Ord. No. 060630, § 1, 10-2-08; Ord. No. 100198, § 2, 7-21-11)  
Sec. 13-3. - Prohibited fences. 
(a)  Fences that are constructed, in whole or in part, of razor wire or barbed wired or similar materials are prohibited in residential zoning districts (as classified in section 30-41 of the city land development code.) 
(b)  Fences that are constructed of cloth, fabric or other similar materials, are prohibited; except that such materials of professional grade may be used as a privacy screening in conjunction with a permanent fence or wall. 
(c)  Temporary fences are prohibited; except that temporary fences constructed of materials of professional grade used to protect construction and excavation sites or to protect plants during grading and construction, are allowed for the duration of an active building permit for the fenced site. 
(Ord. No. 060630, § 1, 10-2-08)  
Sec. 13-4. - Nonconformities. 
Except for fences prohibited by section 13-3, fences on which construction has commenced and walls for which a valid active permit has been issued, on or before October 2, 2008 at 11:59 p.m. and do not conform to the construction requirements in section 13-2(a) shall be allowed to remain until destroyed or removed, in whole or in part; provided such non-conforming fence or wall otherwise complies with the maintenance requirements in section 13-2(b). Following destruction or removal, in whole or in part, of any non-conforming fence or wall, any replacement wall or fence shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 060630, § 1, 10-2-08)  
Sec. 13-5. - Administration and enforcement. 
The administration and enforcement of this article shall be in accordance with Division 2, Administration and Enforcement of Article II, Housing Code. 
(Ord. No. 060630, § 1, 10-2-08)  
DIVISION 2. - GRAFFITI ABATEMENT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 13-6. - Title, purpose and findings. 
(a)  Title. This division shall be known as the "The Gainesville Graffiti Abatement Program." 
(b)  Purpose. The city commission of the City of Gainesville is enacting this program to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the abatement of graffiti from public and private property. The commission does not intend for this program to conflict with any existing anti-graffiti state laws. 
(c)  Finding. The commission finds that the unauthorized application of graffiti is both a public nuisance and destructive of the rights and values of property owners. Accordingly, the city is taking action to encourage and facilitate the reporting and abatement of graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 100198, § 3, 7-21-11)  
Sec. 13-7. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advance authorization, for purposes of this article, shall mean authorization that is made in writing by the owner, and filed with the city manager or designee, before the writing, marking, etching, scratching, spraying, drawing, painting, or engraving occurs. 
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance, and which is visible to the public or from public streets, sidewalks, or properties that are open to the public. 
Graffiti abatement or abatement of graffiti means the effective elimination and removal of the graffiti. 
Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or human-made surface. 
Owner means a property owner or the property owner's designated agent unless otherwise specified. 
Person means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 100198, § 3, 7-21-11)  
Sec. 13-8. - Removal of graffiti. 
Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the city or private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be done so as to eliminate and remove the graffiti in a manner prescribed by the city manager or designee. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the elimination and removal of the graffiti. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this section, punishable as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian shall also be responsible for such removal or for the payment for the removal. If the person applying the graffiti fails to eliminate and remove the graffiti as prescribed herein, the city may eliminate and remove the graffiti and the city's costs and expenses shall be charged against that person. 
(Ord. No. 100198, § 3, 7-21-11)  
Sec. 13-9. - Reporting of graffiti. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall establish a program to encourage and facilitate the reporting of graffiti or suspected graffiti by property owners, city or county employees, or citizens. 
(1)  This graffiti reporting program shall incorporate reporting by electronic means, such as E-mail, or a web based form on the internet, or both, in addition to written reports. 
(2)  This graffiti reporting program will allow an option for anonymous reporting. 
(b)  The city manager or designee shall establish a program to encourage and facilitate the reporting of information leading to the identity of the person applying the graffiti, which information shall be forwarded for any warranted follow-up investigation by law enforcement. 
(1)  This graffiti reporting program shall incorporate reporting by electronic means, such as E-mail, or a web based form on the internet, or both. 
(2)  This graffiti reporting program will allow an option for anonymous reporting, but shall caution this may limit the ability to perform any follow-up investigation. 
(Ord. No. 100198, § 3, 7-21-11)  
Sec. 13-10. - Graffiti on city property. 
After receipt of notification of the presence of graffiti, and verification thereof, on property of the City of Gainesville, the city manager or designee shall either: 
(1)  Act to abate the graffiti within 24 hours of notification; or 
(2)  Arrange for abatement of the graffiti to be performed by an authorized community based organization, or by a contractor to the city or by city employees, within ten days of notification, and further arrange for verification that said abatement has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 100198, § 3, 7-21-11)  
Sec. 13-11. - Graffiti on other government property. 
After receipt of notification of the presence of graffiti, and verification of same, on property within the City of Gainesville and owned by Alachua County, the State of Florida, the United States of America, or any other governmental body or entity, the city manager or designee shall notify the responsible governmental entity, and either: 
(1)  Request abatement of the graffiti by that entity within five business days; or 
(2)  Offer to provide abatement services, and upon agreement by the entity, facilitate abatement of the graffiti by the authorized community based organization, and/or by a contractor to the city, within ten days of notification, and to further arrange for verification that said abatement has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 100198, § 3, 7-21-11)  
Sec. 13-12. - Graffiti on private property—Notice to owner and reply by owner. 
After receipt of notification of the presence of graffiti on private property and verification of the presence of said graffiti, the city manager or designee shall notify the owner that there is graffiti on the property, by providing written notice to the property owner. 
(a)  Notice delivery. Said notice shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  The notification shall be provided by delivering or posting a written notice to the property on which, or at which, the graffiti is located. The notification shall be personally served on the owner or the owner's designated agent if present, or placed on the main entrance door. 
(2)  In addition, if notice has not been effected by personal delivery to the owner or the owner's designated agent, notice shall be delivered by first-class mail to the owner of the property at the address listed on the tax rolls of Alachua County, Florida. 
(b)  Notice and reply contents. Said notice shall include a space or method to reply, where the owner may advise the city manager or designee that the owner: 
(1)  Denies that there is graffiti on the property; or 
(2)  Authorizes the city manager or designee to arrange for abatement of the graffiti, including permission to enter the property after notice and to either clean up or paint over the graffiti. Said consent shall include recognition that the city, any authorized community based programs, or any city contractors who remove or cover up the graffiti may utilize donated or surplus paint, and cannot guarantee color matching; or 
(3)  Will abate the graffiti within 24 hours after the date of the notice. 
(c)  Failure to reply. A failure to timely reply to the notice within ten calendar days of the date of the mailing of the notice shall be deemed to be consent for entry upon the property and abatement of the graffiti by: 
(1)  An authorized and designated city employee; or 
(2)  A community based program authorized by the city to provide such services; or 
(3)  A contractor authorized and provided by the city to provide such services. 
(d)  False statements—Penalty. The making of a false statement in the response to a notification of the presence of graffiti shall be a violation of this code, punishable as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 100198, § 3, 7-21-11)  
Sec. 13-13. - Failure of owner to abate graffiti. 
If the owner elects in their response pursuant to section 13-12(b)(3) to eliminate and remove the graffiti, but fails to do so within the time period as set forth, this shall be deemed to be consent for entry upon the property and abatement of the graffiti by: 
(1)  An authorized and designated city employee; or 
(2)  A community based program authorized by the city to provide such services; or 
(3)  A contractor authorized and provided by the city to provide such services. 
(Ord. No. 100198, § 3, 7-21-11)  
Secs. 13-14, 13-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 2-376 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-16. - Findings of fact and declaration of necessity. 
The city commission finds the following: 
(1)  Existence of conditions. Premises exist within the city containing blighted dwellings or other structures intended for human habitation, and such dwellings or other structures are blighted because of faulty design or construction or failure to keep them in a proper state of repair or lack of proper sanitary facilities or lack of adequate heat, light or ventilation, or improper management or any combination of these factors as a result of which such buildings or structures have become deteriorated, dilapidated, neglected, overcrowded with occupants or unsanitary as to be unfit for human habitation, thereby imperiling the health, safety or welfare of the occupants thereof or the inhabitants of the surrounding area. 
(2)  Results if conditions uncorrected. Such blighted premises, dwellings and other blighted buildings or other structures contribute to the development of, or increase in, disease, infant mortality, crime and juvenile delinquency; conditions existing on such blighted premises cause a drain upon public revenue and impair the efficient and economical exercise of governmental functions in such areas; and conditions existing on such blighted premises necessitate excessive and disproportionate expenditure of public funds for public health, public safety, crime prevention, fire protection and other public services. 
(3)  Necessity to protect public health, safety and welfare. The enactment of this chapter is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the city by establishing minimum standards governing the facilities, utilities, occupancy, repair and maintenance of buildings and grounds used for human habitation. This chapter is declared to be remedial and essential to the public interest and welfare, and to this extent it is intended that this housing code be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes stated herein. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-1; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-1), 1-7-85)  
Sec. 13-16.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 040025, § 15, adopted Aug. 22, 2005, repealed § 13-16.1 in its entirety. Former § 13-16.1 pertained to residential smoke detectors and derived from Ord. No. 3601, § 1, adopted Mar. 5, 1990.  
Sec. 13-17. - Buildings affected. 
Every portion of a building or premises, used or intended to be used as a dwelling, shall comply with the provisions of this article, irrespective of when the building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired, except where specifically exempt as stated in this article, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-2; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-2), 1-7-85; Ord. No. 040025, § 1, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 13-18. - Conflicts resolved; conditional provisions for higher standard to prevail; quality of work. 
In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, fire, safety or health ordinance or other code provision of this city, the provision which establishes the higher standards for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. All work or repairs performed as required in this chapter shall be performed in a neat and professional manner. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-3; Ord. No. 040025, § 2, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 13-19. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, words, phrases and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit" and "premises" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by words "or any part thereof." 
Accessory building shall mean a separate building or structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building on the same lot. 
Abandoned vehicle shall mean any vehicle, which appears to be incapable of safe operation under its own power upon public street. It is rebuttably presumed that a vehicle is abandoned if it does not have a current motor vehicle registration tag properly attached. 
Agent shall mean a representative of an owner who performs any services for the owner with respect to the real estate of the owner. 
Approved shall mean any system, structure or equipment that is designed and/or plans sealed by an engineer or architect, or that meets the requirements of the standard building trade codes adopted by the city. 
Basement shall mean a portion of any dwelling located partly underground, but having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
Building shall mean any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." 
Cellar shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, having one-half or more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
Common area/public areas as used in this Code, means an unoccupied open space inside or adjoining a building and on the same property, that is permanently maintained accessible to the fire department and all occupants and free of all encumbrances that might interfere with its use by the fire department. 
Decay-resistant woods shall mean those woods that are known to be resistant to moisture and insect damage because of their natural properties, such as cypress, redwood and preservative-treated lumber. 
Dwelling shall mean any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living, eating or sleeping by human occupants, whether or not the building is occupied or vacant; provided, that temporary housing, as defined in this section, shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
Dwelling unit shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, whether or not the unit is occupied or vacant. 
Extermination shall mean control and extermination of insects, rodents or other pests by elimination thereof. 
Foundation systems shall mean those structural members of a building consisting of piers, sills, girders, joists, concrete slabs or any other members designed and used to support a building, upon, in or under the ground. 
Habitable room shall mean a room or enclosed floor space, used or intended to be used for living, sleeping or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, kitchens, foyers or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces. 
Hazard (hazardous) shall mean any condition, substance or material which has or creates a reasonably serious potential for harm to a building, its occupants or the general public. 
Infestation shall mean the presence within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or other pests. 
Letter of commencement shall mean a letter provided by the city manager or designee to the code enforcement officer responsible for the inspection of a given dwelling. The letter states when action on the case begins so the code enforcement officer has reason to halt enforcement. 
Letter of completion shall mean a letter provided by the city manager or designee to the code enforcement officer responsible for the inspection of a given dwelling. The letter states when action is completed on the house and reinspection for completion of work or to carry out the remaining code enforcement action is required. 
Major, multiple-minors, minor violations. 
(1)  Major violation shall mean a defect existing on a premises that is immediately dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or passersby, or persons in contiguous areas. 
(2)  Multiple-minors. Five or more minor violations on a single dwelling unit and/or premises constitute a multiple-minor violation. The multiple-minor will then be acted upon as a major violation until abatement; except the time given for correcting the violations on the notice of violation shall be not less than 30 days nor more than 120 days. Abatement of a multiple-minor violation includes reducing the number of minor violations to four or less. 
(3)  Minor violation shall mean a defect on the premises that is not an immediate hazard but if allowed to remain unrepaired will potentially cause a hazard or further property deterioration. 
All defects of the same kind shall be included as one violation (e.g., two broken windows constitute only one violation). 
Occupant shall mean an individual living in a dwelling unit for more than 30 days or an individual living in a dwelling unit by any implied lease or express agreement. 
Occupancy shall mean the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes. 
Openable area shall mean that part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
Order, written shall mean the status assumed by a notice of violation, order to vacate or order to demolish, upon its expiration date, at which time it has become a misdemeanor for the occupancy/owner to fail to correct the violation cited. 
Outdoor storage shall mean the storage, keeping, maintaining or allowing the existence of merchandise, building materials, wood, junk, trash, debris or similar items outside of a completely enclosed building. 
Owner shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple and any person, individual, association, firm, corporation, partnership, bodies politic and corporation and groups or combinations thereof in show name tax bills on the property are submitted. It shall also mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title, to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner, executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owner, mortgagee or vendee in possessions, or assignee of rents, lessee, or other person, firm or corporation in control of a building, or their duly authorized agents. 
Plumbing shall mean the practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: Sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and the public or private water-supply systems, within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of stormwater, and water-supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public or other acceptable means of disposal. 
Premises shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon. 
Registered domestic partner means a person in a relationship as provided in Article VIII of Chapter 2 of this Code. 
Repair shall mean the replacement of existing work with the same or equivalent kind of material used in the existing work, not including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change required existing facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or heating installations, or that would be in violation of a provision of law or ordinance. The term "repair" or "repairs" shall not apply to any change of the structural systems. 
Rooming house shall mean any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, or registered domestic partner, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner. 
Rooming unit shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
Rubbish shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. 
Sleeping room shall mean a habitable room used continuously or occasionally for the purpose of sleeping. This room must meet more stringent requirements for purposes of safety. 
Stairway shall mean one or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story to another in a building or structure. 
Story shall mean that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. 
Structure shall mean that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definitive manner. The term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." 
Supplied shall mean paid for, furnished or provided by or under control of the owner. 
Temporary housing shall mean tents, campers, plastic or tarpaper leanto's and similar structures of a temporary nature not meeting the requirements of this Code. 
Vehicle shall mean a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-4; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-4), 1-7-85; Ord. No. 3483, §§ 1, 2, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 020375, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 040025, § 3, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 080439, §§ 5, 6, 11-20-08) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-20. - Occupancy of dwellings, rooming units, etc., containing major violations. 
(a)  No owner shall let for occupancy by any person other than the owner of any premises, any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit which contains major violations as defined in this division. For additional procedures, see section 13-41(c). 
(b)  Any persons who shall fail to comply with subsection (a) above after a notice of violation of the provisions of this article becomes an order, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-9. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1960, §§ 15A-5, 15A-6)  
Secs. 13-21—13-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 13-36. - Administrative liability. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to set the standard between the city and its employees. No officer, agent or employee of the city shall himself/herself become personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the proper discharge of duties under this article. 
(b)  Any suit brought against an officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the proper discharge of his/her duties under this article shall be defended by the city at no cost or expense to the employee until the final determination of the proceedings therein. The city shall pay any judgment against an employee who has correctly discharged his/her duties. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-9; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-9), 1-7-85)  
Sec. 13-37. - Designation of enforcing official; powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the enforcing official. The city manager may designate one or more subordinates who shall be charged with the duty of administering the applicable standards of this article and securing compliance therewith, and carrying out all other duties as specified by this Code. In furtherance of this responsibility, the enforcing official shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with housing-related boards in studies of housing conditions in the city; 
(2)  Make such routine area inspections, investigate complaints of alleged violations of the provisions of this article and take such actions as specified in this article as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes and intent and gain compliance with this housing code; 
(3)  Maintain a record of the disposition of all such inspections and complaint investigations and of the actions taken in regard to violations of this article. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-7; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-7), 1-7-85)  
Sec. 13-38. - Authorization and procedure for inspections. 
The enforcing official is authorized to enter and make inspections of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses and rooming units at reasonable times during daylight hours, to determine their condition in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public, when the inspections are part of an area-wide, systematic inspection routine or are based on reasonable cause to believe a violation of this article exists. The enforcing official is also authorized to apply for search warrants when permission to search is refused by the owner or occupant. Written notice of the enforcing official's intention to inspect shall be issued and mailed to the owner or his/her agent, as well as the occupant of the premises, if the premises are not occupied by the owner, at least seven calendar days before the inspection except in an emergency, or for an inspection not requiring entry onto the premises, or for a reinspection after a notice of violation has been issued but not abated, or for an inspection made upon the owner's or occupant's request. Such notice shall state the date and time of the inspection and identify the person making same. If the inspection is authorized by search warrant, the notice shall so state. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-8; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-8), 1-7-85)  
Sec. 13-39. - Procedure in handling minor violations. 
Whenever the enforcing official determines that a minor violation (see section 13-19 for definition) of this article exists, he/she shall take action as follows: 
(1)  Give written notice of the violation to the occupants and/or owners. 
(2)  The notice shall include: 
a.  A description of the location of the structure involved, either by street address or legal description; 
b.  A statement indicating the nature of the violation and the reason or reasons why the notice of violation is issued; 
c.  A specification of the section or sections of this article upon which the notice of violation is based; 
d.  If repairs or alterations will bring the structure into compliance with this article, a statement of the nature and extent of such repairs or alterations necessary to comply with this article; and 
e.  A statement that the violation, if it is uncorrected and becomes a major violation, could result in the city performing the required repairs and obtaining a lien on the property. 
(3)  The written notice of violation referred to in subsections (1) and (2) above shall in all cases be served upon the owner, as well as upon the occupant of the premises, if the premises are not occupied by the owner. Such service shall be deemed complete if personally delivered or upon sending same by regular mail to the last known address of the owner as shown on the tax rolls of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-10; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-10), 1-7-85)  
Sec. 13-40. - Procedures in handling major violations. 
Whenever the enforcing official determines that a major violation of this article or article III exists, he/she shall take action as follows: 
(1)  Give written notice of the violation as described in subsection (3) below. 
(2)  The notice shall include: 
a.  A description of the location of the structure involved, either by street address or legal description; 
b.  A statement indicating the nature of the violation and the reason or reasons why the notice of violation is issued; 
c.  A specification of the section or sections of this chapter upon which the notice of violation is based; 
d.  If repairs or alterations will bring the structure into compliance with this article, a statement of the nature and extent of such repairs or alterations necessary to comply with this article; 
e.  If repairs or alterations are necessary for compliance, a specification of time for performing such repairs, such time to be not less than 15 nor more than 120 days, except as noted in the definition of "letter of commencement" in section 13-19, depending on the extent of the needed repairs, and the degree of danger to the occupants, if any. When the violation is of such a magnitude that there exists an immediate threat to the safety and well being of the occupants, the enforcing official may allow less than 15 days as a minimum time period for compliance. Such determination of imminence shall be confirmed by the city manager or designee prior to the specification of time of performance of less than 15 days by the enforcing official; 
f.  If the violation is of such character that repairs or alterations cannot reasonably bring the structure into compliance, a statement to this effect and an order for vacating of the premises indicating fully the reasons therefor; 
g.  The name or names of persons upon whom the notice of violation is served as required by subsection (3) and this subsection; 
h.  A statement advising that upon the owner's failure to comply with the notice, the city may perform or cause to be performed the repairs, alterations, demolition or vacation of the premises involved and that the expense of such performance by the city shall be, and the same shall constitute, a lien against the property involved; 
i.  A statement advising of procedures available for review of the action of the enforcing official as set out in division 3 of this article. 
(3)  The written notice of violation referred to in subsections (1) and (2) above shall in all cases be served upon the owner or his/her agent, as well as upon the occupant of the premises, if the premises are not occupied by the owner. Such service shall be deemed complete if personally delivered or upon sending same by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner as shown on the tax rolls of the city, and by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(4)  The enforcing official shall endorse on the copies of the written notice, the date, time and manner of service of the notice or notices as is hereby required. 
(5)  A written notice of a major violation becomes an order when no petition for review of the decision of the enforcing official has been taken or when the petition for review has been taken and the decision of the enforcing official has not been reversed. 
(6)  When a notice of a major violation becomes an order and the order is not complied with, the enforcing official may take any of the actions authorized by this article to execute or seek compliance with the order. 
(7)  At any time after the issuance of a notice of major violation the code enforcement procedure may be temporarily halted (rehabilitation halt) while consideration is being given to the owner by the city manager or designee for qualification for funds and/or actual rehabilitation of the unit in violation with the following qualifications: 
a.  A letter of commencement will be given to the enforcing official which will temporarily halt enforcement action; 
b.  A letter of release from liability will be signed by the person in control of the property and submitted to the enforcing official with the letter of commencement; 
c.  A letter of completion will be given to the enforcing official upon completion of services (whether or not assistance was given); 
d.  Upon receipt of the letter of completion, code enforcement action will commence from the point it was halted; 
e.  After a period of six months code enforcement activity will continue without further notice unless a second letter of commencement and liability is issued to the enforcing official. At no time will the rehabilitation halt extend past 12 months. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-11; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-11), 1-7-85; Ord. No. 040025, § 4, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 13-41. - Execution of orders. 
Notices which become orders may be executed in the following manner: 
(1)  Notices to repair or to demolish. The enforcing official may cause the required repairs or demolition to be done, bill the owner for the full cost thereof and request that the city commission place a lien on the property for the work accomplished. 
(2)  Notices to vacate. The enforcing official may request that the city attorney apply to the appropriate court for an order requiring the vacation of the premises. 
(3)  Letting of premises in violation. The enforcing official may request that the city attorney apply to the appropriate court for an order enjoining the letting of premises in major violation of this article to any person other than the owner thereof for occupancy. The enforcing official may also request that the state attorney prosecute any person who lets such premises, for occupancy, to any person other than the owner. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-12)  
Sec. 13-42. - Assessing liens. 
(a)  Billing and notice. Promptly after completion of any repairs, alterations or vacation accomplished by the city under authority of this article, the enforcing official shall cause the owner to be billed for the cost of the work, including labor, materials, administrative costs, court costs, legal expenses and title searches. The bill shall be served upon the owner by delivery to him/her personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at his/her last known address as shown on the city tax rolls. If the bill is not paid within 30 days following such service, the owner shall be notified of the enforcing official's intention to apply for a special assessment against the property. The notice shall: 
(1)  Describe the premises involved, either by legal description or street address; 
(2)  Describe the nature of the work done thereon and state the amount for which a special assessment is sought; 
(3)  Specify the date on which the city commission will hold a public hearing for the purpose of making a special assessment against the property for the cost of the work done thereon, and advise the owner of his/her right to be heard on any matter pertaining to the proposed special assessment; and 
(4)  Be served on the owner not less than ten days prior to the date set for the hearing, in the same manner as set forth above in this section. 
(b)  Hearing. At the hearing, the enforcing official shall report to the city commission on the nature of the work accomplished, the cost of the work, and the service of the required notice. All interested parties shall be given an opportunity to be heard at the hearing with respect to the validity and amount of the proposed special assessment. 
(c)  Levy by city commission: 
(1)  After the hearing, the city commission may levy a special assessment against the property improved, for the cost of work done on the property, in such amount as the commission may find to be proper and reasonable. The assessments shall be made by the adoption of a resolution containing findings that: 
a.  The procedures of this article have been followed; 
b.  The work done was in conformity with the requirements of this article; and 
c.  The amount of assessment is just and reasonable and based on the actual cost of the work. 
(2)  The resolution shall contain a legal description of the property, the names of the owners of the property, and such other information as may be deemed appropriate. The assessment shall become effective immediately upon the adoption of the resolution and shall bear interest thereafter at the rate established by the method set forth below. 
(3)  Each year, immediately before the beginning of the next fiscal year, the city manager shall have the appropriate financial periodicals researched and shall determine the current rate of interest being paid by cities with credit ratings comparable to the city on debts of duration equal to the duration of liens. The city manager shall report this rate to the city commission, which shall consider the city manager's report and shall then set the rate of interest to be charged on the city's liens which are made during the next fiscal year. There shall be no effect on liens made prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, and once established for an individual lien, the interest rate shall not be changed. Upon the adoption of the resolution, the city shall have a lien placed against the property on which the repaired building is located, as described in the resolution, which lien shall be of equal dignity with other municipal liens. The owner may pay the amount of the lien, including interest, in 36 equal, consecutive, monthly installments, commencing on the first day of the month following the adoption of the resolution. 
(d)  Notice of adoption of resolution. A copy of the resolution shall be served on the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, within ten days of the date of its adoption; a copy shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and a copy shall be recorded in the public records of the county. Along with a copy of the resolution, the property owner shall be served a notice informing the owner that payments on the lien may be made in installments, the amount of each installment, the address to which the payments shall be sent, and of the consequence that the property may be sold to satisfy the lien if payments are not made. 
(e)  Enforcement of liens. Liens shall be in default whenever one monthly installment payment is missed unless all delinquent payments have been brought up to date with no outstanding delinquencies. Whenever liens are in default, they shall be referred to the city attorney for enforcement and collection. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-13; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-13), 1-7-85)  
Secs. 13-43—13-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EXTENSION OF TIME[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-245 et seq. 
 
Sec. 13-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 040025, § 15, adopted Aug. 22, 2005, repealed § 13-56 in its entirety. Former § 13-56 pertained to establishment of appeals board for housing violations and derived from Code 1960, § 15a-14.  
Sec. 13-57. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 040025, § 15, adopted Aug. 22, 2005, repealed § 13-57 in its entirety. Former § 13-57 pertained to records on hearing and derived from Code 1960, § 15a-15.  
Sec. 13-58. - Authority to grant extension of time; procedure. 
(a)  The city manager or designee has the authority, upon good cause shown therefor in writing, to grant an extension of time within which an owner or occupant may be required to comply with a notice of violation which has been issued by the enforcing official, provided the written request for the extension of time is filed prior to the expiration of time originally stated in the written notice of violation. 
(b)  The authority of the city manager or designee in considering requests for extension of time as given in this section shall be in each instance limited to either granting or denying the request for the extension, and shall not be considered as an appeal from the terms of the notice of violation, and the city manager or designee shall not have authority to modify or vary the terms of the notice of violation except as to the time of performance. 
(c)  In granting or denying the request for extension of time, the city manager or designee shall consider such factors as are appropriate, including the good faith effort to comply, the availability of materials and workmen necessary, and such other factors as may be deemed appropriate and consistent with the intent of the housing code. 
(d)  All requests for extension of time shall be decided within ten working days after the filing of the request. 
(e)  In granting or denying the request, the city manager or designee shall state its reasons therefor and state the length of time, if it is extended, during which the acts required to be done shall be completed, which time, in no instance, may be greater than 90 days after the time period stated in the original notice of violation. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-21; Ord. No. 970804, § 1, 1-11-99)  
Secs. 13-59—13-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 040025, § 15, adopted Aug. 22, 2005, repealed §§ 13-59—13-63 in their entirety. Former §§ 13-59—13-63 power to sustain, modify or withdraw notice of violation; findings—sustaining, modification or withdrawal; stay of proceedings and status of appeals board actions, and derived from Code 1960, §§ 15a-16—20; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-17 and 15A-20), adopted Jan. 7, 1985.  
DIVISION 4. - STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 13-76. - Exteriors. 
(a)  Foundation systems: 
(1)  The building foundation systems shall be maintained to provide a safe, firm base for the support of the structure. Foundation members shall not lean or be damaged, decayed, deteriorated or insect-infested to the extent that causes unsafe sagging, leaning or buckling of other structural members. Unsafe foundation members constitute a major violation. 
(2)  Foundation systems that show significant deterioration that has not yet created sag, lean or buckling in the foundation or the structure above, but if left untended would do so shall be cleaned, treated and reinforced to prevent future deterioration. Failure to meet this requirement shall be a minor violation. 
(b)  Walls: 
(1)  Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, cracks, breaks, loose or rotting and deteriorated coverings which might admit rain, dampness, cold, rodents or insects to the interior of the wall or occupied portions of the dwelling. Such conditions shall be considered a minor violation unless the defect is of such a nature as to create a hazard. 
(2)  No wall or other vertical structural member shall list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a normally vertical structural member shall be more than two inches out of plumb in ten feet or less of vertical distance and the structure appears in danger of collapsing. Violations of these requirements shall be a major violation. Structural members that were originally designed not to be vertical (e.g., rafters or diagonal braces) that sag, lean or buckle from their original position to such an extent or to appear in danger of collapse shall constitute a major violation. 
(c)  Roofs. 
(1)  Roofs shall not leak with such volume as to cause damage to any of the components of the structure. All critical joints in the roof which are likely to admit water shall be protected by sheet metal or other suitable flashing material. Roofs shall be securely fastened to walls and other support in a manner required by the building code. Failure of a roof system to meet these requirements shall be a major violation. 
(2)  Minor deterioration of roofing coverings and/or parts of structural systems, that does not at the time of inspection constitute a major violation, will be considered a minor violation. 
(d)  Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Stairs, porches and appurtenances shall contain no loose, deteriorated or damaged material that would constitute a hazard. Protective railings shall be required on any stair, porch, appurtenance and unenclosed structure over 36 inches from ground level or, on any steps containing four risers or more. Any railing required to be installed under this provision shall comply with the requirements of the building code of the city. Major or minor violations will be determined by the inspector, based on severity and/or hazard. 
(e)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings and other structures built on the same premises with a dwelling but not attached to it and not used as living quarters shall be kept in sound condition and good repair in accord with the applicable portions of the codes of the city. Violations of the above will be considered major violations if in such condition as to injure or be a health hazard to occupants or neighbors. 
(f)  Screens. Unless the dwelling unit is equipped with a functioning central heat and air-conditioning unit, every door opening from a dwelling unit to the outdoors shall have a screen door that opens outward, fits the opening properly and is equipped with a self-closing device, except where the door opens onto a screen porch or where the door is a standard exterior door with a screen opening, and except as modified below. Screens are required on every window designed to be opened or other opening, attic and gable vents, under floor crawl space (except of the exposed pier design) vents, and opening to the outdoors. Window screens shall be made of frames that fit properly in the openings and which may be removed. Dwelling buildings containing heating furnaces and/or air conditioning equipment for mechanically ventilating the building year around are not required to have screen doors. Where required, if more than 50 percent of the total number of window and/or door screens in a dwelling do not meet the above requirements, it shall constitute a major violation. 
(g)  Exterior doors, basement doors, etc. Exterior doors, basement or cellar doors and hatchways shall be substantially weathertight, rodentproof and insectproof and kept in sound working condition and good repair. Each opening accessible from the outside shall be capable of being fastened closed with a latch or equivalent device when in the closed position. Failure to comply with these provisions will result in either a major or a minor violation. 
(h)  Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have one safe unobstructed means of egress with a minimum ceiling height of seven feet and a minimum width of two feet seven inches leading from the living area to safe and open space at ground level. Stairs and doors to fill this requirement shall have a minimum headroom of six feet seven inches and a minimum width of two feet seven inches. The minimum width of a hallway or exit access shall be not less than three feet, nor shall the ceiling height be less than seven feet in height. Failure to provide the egress requirements shall be a major violation. 
(i)  Protective treatment. Protective treatment shall be applied to all exterior surfaces other than surfaces that are naturally decay-resistant woods. When protective treatments such as paint peels or becomes nonprotective over more than ten percent of the surface, failure to provide protection shall be considered a minor violation. When the protective coating peels or becomes nonprotective over more than 20 percent of the surface and there is evidence of deterioration in the surface, failure to provide such protection shall be considered a major violation. See section 13-93 for additional requirements. 
(j)  Facilities, fixtures, equipment. All supplied facilities, fixtures and equipment shall function properly and be free of hazards to the occupants or the dwelling. Hazardous facilities, fixtures or equipment shall be a major violation. Inoperable but nonhazardous and nonessential facilities, fixtures or equipment (dishwashers, microwave, etc.) shall not be a violation. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-22; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-22), 1-7-85; Ord. No. 3483, § 3, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 040025, § 5, 8-22-05)  
Secs. 13-77—13-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR INTERIORS; HABITABLE ROOMS; VENTILATION AND LIGHTING 
 
Sec. 13-91. - Habitable rooms. 
(a)  Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant and at least 100 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant. Violation of this provisions shall be considered a major violation. 
(b)  Every habitable room shall have a minimum of 70 square feet of floor area, except that every room occupied for sleeping shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. Violation of this provision shall be considered a major violation. 
(c)  Minimum height of a habitable room shall be not less than seven feet in height from the floor to the ceiling throughout one-half the area of the room. Violation of this provision shall be considered a major violation. 
(d)  Minimum width of a habitable room shall not be less than seven feet. Violation of this provision shall be considered a major violation. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-23; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-23), 1-7-85)  
Sec. 13-92. - Ventilation, lighting and egress. 
(a)  Windows. Each window accessible from the outside shall be capable of being held fastened in the closed position. Window sash shall be properly fitted and watertight within the window frame and fully supplied with glass window panes or an approved substitute which is without open cracks or holes that are generally in excess of one square inch. Failure to comply with this provision will result in either a major or a minor violation. 
(b)  Glazed areas. All habitable rooms shall be provided with aggregate glazing area of not less than eight percent of the floor area of such rooms. Forty-five percent of the required area of glazing shall be openable and capable of being held in the open position with appropriate hardware or props. Exceptions to this subsection are as follows: 
(1)  The glazed areas need not be openable where an approved mechanical ventilation system is provided which is capable of producing a change of air every 30 minutes and the opening is not required in subsection (c) below. 
(2)  The glazed areas may be omitted in rooms where an approved mechanical ventilation system is provided which is capable of producing a change of air every 30 minutes, artificial light is provided capable of producing an average illumination of six footcandles over the area of the room at a height of 30 inches above the floor level, and the opening is not required in subsection (c) below. Failure to comply with the above requirements shall be a major violation. 
(c)  Egress. Every sleeping room in one- and two-family dwellings shall have at least one operable window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue to the dwelling's exterior. All egress or rescue windows from sleeping rooms must have a minimum net clear opening of 20 inches by 24 inches. Net clear opening for windows shall mean the maximum opening available after removal of window glass and any frame parts which may be forcibly removed. The required exit door shall be not less than two feet eight inches in width and six feet eight inches in height. The minimum width of a hallway or exit access shall be not less than three feet. Failure to comply with the egress requirements is a major violation. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-24; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-24), 1-7-85; Ord. No. 3483, § 4, 11-7-88)  
Sec. 13-93. - Lead-based paint hazard. 
Lead-based paint shall be presumed to exist in dwelling units that were built prior to 1950 unless conclusive evidence to the contrary exists. All surfaces that have not already been so treated and that are chipping, peeling or cracking shall be washed, sanded, scraped or wirebrushed, so as to remove all hazards resulting from pre-1950 painting, before repainting with at least two coats of a nonleaded paint. Failure to provide proper paint treatment at some point in time subsequent to 1950 shall be considered a major violation. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-25; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-25), 1-7-85)  
Sec. 13-94. - Smoke detectors. 
(a)  For purposes of protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the city regarding fire safety in residential occupancies, single-station smoke detectors shall be installed in each dwelling unit. Smoke detectors shall be ionization or photoelectric type capable of sensing visible or invisible particles of combustion and providing an approved signal alarm. Failure to install and maintain smoke detectors in each dwelling unit shall be a major violation. 
(b)  Location requirements. 
(1)  Smoke detectors shall be installed outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate proximity of the bedrooms and shall be installed on each additional level of the dwelling unit including basements and excluding crawl spaces and unfinished attics. 
(2)  For split-level dwelling units, which are defined as adjacent levels with less than one full story separation between levels, a smoke detector shall be installed outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms, and on every other floor level without an intervening door. 
(c)  Exception. Where smoke detectors are installed as part of an approved fire protection system, the requirements for single station smoke detectors are waived. An approved fire protection system is defined as a combination of devices meeting the requirements of the current building code and installed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
(d)  Equipment. All devices, combinations of devices, and equipment required by this section are to be installed in conformance with the current building code and in compliance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
(e)  Smoke detectors for the deaf and/or hearing impaired. Where a deaf and/or hearing-impaired person occupies a living unit, a smoke detector shall provide a signal approved for persons with such disabilities. 
(f)  It is a major violation for an occupant or owner of a dwelling unit to remove a smoke detector(s) or render the smoke detector(s) inoperative. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-26; Ord. No. 040025, § 6, 8-22-05) 
Cross reference— Residential smoke detectors, § 13-16.1.  
Sec. 13-95. - Interior walls, floors and ceilings. 
Each interior wall, floor and ceiling shall be substantially rodentproof and free from structural hazards and nonhazardous defects including open cracks (excluding hairline cracks), providing accessways for insects, loose or missing parts, and peeling paint over ten percent or more of the surface area. Structural or hazardous defects shall be major violations. Nonhazardous defects are minor violations. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-27; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-27), 1-7-85)  
Sec. 13-96. - Bathrooms. 
(a)  Every dwelling shall have a bathroom. Failure to provide a bathroom shall be a major violation. 
(b)  Bathrooms and water closets shall comply with light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms, except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with an approved ventilation system. Failure to provide ventilation shall be a major violation. 
(c)  Every water closet, flush urinal, bathroom lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower shall be located within the dwelling unit and, shall have adequate space, accessibility and privacy for use. The required plumbing facilities shall be accessible from the interior of the dwelling. A bathroom shall not be the sole access to a habitable room, hall, basement or to the exterior. Failure to provide the above shall be a major violation. See section 13-112 for related provisions. 
(d)  The floor and wall of every bathroom, flush water closet room and shower room shall be so constructed or surfaced (with surface material such as tile or sheet vinyl for floors, and such as water-resistant paint or water-resistant wallpaper or tile for walls) as to be water-resistant and capable of being kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. Floors and walls that have decayed to a hazardous state shall be major violations. Floors that have tile, sheet vinyl or other cover missing over more than two percent of the floor area or similar defects shall be minor violations. 
(e)  Every bathroom sink, basin and bathtub or shower function properly and shall be connected to the hot and cold water supply lines. Failure to provide connections shall be a major violation. Nonhazardous conditions shall be minor violations. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-28; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-28), 1-7-85)  
Sec. 13-97. - Kitchens. 
(a)  Every dwelling unit shall have a kitchen area with fixtures connected to hot and cold water. Failure to provide a kitchen with hot and cold water shall be a major violation. 
(b)  Every kitchen shall have adequate space provided and proper utility connections supplied for a refrigeration unit of at least five cubic feet capacity as well as a cooking unit containing at least three burners. If the dwelling is occupied, the refrigeration unit and cooking unit shall be installed and functioning properly. Failure to provide for a refrigerator and cooking unit shall be a major violation. If the dwelling is occupied, failure to provide a refrigerator and cooking unit is a major violation. 
(c)  Countertops shall be so constructed and surfaced that the area surrounding the sink is water-resistant and may be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. A countertop or its supporting structure which is decayed to the extent that it is a hazard shall be a major violation. All nonhazardous conditions shall be a minor violation. 
(d)  Kitchens shall comply with light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms, except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated kitchens equipped with an approved ventilation system. Failure to provide ventilation shall be a major violation. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-29; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-29), 1-7-85)  
Sec. 13-98. - Common areas; nonhabitable areas. 
(a)  Access to all habitable parts of a dwelling unit shall be provided without passing through any other dwelling unit. Access to all habitable parts of a dwelling unit shall be possible without leaving the unit. Entry to a habitable room through a garage or carport is acceptable. Failure to comply with this requirement shall be a major violation. 
(b)  All attics shall be vented and screened, except when designed to be closed and insulated. Failure to provide attic vents and screens shall be a minor violation. 
(c)  Attached garages shall not be used for the storage of flammable liquids, except for fuel in the tanks of vehicles parked in the garages or properly stored in containers and not near a ready source of ignition. Violation of this provision shall be a major violation. 
(d)  Every stairway shall be constructed so as to be safe to use, capable of support a normal use load, and shall be unobstructed. Failure to meet the provisions of this subsection shall be a major violation. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-30; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-30), 1-7-85)  
Secs. 13-99—13-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PLUMBING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 6-91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 13-111. - Water supply. 
Every plumbing fixture in every dwelling, dwelling unit and room house shall be connected to an adequate and sanitary running water supply drawn from a source approved by the state board of health. All plumbing fixtures and piping shall meet the plumbing code requirements that were in effect at the time of installation of the fixtures and piping. All current plumbing renovations and repairs shall meet current code requirements. Failure to provide a proper water supply shall be considered a major violation. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-31; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-31), 1-7-85) 
Cross reference— Water and sewerage, § 27-96 et seq.  
Sec. 13-112. - Fixtures. 
Each dwelling or dwelling unit shall contain not less than one kitchen sink, one bathroom lavatory basin, one bathtub or shower bath and one flush water closet. Every kitchen sink, bathroom lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower shall function properly and be properly connected with hot water and cold water supply lines. Failure to provide the fixtures as required by this section shall be a major violation. Nonhazardous conditions shall be minor violations. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-32; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-32), 1-7-85)  
Sec. 13-113. - Sewerage. 
(a)  Connections. All plumbing fixtures, facilities and equipment shall function properly and be properly connected to the city sanitary sewer system or to some other disposal system approved by the state board of health. Failure to provide proper sewerage connections shall be a major violation. 
(b)  Facilities prohibited. Water closets outside the dwelling and privies are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be eliminated. This subsection shall not apply to facilities properly connected to sewer systems in buildings legally constructed for special purposes, such as pool dressing rooms, or to legally permitted temporary privies used for construction sites, public events or the like. Failure to remove privies and outside water closets shall be considered a major violation. 
(c)  All materials used in a sewer system shall be approved for this purpose and shall be installed in a manner consistent with any manufacturer's listing or labeling. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-23; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-33), 1-7-85; Ord. No. 040025, § 7, 8-22-05) 
Cross reference— Water and sewerage, § 27-96 et seq.  
Secs. 13-114—13-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR ARTIFICIAL LIGHTING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical code, § 6-31 et seq.; electricity generally, § 27-21 et seq. 
 
Sec. 13-126. - Replacement of electrical construction. 
When a section of this division has been violated to the degree that replacement is required, it shall be replaced so as to meet the electrical code of the city. Any specific portion of the electrical construction in an existing dwelling that functions properly and is not hazardous or can be repaired without being replaced will not be required to conform to the current electrical codes. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-34)  
Sec. 13-127. - Hazardous conditions. 
An electrical installation shall not be permitted which has any one or a combination of the following hazardous conditions. Some of the conditions may be hazards or indicators of hazards. The following listing is not all-inclusive; when necessary the inspector will investigate further, and when necessary, seek more qualified advice. The existence of any of the following conditions, when present to the extent that a fire or electrocution hazard exists, shall constitute a major violation. 
(1)  Electrical equipment with wiring or other conductors exhibiting hazardous features such as missing insulation, broken or disconnected line wiring, wiring not appropriately fastened in place, wiring that is corroded, burnt, cracked, split or exhibits of overheating, physical damage or misuse; 
(2)  Live electrical equipment that contains dirt or debris in sensitive areas; 
(3)  Wiring that is frayed; 
(4)  Labeled electrical equipment or wiring that is not installed in accordance with any labeling or other instructions; 
(5)  Circuit breaker, fuse, switch, receptacle, other device, fixed utilization equipment or wiring that is not compatible with the phase, voltage, amperage or type characteristics of the electricity in use; 
(6)  Circuit breaker, switch or other operable device that has visible evidence of arcing, overheating or other malfunction; 
(7)  Receptacle contact devices that are not firmly in contact with the contact devices of a standard type flexible cord attachment plug, when the plug is inserted in the receptacle; 
(8)  Neutral that is not grounded at the main service entrance equipment location by a properly connected grounding electrode conductor where called for by the current electrical code; 
(9)  Polarity that is reversed in writing connections to receptacle outlets; 
(10)  Fixed utilization equipment, such as a lighting fixture, lampholder or appliance, that malfunctions; 
(11)  Faulty insulation on wiring, equipment or appliance; 
(12)  Service, feeder or branch circuit conductors that have evidence of malfunction, impaired operation or that cannot otherwise be determined to be acceptable when the installation is energized; 
(13)  Flexible cord that is used as a permanent wiring method contrary to the current electrical code; 
(14)  Branch circuits, feeder, switchboard, panel board or distribution board service rating that is inadequate for the load calculated in accordance with the current code; 
(15)  Pull-chain switch or brass shell socket in a location, wet or location, damp (as defined in Article 100, National Electrical Code: NFPA 70, 2005 addition). 
(16)  Exterior light fixtures where the associated lamps are exposed to the elements of nature. 
(17)  Electrical equipment or conductors that are installed in a manner inconsistent with manufacturer's listing or labeling. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-35; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-35), 1-7-85; Ord. No. 040025, § 8, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 13-128. - Illumination for certain rooms; receptacles; outlets. 
(a)  Entrances and exits. 
(1)  Entrances and exits in single and duplex occupancies shall be illuminated by exterior lights which are controlled by interior wall switches. Failure to provide this illumination shall be a major violation. 
(2)  In multiple occupancy buildings with two or more common entrances and/or exits, at least two entrances and/or exits shall be illuminated by exterior (exterior to the dwelling unit but not necessarily exterior to the structure) lights and controlled by interior wall switches, located for convenient and readily accessible use. Where adequate lighting of exterior doorways is provided by the management during all hours of darkness no interior wall switch is required. Failure to provide the required exterior illumination shall be a major violation. 
(b)  Interior stairways. Where lighting outlets are installed in interior stairways, there shall be a wall switch at each floor level to control the lighting outlet where the difference between floor levels is six steps or more, except in hallways, stairways, and at outdoor entrances, remote, central, or automatic control of lighting shall be permitted. 
(c)  Habitable rooms. All habitable rooms including living rooms shall be provided with illumination. At least one lighting outlet in each habitable room shall be controlled by a wall switch, located for convenient and readily accessible use. One of the receptacle outlets controlled by a wall switch in lieu of ceiling outlet is acceptable. Convenient duplex receptacle outlets shall be provided. Receptacle outlets shall be reasonably spaced around the room and at least two receptacles shall be required per room. Failure to provide at least two receptacles or one receptacle and one light fixture shall be a major violation. Failure to provide the other requirements of this subsection shall be a minor violation. 
(d)  Kitchens. Kitchens shall be provided with illumination. The lighting outlet shall be controlled by a wall switch located for convenient and readily accessible use. Failure to provide this illumination shall be a major violation. A minimum of two 125-volt convenient duplex receptacles shall be provided on a minimum of one 20-amp appliance circuit. Nothing in this requirement shall be construed to be more restrictive than the city electrical code. One of these receptacles shall be readily accessible for convenient use of portable appliances. Failure to provide these circuits and receptacles shall be a major violation. 
(e)  (1)  Bathrooms shall be illuminated and the light controlled by a wall switch. Failure to provide this illumination shall be a major violation. 
(2)  No electrical device or equipment shall be located within 36 inches of a tub or shower area unless the device or equipment is protected by ground fault interruption capabilities. 
(f)  Laundry areas. Laundry areas, where provided, shall be provided with illumination. The laundry circuit shall be an individual circuit if the calculated load on the existing system is too great. Such load shall be considered as too great when the laundry appliance exceeds 80 percent of the branch circuit rating. A wall-mounted grounding type duplex receptacle outlet shall be provided and located within six feet of the laundry equipment. Hazardous conditions shall be major violations. 
(g)  Service and/or feeder. Service to an existing dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 100 amperes, three-wire capacity. Service equipment shall be dead front having no live parts exposed where accidental contact could be made. Type "S" fuses shall be installed when fused equipment is used. Overcurrent, faultcurrent and groundfault devices shall be properly sized and installed in a manner consistent with any manufacturer's recommendations or listing. 
Exception. Existing service of lesser amperage, three-wire capacity, and feeder of 30 amperes or larger two- or three-wire capacity shall be acceptable if adequate for the electrical load being served. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-36; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-36), 1-7-85; Ord. No. 040025, § 9, 8-22-05)  
Secs. 13-129—13-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - HEATING AND COOKING INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 13-141. - Supplied and required facilities. 
(a)  Every dwelling unit shall have, as a supplied facility, a domestic water heater and heating equipment which can safely and adequately heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments to at least 65 degrees Fahrenheit and provide hot water of at least 110 degrees Fahrenheit. Failure to supply facilities, spaces, equipment and/or connections as required is a major violation. 
(b)  Every piece of cooking, heating and water heating equipment in a dwelling unit shall be so constructed, installed, maintained and operated so that it will function safely and effectively, free from fire, health and accident hazards in conformance with the subsections below. Failure to meet this requirement is a major violation. 
(c)  Portable heating and cooking equipment employing open flame from gasoline or kerosene or other liquid fuel is prohibited in a dwelling unit. All other portable kerosene units shall likewise be prohibited unless they have an a label from a recognized testing laboratory attached. Failure to meet this requirement is a major violation. 
(d)  Where they exist, chimneys, flues and smoke and vent pipes shall be provided and adequately supported, reasonably clean, in a good state of repair, and free from cracks or openings which would permit leakage of gases within the dwelling unit. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be a major violation. 
(e)  Where heat-producing equipment is installed on or adjacent to combustible materials, the location, insulation, clearance and the control of the equipment shall be such that the temperature on the surface of the combustible materials does not exceed a safe limit. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be a major violation. 
(f)  Heating and cooking equipment burning liquefied petroleum or gaseous fuels shall conform to the applicable City Code. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be a major violation. 
(g)  Heating or cooking equipment, burning oil or kerosene, shall conform to the regulations established in the applicable City Code. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be a major violation. 
(h)  All appliance use for conformance with these provisions shall be installed in a manner consistent with manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-38; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-38), 1-7-85; Ord. No. 040025, § 10, 8-22-05)  
Secs. 13-142—13-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - MULTIFAMILY AND ROOMING UNIT REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 13-156. - Additional requirements. 
Multifamily and rooming units shall comply with all other requirements of this article. In addition, the following requirements shall also be met: 
(1)  All halls, corridors, stairways, lobbies, foyers and other common or public areas used or intended to be used by more than one family, or by one family and some other person shall have supplied electric light fixtures providing three footcandles of artificial or artificial and natural illumination over the entire usable floor area and stairway area and shall be so illuminated at all times; except that in a two-family dwelling, an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed for shared areas by conveniently located light switches, available to the occupant of either unit, shall be permitted. Exception: remote, central, or automatic control of lighting shall be permitted. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be a major violation. 
(2)  Common hallways and stairways in two-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, or rooming houses shall be adequately ventilated. Failure to comply with this violation shall be a minor violation. 
(3)  In rooming houses there shall be at least one flush water closet, one bathroom lavatory basin, and one bathtub or shower bath for each five persons or fraction thereof, except that in a rooming house, where rooming units are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half the required number of flush water closets. Failure to provide the required number of fixtures shall be a major violation. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-39; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-39), 1-7-85; Ord. No. 040025, § 11, 8-22-05)  
Secs. 13-157—13-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - CARE OF PREMISES 
 
Sec. 13-171. - Insects, outdoor storage, trash, and yard maintenance. 
(a)  All premises shall be maintained so as to discourage the harboring and breeding of insects, rodents and vermin. Failure to comply with this provision shall be a major violation. Insofar as the natural drainage will permit, yards and premises appurtenant to a dwelling unit shall be sloped or graded to provide for disposal of surface water and to prevent the accumulation of surface water in the yard or next to the building. Failure to comply with this provision shall be a minor violation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a residential building structure or property to utilize the premises of the residential property for the open outdoor storage of any blight-inducing materials such as abandoned motor vehicle or part thereof including tires, icebox, refrigerator, stove, or other appliances, planks, timbers, glass, or other building material, building rubbish, packing material, barrels, bottles, cans, boxes or similar items. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be a major violation. 
(c)  No owner, tenant or occupant of a dwelling shall permit or allow furniture, mattresses, or other materials which are upholstered with water-permeable fabric to remain outside of a completely enclosed building or structure other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. This subsection does not apply to furniture, mattresses or other such materials which are unused and placed at or near the curb as refuse for collection and disposal, or as items offered for sale at a yard or garage sale. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be a major violation. 
(d)  Any other provision of this Code notwithstanding, the placement of any pools, furniture or furnishings, such as any chair, sofa, bed, table or other similar furnishings, on the roof of any building or structure at any time is strictly prohibited and shall be a major violation. This subsection does not apply to any building or structure that has been designed and approved for rooftop occupancy by the City of Gainesville Building Inspection Department. 
(e)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner and occupant to keep the premises of residential property clean, and to remove from the premises, upon notice from the code officer, the following: 
(1)  All trash and garbage; 
(2)  Dead or hazardous trees that are standing or have fallen to the ground and that pose a hazard to neighboring properties, or which create a hazard to the safety or welfare of any occupant of the property (except the owner), or the inhabitants of the surrounding area, or any public property; and 
(3)  Dead tree limbs and vegetative debris that pose a hazard to neighboring properties, or which create a hazard to the safety or welfare of any occupant of the property (except the owner), or the inhabitants of the surrounding area, or any public property. 
Failure to comply with this subsection shall be a major violation. 
(f)  Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage storage facilities which comply with city ordinances. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be a major violation. 
(g)  Yards shall be maintained to prohibit vegetation over 12 inches high that is or may reasonably become infested by pests or may create a fire or safety hazard. This shall not be construed to prohibit the following: 
(1)  Vegetation planted and maintained for landscape purposes or for erosion control; 
(2)  Vegetation located on a lot over five acres in area that is in a natural state, or vegetation that has not been mowed within the past five years; 
(3)  Vegetation located more than 200 feet from the boundary line of an improved property, street or public right-of-way; 
(4)  Controlled, managed and maintained low-maintenance natural landscaping; or 
(5)  The understory of hammocks that are protected through development regulations, conditions or agreements, and vegetation within wetlands, stormwater retention lake littoral zones, or within 150 feet of a regulated creek. 
This subsection shall not apply to lands designated agriculture or conservation on the future land use map. Failure to comply with this subsection (e) is a major violation. 
(Code 1960, § 15A-40; Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-40), 1-7-85; Ord. No. 3483, § 5, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 000724, § 1, 2-12-01; Ord. No. 020375, § 3, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 040025, § 12, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 051236, § 1, 6-25-07)  
Secs. 13-172—13-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS 
 
Sec. 13-181. - Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant to create, maintain, keep or allow the existence of any hazardous condition, equipment, facility, fixture, premises or building. Failure to comply with this section shall be a major violation. 
(Ord. No. 3091, § 1(15A-41), 1-7-85)  
Secs. 13-182—13-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - POOLS, WADING POOLS AND HOT TUBS 
 
Sec. 13-191. - Hazardous conditions. 
In addition to pool safety standards stated in law and rule, the following shall apply: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or occupant to create, maintain, keep or allow the existence of any hazardous condition, equipment, facility or fixture associated with a swimming pool, wading pool or hot tub. Failure to comply with this section shall be a major violation. 
(2)  Overhead conductor clearances. The following shall not be placed under existing service drop conductors or any other open overhead wiring nor shall such wiring be installed above the following: 
a.  Pools and the area extending ten feet horizontally from the inside walls of the pool, 
b.  Diving structure, or 
c.  Observation stands, towers, or platforms unless the installation provides a minimum of 22 feet of clearance from the water level or 14 feet of clearance in any direction from a diving platform or tower from an insulated supply or service drop cable rated 0-750 volts to ground. 
(Ord. No. 040025, § 13, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 13-192. - Receptacles, lighting fixtures, lighting outlets, switching devices, or other circulation and sanitation system. 
(a)  Receptacles. 
(1)  A receptacle(s) that provides power for a water-pump motor(s) or other circulation and sanitation system for a permanently installed pool shall be permitted between five and ten feet from the inside walls of the pool or fountain, and, where so located, shall be single and of the locking and grounding types and shall be protected by a ground-fault circuit interrupter(s). Other receptacles on the property shall be located at least ten feet from the inside walls of a pool. 
(2)  At least one 125-volt 15- or 20-ampere receptacle on a general-purpose branch circuit shall be located between ten feet and 20 feet from the inside wall of a permanently installed pool. This receptacle shall be located not more than six feet six inches above the floor, platform, or grade level serving the pool. 
(3)  All 125-volt receptacles located within 20 feet of the inside walls of a pool shall be protected by a ground-fault circuit interrupter. 
In determining the above dimensions, distance is measured as the shortest path the supply cord of an appliance connected to the receptacle would follow without piercing a floor, wall, ceiling, doorway with hinged or sliding door, window opening, or other effective permanent barrier. 
(b)  Lighting fixtures, lighting outlets, and ceiling suspended (paddle) fans. 
(1)  In outdoor pool areas, lighting fixtures, lighting outlets, and ceiling-suspended (paddle) fans shall not be installed over the pool or over the area extending five feet horizontally from the inside walls of the pool unless no part of the lighting fixture or ceiling-suspended (paddle) fan is less than 12 feet above the maximum water level. 
(2)  Existing lighting fixtures and lighting outlets located less than five feet from the inside walls of a pool shall be at least five feet above the surface of the maximum water level, shall be rigidly attached to the existing structure, and shall be protected by a groundfault circuit interrupter. 
(Ord. No. 040025, § 13, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 13-193. - Bonding. 
All metallic parts required to be bonded by the city electrical code shall be maintained in an approved manner. Failure to maintain bonding connections shall be a major violation. 
(Ord. No. 040025, § 13, 8-22-05)  
Sec. 13-194. - Maintenance. 
All private swimming pool fences and enclosures shall be maintained in a manner consistent with the standards set forth in section 6-159(a) of the City Code. All equipment, wiring and devices shall be maintained in a functional manner. 
(Ord. No. 040025, § 13, 8-22-05)  
Secs. 13-195—13-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 13-201. - Findings of fact and declaration of necessity. 
The city commission finds the following: 
(1)  Existence of conditions. There exists within the city blighted buildings or other structures used or intended to be used for commercial, business, institutional, industrial or multifamily dwelling purposes that because of structural or maintenance problems are abandoned, unsafe, and endanger the general health, welfare and safety of the general public and those who use or visit the structures. 
(2)  Results if conditions uncorrected. Such blighted buildings and structures contribute to the development of, or increase in crime, increase costs to public revenue and impair the efficient and economical exercise of governmental functions in such areas; and necessitate excessive and disproportionate expenditure of public funds for public safety, crime prevention, fire protection and other public services. 
(3)  Necessity to protect public health, safety and welfare. The adoption of this article is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the city by establishing minimum standards governing the facilities, repair and maintenance of buildings and grounds used for or intended to be used for commercial, business, institutional, industrial or multi-family dwelling purposes. This article is intended to be remedial and essential to the public interest and welfare and to this extent it is intended that this commercial building code be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 990442, § 2, 8-28-00)  
Sec. 13-202. - Buildings affected. 
Every portion of a building or premises, used or intended to be used for commercial, business, institutional, industrial or multi-family dwelling purposes, shall comply with the provisions of this article, irrespective of when the building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired, except where specifically exempt as stated in this article, and irrespective of any permits or licenses that have been issued for the use of the building or premises, for the construction or repair of the building or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 990442, § 2, 8-28-00)  
Sec. 13-203. - Conflicts resolved. 
In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or other code provision of this city, the provision that establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail if the defect cited is hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of the people using the building or adjoining properties and the defect must be replaced to comply. If repairs will correct the defect cited, the repairs may be made using the same methods and materials used in the original construction. 
(Ord. No. 990442, § 2, 8-28-00)  
Sec. 13-204. - Standards for exterior property areas. 
(a)  Sanitation. All exterior property and premise shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. Each occupant of the property shall keep that part of the exterior property that the occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of ten inches. Weeds shall mean all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; however, the term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
(c)  Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound and in good repair. 
(d)  Motor vehicles. Except as permitted by the land development code in a particular zoning district, no motor vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled unless such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed for, and approved by the city for, such purpose. 
(e)  Hazardous conditions. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant to create, maintain, keep or allow the existence of any hazardous condition, equipment, facility, fixture, premises or building. 
(Ord. No. 990442, § 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 060630, § 2, 10-2-08)  
Sec. 13-205. - Exterior structures. 
(a)  General. The exterior of all buildings and structures shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Exterior painting. All wood and metal surfaces, including but not limited to window frames, doors, door frames, cornices, porches and trim shall be maintained in good condition. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. 
(c)  Street numbers. Each structure to which a street number has been assigned shall have such number displayed in a position easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 990442, § 2, 8-28-00)  
Sec. 13-206. - Exterior walls. 
Building walls shall be maintained in a secure and safe manner as follows: 
(1)  All defective structural and decorative elements of the building facade shall be removed, replaced or repaired. 
(2)  All exterior walls shall have all loose material removed. Patching and resurfacing shall match the existing or adjacent surfaces as to material, color, bond and joinings. 
(3)  All cornices, trim, and window frames that are damaged, sagging or otherwise deteriorated shall be removed, repaired or replaces so that they are structurally sound and secure. 
(4)  All exposed materials shall be painted, stained or otherwise treated to protect them from the elements. 
(Ord. No. 990442, § 2, 8-28-00)  
Sec. 13-207. - Door and window openings. 
(a)  All window and door openings shall be safe and secure. Sashes with rotten wood, broken joints, or deteriorated mullions or muntins shall be removed, repaired or replaced. 
(b)  All exterior doors and windows shall be maintained in an unbroken and secure condition. No door or window shall be removed and enclosed, covered or boarded up unless treated as an integral part of the building facade, compatible with the design, material and finish of the adjoining walls of which the opening is a part. This subsection shall not apply to the temporary short-term covering or boarding up of windows or doors while undergoing replacement or repair. However, all damaged or broken doors and windows shall be restored, repaired or replaced within 60 days following breakage or damage. 
(Ord. No. 990442, § 2, 8-28-00)  
Sec. 13-208. - Roofs. 
Roofs shall be maintained in a secure, safe and watertight condition. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. 
(Ord. No. 990442, § 2, 8-28-00)  
Sec. 13-209. - Accessory and appurtenant structures. 
Signs, awnings, canopies, freestanding walls, and fences shall be maintained in good repair and condition. Deteriorated signs and torn or unsecured awnings or canopies shall be removed, repaired or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 990442, § 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 060630, § 3, 10-2-08)  
Sec. 13-210. - Compliance period. 
(a)  Any other provision of this Code notwithstanding, corrective action ordered by the city manager or designee shall be commenced within 30 days and shall be completed within 90 days from the date of written notice of noncompliance. 
(b)  The city manager or designee may stay enforcement for a further period of time, not to exceed six months from the initial notice, if the property owner demonstrates with tangible evidence that he/she is taking affirmative steps to abate the violations and requires additional time to fully comply. 
(Ord. No. 990442, § 2, 8-28-00)  
Sec. 13-211. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 060109, § 4, adopted Nov. 13, 2006, repealed § 13-211 in its entirety. Former § 13-211 pertained to appeals and derived from Ord. No. 990442, § 2, adopted Aug. 28, 2000.  
Sec. 13-212. - Historic preservation review. 
The owner of a building that is subject to the provisions of section 30-112 (historic preservation ordinance) shall comply with the provisions of that section when making repairs or modifications required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 990442, § 2, 8-28-00)  
Sec. 13-213. - Right of entry. 
The enforcing official is authorized to enter and make inspections of any building, structure or premises that is subject to the provisions of this article at reasonable times during daylight hours, to determine the condition of the building in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. If an owner, operator or other occupant of a building, structure or premises refuses to permit the enforcing official to enter and make inspections, the official is authorized to petition the court for an administrative warrant to allow entry and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 990442, § 2, 8-28-00)  
Chapter 14 - STATE HOUSING INITIATIVES PARTNERSHIP (SHIP) PROGRAM[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3255, § 1, adopted Sept. 22, 1986, repealed §§ 2-30, 2-32 and 2-33 of the 1960 Code, concerning the library advisory board, which comprised §§ 14-16—14-18, the substantive provisions of former Ch. 14. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. 3855, § 1, adopted Apr. 19, 1993, added a new Ch. 14, §§ 14-1—14-7, as set out herein. 
Cross reference— Fair housing, § 8-86 et seq.; housing generally, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Adjusted for family size means adjusted in a manner which results in an income eligibility level that is lower for households having fewer than four (4) people, or higher for households having more than four (4) people, than the base income eligibility determined as provided in subsection (19), (20) or (25), based upon a formula established by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. Students, as defined herein, are to be included in the calculation of family size. 
(2)  Adjusted gross income means wages, income from assets, regular cash or non-cash contributions, and any other sources and benefits determined to be income by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, adjusted for family size, minus the deductions allowable under section 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(3)  Administrative expenses means those expenses directly related to implementation of the local housing assistance plan and local housing assistance program and shall not include the reimbursement of costs which were previously borne by another funding source which could continue to be available at the time the local housing assistance plan is submitted. 
(4)  Affordable means that contract rent and utilities or mortgage payments, insurance, property taxes, utilities and homeowner's association fee, where applicable, do not exceed thirty (30) percent of that amount which represents the percentage of the median adjusted gross income for households qualifying under subsection (19), (20) or (25). 
(5)  Affordable housing advisory committee means the committee appointed by resolution of the city commission as required by state law for the purpose of recommending specific initiatives and incentives to encourage or facilitate affordable housing within the city. 
(6)  Award means a loan, grant or subsidy funded wholly or partially by the local housing distribution. 
(7)  Community-based organization means a nonprofit organization that has among its purposes the provision of affordable housing to persons who have special housing needs or have very low income, low income, or moderate income within a designated area, which may include a municipality, a county, or more than one municipality or county, and maintains, through at least one-third representation on the organization's governing board, accountability to housing program beneficiaries and residents of the designated area. 
(8)  Eligible housing means any real and personal property located within the county or the city which is designated and intended for the primary purpose of providing decent, safe and sanitary residential units that are designed to meet the standards of F.S. Ch. 553 for home ownership or rental for eligible persons as designated by the county or the city participating in the local housing assistance program. 
(9)  Eligible municipality means the City of Gainesville that is eligible for federal community development block grants as an entitlement community identified in 24 C.F.R. section 570, subpart D, Entitlement Grants. 
(10)  Eligible person means one or more natural persons or a family determined by the county or the city to have special housing needs to have very low income, low income, or moderate income according to the adjusted gross income of the resident with adjustment made for family size. 
(11)  Eligible sponsor means a community-based organization, a person or a private or public for-profit or nonprofit entity that applies for assistance under the local housing assistance program for the purpose of providing eligible housing for eligible persons. 
(12)  Grant means a distribution of a portion of a local housing distribution to an eligible sponsor or eligible person to provide assistance under the local housing assistance program. 
(13)  Home ownership means a distribution of a portion of a local housing distribution to an eligible person or eligible sponsor for construction, rehabilitation, purchase or lease-purchase financing for owner-occupied eligible housing. 
(14)  Interlocal entity means any entity created pursuant to the provisions of F.S. Ch. 163, Part 1, for the purpose of a joint local housing assistance program pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 420.9075(5) or for the purpose of a joint affordable housing incentive plan pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 420.9076(2). 
(15)  Loan means a pledge of the local housing distribution monies to an eligible sponsor or eligible person to finance the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of eligible housing. 
(16)  Local housing assistance plan means a concise description of the local housing assistance program adopted by this chapter with an explanation of the way in which the local housing assistance program meets the requirements of this chapter and F.S. §§ 420.907—420.9079, and Rule 9I-37, Florida Administrative Code. 
(17)  Local housing distribution means the proceeds of the taxes collected under Chapter 201 deposited into the local government housing trust and distributed to counties and eligible municipalities participating in the state housing initiatives partnership program pursuant to F.S. § 420.9073. 
(18)  Local housing incentive strategies means local regulatory reform or incentive programs to encourage or facilitate affordable housing production, which include at a minimum, assurance that development orders and permits for affordable housing projects are expedited to a greater degree than other projects; an ongoing process for review of local policies, ordinances, regulations, and plan provisions that increase the cost of housing prior to their adoption; and a schedule for implementing the incentive strategies. Local housing incentive strategies may also include other regulatory reforms adopted by the city commission. 
(19)  Low-income person means one or more natural persons or a family, not including students, that has a total annual adjusted gross income for the household that does not exceed eighty (80) percent of the median annual adjusted gross income for households within the county. With respect to rental units, the low-income household's annual adjusted gross income at the time of initial occupancy may not exceed eighty (80) percent of area median income adjusted for family size. While occupying the rental unit, a low-income household's annual adjusted gross income may increase to an amount not to exceed one hundred forty (140) percent of eighty (80) percent of area median income adjusted for family size. 
(20)  Moderate-income person means one or more natural persons or a family, not including students, that has a total annual adjusted gross income for the household that does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) percent of the median annual adjusted gross income for households within the county. With respect to rental units, the moderate-income household's annual adjusted gross income at the time of initial occupancy may not exceed one hundred twenty (120) percent of area median income adjusted for family size. While occupying the rental unit, a moderate-income household's annual adjusted gross income may increase to an amount not to exceed one hundred forty (140) percent of one hundred twenty (120) percent of area median income adjusted for family size. 
(21)  Personal property means major appliances, including a freestanding refrigerator or stove, to be identified on the encumbering documents. 
(22)  Persons who have special housing needs means persons who have incomes not exceeding moderate income and who because of particular social, economic or health-related circumstances have greater difficulty acquiring or maintaining affordable housing. Such persons may, for example, encounter resistance to their residing in particular communities, increased housing cost resulting from unique needs, and high risk of institutionalization. As set out in the state Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (1991) these individuals include persons with developmental disabilities, persons with mental illness/chemical dependency, persons with AIDS and HIV disease, runaway and abandoned youth, single-parent families, public assistance recipients, migrant and seasonal farmworkers, refugees and entrants, and the elderly and disabled adults. 
(23)  SHIP Act means State Housing Initiative Partnership Act. 
(24)  Student means a person not living with his/her parent or guardian who is eligible to be claimed by the person's parent or guardian under the Federal Income Tax Code and who is enrolled at least half time in a secondary school, vocational-technical school, community college or university. The term does not include a person participating in a job training program approved by the county or the city. 
(25)  Very-low-income person means one or more natural persons or a family, not including students, that has a total annual adjusted gross income for the household that does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the median annual adjusted gross income for households within the county. With respect to rental units, the very-low-income household's annual adjusted gross income at the time of initial occupancy may not exceed fifty (50) percent of area median income adjusted for family size. While occupying the rental unit, a very-low-income household's annual adjusted gross income may increase to an amount not to exceed one hundred forty (140) percent of fifty (50) percent of area median income adjusted for family size. 
(Ord. No. 3855, § 1, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 070872, § 1, 4-14-08) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-2. - Local housing assistance trust fund. 
(a)  The local housing assistance trust fund is hereby created and established. 
(b)  All monies received from the state pursuant to the State Housing Initiative Partnership Act and any other funds received or budgeted to provide funding for the local housing assistance program shall be deposited into the local housing assistance trust fund. Administration of the local housing assistance trust fund shall comply with Rule 9I-37.007, Florida Administrative Code. Any funds deposited into the local housing assistance trust fund will be subject to the requirements of the SHIP program, F.S. § 420.9075(4). 
(c)  Until utilized for the purposes thereof, monies in the local housing assistance trust fund shall be held in trust by the city solely for use pursuant to the local housing assistance program. All local housing assistance program income, including investment earnings, shall be retained in the local housing assistance trust fund and used for the purposes thereof. 
(d)  The city agrees that the local housing assistance trust fund shall be separately stated as a special revenue fund in the city's audited financial statements. Copies of such audited financial statements shall be forwarded to the state housing finance agency. 
(Ord. No. 3855, § 1, 4-19-93)  
Sec. 14-3. - Intent of local housing assistance program. 
The intent of the local housing assistance program is to further the goal of providing decent, safe, sanitary and affordable housing to all eligible persons. This will be accomplished through the effective development and enhancement of affordable housing initiatives and programs. 
(Ord. No. 3855, § 1, 4-19-93)  
Sec. 14-4. - Establishment of local housing assistance program. 
(a)  The local housing assistance program is hereby created and established. The city commission may enter into interlocal agreements with the county or other governments in order to more effectively address affordable housing needs and follow the intent of the SHIP Act. 
(b)  The city shall use the funds received from the state pursuant to the SHIP Act to implement the local housing assistance program. 
(c)  The cost of administering the local housing assistance program shall be consistent with requirements of the SHIP Act. 
(d)  The local housing assistance program shall include all other lawful objectives listed in the local housing assistance plan as provided for by F.S. §§ 420.907—420.9079, and Rule 9I-37, Florida Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 3855, § 1, 4-19-93)  
Sec. 14-5. - Administration and implementation of local housing assistance program. 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for implementation and administration of the local housing assistance program. 
(b)  In implementing the local housing assistance program the city shall: 
(1)  Advertise the availability of a housing assistance program in a newspaper of general circulation and periodicals serving ethnic and diverse neighborhoods, at least thirty (30) days before the beginning of any application period. 
(2)  Adopt a maximum award schedule or system of awards to comply with the following criteria: 
a.  A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the distribution of funds in the first year shall be reserved for construction, rehabilitation or emergency repair of eligible housing. 
b.  At least sixty-five (65) percent of the funds made available, including but not limited to construction, rehabilitation or emergency repair, must be reserved for activities benefitting existing or potential home ownership for eligible persons. 
c.  The cost of administering the program may not exceed five (5) percent of the local housing distribution moneys deposited into the trust fund. If the five (5) percent is found to be insufficient to adequately pay the necessary cost of administering the local housing assistance program, the city commission, by resolution, may grant up to an additional five (5) percent. The total cost of administering the program may not exceed ten (10) percent of the local housing distribution deposited into the trust fund. 
d.  The percentage allocation of SHIP funds may vary year to year as provided in F.S. § 420.9075(3). 
e.  The sales price of new or existing eligible housing shall not exceed ninety (90) percent of the median area purchase price in the area where the eligible housing is located as established by the United States Department of Treasury in accordance with section 3(b)2 of the United States Housing Act of 1937. 
f.  All units constructed, rehabilitated or otherwise assisted with program funds shall be occupied by very-low-income, low-income or moderate-income persons and persons who have special housing needs. At least thirty (30) percent of units must be occupied by very-low-income persons and at least another thirty (30) percent by low-income persons. The remainder shall be occupied by persons who have special housing needs, very-low-income, low-income or moderate-income persons. 
g.  The amount of monthly mortgage payments or the amount of monthly rents charged by the eligible sponsor or its designee must be affordable to eligible persons. 
h.  Loans shall be provided for periods not exceeding thirty (30) years except for deferred payment loans or loans that extend beyond thirty (30) years which continue to provide eligible housing for eligible persons. 
i.  Eligible owner-occupied housing constructed, rehabilitated or otherwise assisted from proceeds provided from the local housing assistance program shall be subject to subsidy recapture provisions as specified in the local housing assistance program. 
j.  Eligible rental housing constructed, rehabilitated or otherwise assisted from proceeds provided from the local housing assistance program shall be reserved for eligible persons for a minimum of fifteen (15) years. 
k.  A qualification system for applicants for awards consistent with the intent of the local housing assistance program and F.S. §§ 420.907—420.9079 shall be established by the city manager. 
l.  The city shall annually monitor to determine that eligible sponsors are in compliance with the city's fair housing ordinance, as provided in Chapter 8, Article V, of this Code, and all other federal, state and local laws, statutes and regulations. 
(3)  The city will ensure that the local housing assistance program is in compliance with the city's fair housing ordinance, as provided in Chapter 8, Article V, of this Code, and all other federal, state and local laws, statutes and regulations. 
(4)  The city shall comply with all rules and regulations of the state housing finance agency. 
(5)  Prior to receiving an award, all eligible persons or eligible sponsors shall be required to enter into an agreement with the city that the persons or sponsors agree to comply with the affordable housing criteria provided under F.S. §§ 420.907—420.9079 and this chapter. All eligible persons or eligible sponsors shall include in the deed transferring ownership of the property to the eligible person or eligible sponsor a covenant agreeing to comply with the terms of the above-described laws, which covenant will run with the land, or, in the alternative, the agreement shall be made a part of the mortgage agreement. Failure to comply with the covenant in the mortgage shall result in a default of the mortgage with all remedies and rights for enforcement inuring to the benefit of the city. 
(6)  Eligible sponsors receiving assistance from both the state housing initiative partnership (SHIP) program and the low-income housing tax credit program shall be required to comply with the income, affordability and other low-income housing tax credit program requirements. Similarly, any eligible housing receiving assistance from state housing initiative partnership and federal programs shall be required to comply with all requirements of those programs. 
(Ord. No. 3855, § 1, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 3872, § 1, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 3925, § 1, 1-10-94)  
Sec. 14-6. - Affordable housing advisory committee. 
(a)  The affordable housing advisory committee is created and established to recommend monetary and nonmonetary local housing incentive strategies to be included in the local housing assistance plan as provided in section 14-7, and such other duties as may be established by the city commission. The city commission shall appoint the members to the committee by resolution. 
(b)  The affordable housing advisory committee shall consist of 11 members. The composition of the committee shall include the following individuals as required by state law: 
(1)  One citizen who is actively engaged in the residential home building industry in connection with affordable housing. 
(2)  One citizen who is actively engaged in the banking or mortgage banking industry in connection with affordable housing. 
(3)  One citizen who is a representative of those areas of labor actively engaged in home building in connection with affordable housing. 
(4)  One citizen who is actively engaged as an advocate for low-income persons in connection with affordable housing. 
(5)  One citizen who is actively engaged as a for-profit provider of affordable housing. 
(6)  One citizen who is actively engaged as a not-for-profit provider of affordable housing. 
(7)  One citizen who is actively engaged as a real estate professional in connection with affordable housing. 
(8)  One citizen who actively serves on the city plan board 
(9)  One citizen who represents employers within the jurisdiction. 
(10)  One citizen who represents essential services personnel, as defined in the local housing assistance plan. 
(11)  One other citizen 
(c)  If the city commission, whether due to the presence of a conflict of interest by prospective appointees, or other reasonable factor(s), is unable to appoint a citizen actively engaged in the above activities "in connection with affordable housing", a citizen engaged in the activity without regard to affordable housing may be appointed. 
(d)  The members of the committee shall be and remain bona fide residents of the city. If at any time any member of the committee fails to be and remain a resident of the city that member shall be automatically disqualified and removed from the committee. 
(e)  Members shall be appointed for a term of two years. Members may be reappointed for consecutive terms, but no member shall serve more than three successive terms. Reappointment may then occur after at least one year of absence from the committee. If a vacancy occurs, a new appointment shall be made by resolution of the city commission for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(f)  Six members of the committee shall constitute a quorum sufficient to permit the committee to take any formal action. Formal action of the committee must be approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of its entire membership (i.e., six members). The committee may meet to hear presentations with less than a quorum in attendance, provided the meeting is duly noticed and formal action is not taken at the meeting. The committee may elect a chairperson or presiding officer and may adopt rules of procedures to carry out its duties. All rules of procedure must conform to this article, the Code of Ordinances, rules of the city commission and state law. 
(g)  All meetings of the committee are public meetings and all committee records are public records. Staff, administrative and facility support for the affordable housing advisory committee shall be provided by the city housing division, and by the city planning and development services department to the extent necessary to ensure an integrated approach to the work of the committee. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the general regulation of committees as set forth in Chapter 2, Article V, Division 1 shall apply to this committee. 
(Ord. No. 3855, § 1, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 070872, § 2, 4-14-08) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2.  
Sec. 14-7. - Adoption of local housing incentive strategies. 
(a)  The affordable housing advisory committee shall review the established policies and procedures, ordinances, land development regulations, and adopted comprehensive plan of the city and shall recommend specific actions or initiatives to encourage or facilitate affordable housing while protecting the ability of the property to appreciate in value. The recommendations may include the modification or repeal of existing policies, procedures, ordinances, regulations, or plan provisions; the creation of exceptions applicable to affordable housing; or the adoption of new policies, procedures, regulations, ordinances, or plan provisions, including recommendations to amend the local government comprehensive plan and corresponding regulations, ordinances, and other policies. At a minimum, the committee shall submit a report for local housing incentive strategies to the mayor and city commission that includes recommendations on, and every three years thereafter evaluates the implementation of, local housing incentive strategies in the following areas: 
(1)  Expedited processing of approvals of development orders or development permits issued by the city for affordable housing projects, including without limitation, building permits, zoning permits, subdivision approval, rezoning, certification, special exceptions, variances, or any other official action of local government having the effect of permitting the development of land for affordable housing projects. 
(2)  Modification of impact-fee requirements, including reduction or waiver of fees and alternative methods of fee payment. 
(3)  Allowance of flexibility in densities for affordable housing. 
(4)  Reservation of infrastructure capacity for housing for very-low-income persons, low-income persons and moderate-income persons. 
(5)  Allowance of affordable accessory residential units in residential zoning districts. 
(6)  Reduction of parking and setback requirements for affordable housing. 
(7)  Allowance of flexible lot configurations, including zero-lot-line configurations, for affordable housing. 
(8)  Modification of street requirements for affordable housing. 
(9)  Establishment of a process by which the city considers, before adoption, policies, procedures, ordinances, regulations, or plan provisions that increase the cost of housing. 
(10)  Preparation of a printed inventory of locally owned public lands suitable for affordable housing. 
(11)  Support of affordable housing development near transportation hubs and major employment centers and mixed-use developments. 
(12)  Other affordable housing incentives identified by the advisory committee. 
(b)  To the maximum extent feasible, the report of recommendations for local housing incentive strategies submitted to the mayor and city commission shall quantify the affordable housing cost reduction anticipated from implementing the specific recommendations. 
(c)  The report shall be approved by formal action of the committee at a public hearing. Public notice of the hearing shall include the time, date and place and shall be published in a newspaper of general paid circulation. The notice shall provide a short and concise summary of the local housing incentive strategy recommendations to be considered by the committee. The notice shall state the public place where a copy of the committee recommendations can be obtained by interested persons. 
(d)  Within 90 days after receipt of the report from the committee, the city commission shall adopt an amendment to the local housing assistance plan to incorporate the local housing incentive strategies it will implement within the city. The city commission must consider the strategies specified in section 14-7(a) as recommended by the committee. The city commission may also consider other regulatory reforms and incentives that encourage or facilitate affordable housing. The amendment shall include specific initiatives to encourage or facilitate affordable housing and a schedule for implementation. At a minimum, the amendment shall include the following: 
(1)  A schedule for implementation of expedited permit processing for affordable housing projects; and 
(2)  A process for review of local policies, ordinances, regulations, and incentive plan provisions that significantly impact the cost of housing prior to their adoption. 
(Ord. No. 3855, § 1, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 070872, § 3, 4-14-08)  
Chapter 14.5 - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Bottle clubs, § 4-21 et seq.; discrimination, Ch. 8; clean indoor air, § 11.5-16 et seq.; automatic dialing telephonic alarm systems, § 17-3; peddlers, solicitors and canvassers, Ch. 19; burglar alarm systems, § 21-61 et seq.; secondhand goods, Ch. 22; taxation, Ch. 25; utilities, Ch. 27; vehicles for hire, Ch. 28; land development code, Ch. 30; landlord permits, § 30-57; home occupation permits, § 30-58. 
 
ARTICLE I. - LANDLORD PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 070107, § 2, adopted June 25, 2007, amended Art. I, §§ 14.5-1—14.5-4, in its entirety, in effect deleting Art. I, §§ 14.5-1—14.5-4, as being superseded and enacting a new Art. I, §§ 14.5-1—14.5-5, to read as set out herein. Former Art. I, §§ 14.5-1—14.5-5, pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete history of former Art. I, §§ 14.5-1—14.5-5, see the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 14.5-1. - Landlord permits. 
(a)  Definitions. Unless otherwise specified in this article, "days" shall mean calendar days and "notice" shall mean written notice that is made in the same manner as provided in F.S. § 162.12. 
(b)  Application/issuance of permit. The owner(s) of a dwelling unit, as defined in section 30-2.1, that is located within one of the following districts: RSF-1; RSF-2; RSF-3; RSF-4; RC; all PD's designated for residential use at a density of more than eight dwelling units per acre; and all other PD's as may be specified in the rezoning ordinance, shall obtain a landlord permit prior to allowing the occupancy of that dwelling unit by any person, whether or not for consideration. Landlord permits shall be valid from August 1, or the date of issuance, through July 31. The owner(s) of the dwelling unit or the owner's agent shall submit a written application for a permit on a form provided by the city. Upon receipt of a completed application, the city manager or designee shall issue a landlord permit for the dwelling unit provided each of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The application is accompanied by payment of the permit fee set forth in Appendix A; 
(2)  The owner(s) and the dwelling unit are in compliance with all provisions of this article; and 
(3)  The application for the landlord permit provides the correct street address for the dwelling unit. 
(c)  Exemption. This section does not apply if the dwelling unit is occupied by: a) the owner(s) as a permanent place of residence, as evidenced by an existing homestead exemption or a filed application for a homestead exemption, or b) no persons other than the following family members of the owner(s): spouse, domestic partner, child, stepchild, foster child, parent, stepparent, foster parent, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, or legal guardian, as evidenced by written documentation of such relationship. 
(d)  Payment; late payment. The applicable permit fee is specified in Appendix A. If payment is not received on or before the due date specified in Appendix A, the late fee specified in Appendix A shall be due and payable and the city manager or designee may refer the account to a collection agency. If the collection agency does not collect the amount due within 90 days of the referral, or if the city manager or designee decides not to refer the account to a collection agency, the applicant or permit holder shall be subject to notice of violation of this article and code enforcement proceedings, or the case can be referred to the city attorney to pursue resolution in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  Failure to apply for permit. If the city manager or designee has reasonable cause to believe that a dwelling unit is occupied without a permit in violation of this article, the owner(s) of the property shall be sent an application advising that the owner(s) shall, within 30 days of the date application was sent, either: a) provide evidence that a permit is not required, or b) submit a permit application. Failure to either provide evidence that a permit is not required, or submit a permit application within 30 days shall subject the owner(s) to a notice of violation of this article and code enforcement proceedings. Fines imposed by the code enforcement-proceedings shall stop accruing, and be calculated as due and payable to the city, upon the date of occurrence of any of the following events: 
(1)  A landlord permit is obtained for the subject property; 
(2)  The subject property is no longer occupied in violation of this article; 
(3)  The subject property has been relinquished by the owner(s) by sale, foreclosure, or other action that dispossesses the owner(s) of title to the property; or 
(4)  The landlord permit year for which the owner(s) is in arrears ends. 
(f)  Requirements of permit applicant. The applicant for a landlord permit shall comply with the following requirements. Failure to comply with any of the following requirements shall be grounds for revocation of the permit, as described in section 14.5-3 or denial of a permit as described in section 14.5-4. 
(1)  The applicant shall certify that he/she has provided each occupant of the subject dwelling unit with a copy of: 
a.  F.S. Ch. 83, Pt. II, titled "Residential Tenancies"; 
b.  Chapter 14.5, article I of this Code, titled "Landlord Permits"; and 
c.  A pamphlet prepared by the city containing guidelines for rentals in residential neighborhoods. 
(2)  The applicant shall certify that, in the event the city provides notice of repeated violations of certain ordinances occurring at the dwelling unit, as provided in section 14.5-2, the applicant will pursue all lawful remedies available under F.S. § 83.56, regarding termination of the rental agreement due to the tenant's failure to comply with F.S. Ch. 83, the provisions of the lease or this Code. 
(3)  The applicant shall certify that he/she is the fee simple owner of the dwelling unit or the agent of the fee simple owner of the dwelling unit. 
(4)  The applicant shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of a contact person who resides within Alachua County to receive communications from the city concerning the permit. 
(5)  The applicant shall maintain a list of the names of occupants in each dwelling unit, and such lists shall be made available to the city in a reasonable amount of time upon request. 
(g)  If owner(s) sells the property for which a valid permit has been issued, the new owner(s) shall submit a permit application and otherwise meet the requirements of this article, and has the option of either: a) paying the permit fee for transfers of a permit as set forth in Appendix A, which permit shall be transferred with any outstanding points accumulated per section 14.5-2, or b) paying the permit fee for a new permit as set forth in Appendix A, which permit shall have no accumulated points. 
(Ord. No. 070107, § 2, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 100591, §§ 1, 2, 7-21-11; Ord. No. 140043, § 1, 7-17-14; Ord. No. 140292 , § 2, 7-21-16; Ord. No. 180471 , § 1, 2-7-19)  
Sec. 14.5-2. - Points assessed on permit. 
(a)  Violations; warnings; points. When a dwelling unit regulated by this article is the subject of repeated warnings of violation and/or adjudication of guilt, finding of guilt with adjudication withheld, waiver of right to contest the violation, or pleas of no contest (including, but not limited to, payment of fine) of the following city ordinances: 
(1)  Noise ordinances (chapter 15 of the Code of Ordinances); 
(2)  Animal control ordinances (chapter 5 of the Code of Ordinances); 
(3)  Solid waste ordinances (article III of chapter 27 of the Code of Ordinances); 
(4)  The provisions of section 30-57 concerning habitation by more than one family; 
(5)  Yard parking ordinance (subsection 30-56(c)(4) of the Code of Ordinances); 
(6)  Section 13-171 (related to insects, storage, trash and yard maintenance); or 
(7)  Section 13-181 (related to hazardous conditions). 
The landlord permit for the dwelling unit shall be subject to the accumulation of points as follows: 
a.  For one or more written warnings given in any 24-hour period for violation of one or more of the ordinances listed above, one point will be assessed on the landlord permit for that unit. For each instance of adjudication of guilt, finding of guilt with adjudication withheld, waiver of right to contest the violation, or plea of no contest (including, but not limited to, payment of fine) for violation of any of the ordinances listed above, two points will be assessed on the landlord permit for that unit. However, to the extent more than one person is adjudicated guilty, found guilty with adjudication withheld, waives the right to contest the violation or pleads no contest for the same violations that occur within a 24-hour period, only two points will be assessed on the landlord permit for that unit. For purposes of this section, written warnings shall mean those warnings issued pursuant to civil citation or code enforcement procedures, including stickers placed on vehicles advising of violation of the yard parking ordinance. 
b.  After each point is assessed on a landlord permit for a unit, the city manager or designee shall send a written warning to the owner(s) or agent. Each warning shall specify which ordinance or ordinances have been violated and shall state that further warnings or violations may lead to a revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 070107, § 2, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 140292 , § 2, 7-21-16)  
Sec. 14.5-3. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Accumulation of six or more points on a permit during any three consecutive annual (i.e., August 1 through July 31) permit periods or failure to comply with subsection 14.5-1(f), shall constitute a violation of this article subjecting the owner(s) to proceedings to revoke the permit as follows: 
(1)  The city manager or designee shall have written notice served to the owner(s) or agent to show cause why the permit should not be revoked. 
(2)  The owner(s) or agent shall have 15 days from the date of service to request a hearing to determine whether the permit should be revoked. The request shall be sent to the city manager by certified mail, return receipt requested. If such request is not timely made, the revocation shall take effect on the 21st day after the date of service to show cause. 
(3)  Upon request for a hearing, a hearing shall be scheduled before the code enforcement board or special magistrate. 
(4)  In conducting the hearing, the code enforcement board or special magistrate shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, compel the production of books, paper, and other documents, and receive evidence. All parties shall have an opportunity to respond, to present evidence and argument on all issues involved, to conduct cross-examination and submit rebuttal evidence, and to be represented by counsel or other qualified representative. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The lack of actual knowledge of, acquiescence to, participation in, or responsibility for, a public nuisance at common law or a noxious use of private property on the part of the owner(s) or agent shall not be a defense by such owner(s) or agent. 
(5)  If the code enforcement board or special magistrate finds either: (a) the accumulation of the six points and the existence of a public nuisance at common law or noxious use of private property, or (b) the owner(s) failed to comply with subsection 14.5-1(f), the code enforcement board or special magistrate shall enter an order revoking the permit. 
(6)  If the code enforcement board or special magistrate finds no failure to comply with subsection 14.5-1(f), no public nuisance at common law or noxious use of private property exists, or that the owner(s) has recovered possession of the dwelling unit from the tenant(s) that caused the violation(s), the code enforcement board or special magistrate shall enter an order to dismiss the revocation action and, if appropriate, to rescind points from the permit based upon the actions taken by the owner(s) to seek compliance with the city's ordinances. 
(7)  The code enforcement board or special magistrate's order shall consist of findings of fact, conclusions of law and relief. 
(8)  Notice of the final order shall be provided to the owner(s) within 15 days of the date of the final order. 
(9)  If the permit is revoked under these procedures, the owner(s) or agent shall have 15 days from the date of the final order to commence proceedings to recover possession of the rental unit under state law from the tenant(s) that caused the violation(s), if not already done. The owner(s) or agent shall diligently pursue the process of eviction to completion. The owner(s) or agent shall provide copies of all documents provided to the tenant(s) or filed with the court concerning the eviction process to the city manager or designee. If the owner(s) fails to comply with these provisions, or fails to abide with the final order of the city, the city may cite the owner(s) for violation of section 14.5-1 (renting without a landlord permit), or seek other available legal or equitable relief. 
(10)  In addition to the above-described procedures, the city attorney is authorized to file for injunctive relief to abate the public nuisance at common law or noxious use of private property pursuant to law. 
(11)  The final order of the city is subject to certiorari review in a court of competent jurisdiction in Alachua County, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 070107, § 2, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 140292 , § 2, 7-21-16)  
Sec. 14.5-4. - Denial of permit. 
(a)  The city manager or designee may deny issuance of any permits applied for under this section if it is determined either that the owner or agent has made material misrepresentations about the condition of his/her property or status of ownership, or that the occupancy of the property is in violation of section 30-57 or that the owner or agent has refused to make or comply with the certifications required in subsection 14.5-1.(e) or that the owner has otherwise violated a provision of this article. 
(b)  If the city manager or designee determines there is reasonable cause to believe that there are grounds to deny a permit applied for the city manager or designee shall provide notice of the denial, including the grounds for the denial. 
(c)  Within 15 days of the date of the notice, the owner may request in writing to the city manager a hearing on the denial. The city manager or designee shall schedule the hearing to occur within 15 days after receiving the request for hearing and shall notify the owner at least five days in advance of the time and location for the hearing. The hearing may be postponed if mutually agreed upon by the city manager and the owner. 
(d)  The hearing shall be conducted informally and adherence to the rules of evidence normally followed by the courts shall not be required. Any person may present testimony, documents or other evidence as deemed relevant by the city manager or designee. Any person may be represented by counsel. 
(e)  The city manager or designee shall consider all evidence presented, and if the preponderance of the evidence supports the allegation of violation the permit shall be denied. If the preponderance of the evidence does not support the allegation of violation, the permit shall be issued. The decision of the city manager or designee may be appealed by a writ of certiorari to a court of competent jurisdiction in Alachua County, Florida. 
(f)  The city manager or designee may waive the denial requirement as to any permit if it is determined that the owner has attempted in good faith to comply with this article. In determining asserted good faith as required for a waiver, the city manager or designee may consider, but not be limited to, the owner response to current violations and remedy of past violations. 
(g)  If a permit is denied under this section, the owner whose permit was denied shall not be issued another permit on the same dwelling unit for a period of 6 months after the date of denial. 
(Ord. No. 070107, § 2, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 14.5-5. - Inspections and complaints. 
(a)  Inspections. By applying for a permit, the owner agrees to allow inspection of the unit for violations of this article, as well as violations of the housing code (article II of chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances) at any reasonable time; however, this provision shall not be interpreted as authorizing the city to conduct an inspection of an occupied rental unit without obtaining either the consent of an occupant or a warrant. 
(b)  Complaints. Each complainants shall be requested to state his/her name and addresses and give a statement of the facts giving rise to the complainant's belief that the provisions of this article are being violated. Such information may be obtained orally or in writing. A complainant may be subpoenaed to appear in a revocation or denial proceeding to provide evidence or testimony. 
(Ord. No. 070107, § 2, 6-25-07)  
Secs. 14.5-6—14.5-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MERCHANDISING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 020023, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2002, created Art. II pertaining to merchandising of tobacco products. Formerly Art. II pertained to convenience food stores and was repealed by Ord. No. 980470, § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 1998. The repealed provisions derived from Ord. No. 3230, § 1, adopted July 14, 1986; Ord. No. 3308, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 1986; and Ord. No. 3318, § 1, adopted Feb. 2, 1987. 
 
Sec. 14.5-15. - Declaration of intent. 
This article is intended to prevent the sale to, and possession of tobacco products by, persons under the age of 18 by regulating the commercial marketing and placement of such products. This section shall not be interpreted or construed to prohibit the sale or delivery of tobacco products that are otherwise lawful or are regulated pursuant to F.S. ch. 569. 
(Ord. No. 020023, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 14.5-16. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall mean: 
Business means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation, or other business for profit-making or non-profit purposes, including retail establishments, where goods or services are sold. 
Persons means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative receiver, trustee, assignee, or other legal entity. 
Restricted access area means an area reasonably physically confined with access designated by the vendor as limited to the vendor. 
Self-service merchandising means the open display of tobacco products to which the public has access without the intervention of the vendor, storeowner or other store employee. 
Tobacco products includes loose tobacco leaves, and products made from tobacco leaves, in whole or in part, and cigarette wrappers, which can be used for smoking, sniffing, or chewing. 
Tobacco retailer means any person or business that operates a store, stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales of tobacco products are made to purchasers for consumption. 
Vendor assisted means the customer has no access to tobacco products without the assistance of the vendor, storeowner, or other store employee. 
(Ord. No. 020023, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 14.5-17. - Self-service merchandise prohibited. 
No person, business, tobacco retailer, or other establishment subject to this article, shall sell, permit to be sold, offer by sale, or display for sale any tobacco products by means of self-service merchandising, or any other means other than vendor-assisted sales, unless access to the premises by persons under the age of 18 is prohibited by the person, business, tobacco retailer, or other establishment, or prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 020023, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 14.5-18. - Designation of enforcement official. 
The city manager shall be the enforcing official. The city manager may designate one or more subordinates who shall be charged with the duty of administering the applicable standards of this article and securing compliance therewith, and carrying out all other duties as specified by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 020023, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 14.5-19. - Liability of city officers, employees. 
No officer, agent or employee of the city shall render himself/herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this article. Any suit brought against an officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties under this article shall be defended by the city as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 020023, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 14.5-20. - Service of notice of violation. 
Whenever the enforcing official determines that a violation of this article exists, he/she shall take action as follows: 
(1)  Give written notice of the violation to the occupants and/or owners. 
(2)  The notice shall include: 
a.  A description of the location of the business involved, either by street address or legal description; 
b.  A statement indicating the nature of the violation and the reason or reasons why the notice of violation is issued; 
c.  A specification of the section or sections of this article upon which the notice of violation is based; 
(3)  The written notice of violation referred to in subsections (1) and (2) above shall in all cases be served upon the owner, as well as upon the occupant of the premises, if the owner does not occupy the premises. Such service shall be deemed complete if personally delivered or upon sending same by regular mail to the last known address of the owner as shown on the tax rolls of the city. 
(4)  The time for correcting any violation(s) on a notice of violation shall be not less than five days nor more than ten days. 
(Ord. No. 020023, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Secs. 14.5-21—14.5-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TOWING OR IMMOBILIZING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 050749, § 1, adopted July 23, 2007, amended Art. III, §§ 14.5-25—14.5-36, in its entirety, in effect deleting Art. III, §§ 14.5-25—14.5-36, as being superseded and enacting a new Art. III, §§ 14.5-25—14.5-38, to read as set out herein. Former Art. III, §§ 14.5-25—14.5-36, pertained to similar subject. For a complete history of former Art. III, §§ 14.5-25—14.5-36, see the Code Comparative Table. Ord. No. 080284, § 1, adopted March 19, 2009, changed the title of Art. III from "Towing from Certain Private Property" to "Towing or Immobilizing Vehicles on Private Property." 
 
DIVISION 1. - TOWING OF VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 14.5-25. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Applicant means the person applying for a permit under this division. For purposes of a trespass towing service permit, the term applicant includes all owners of the towing service. 
Call in towing means towing or removal of a vehicle that is parked on private real property, without the consent of the vehicle's registered owner or other legally authorized person in control of the vehicle, when done so at the specific request of the private property owner or designee. 
Emergency towing shall only include circumstances where the usual operation of a business is impeded by the blocking of entrances, exits or access to operational equipment, but specifically shall not include tows for the purpose of clearing parking areas. 
Major credit card means a Visa or MasterCard. 
Normal business hours means Monday through Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., and on any Sunday the tow service tows any vehicles. 
Owner(s) means the natural person(s) that own, hold, control, or have beneficial interest in a trespass towing service. 
Person shall mean and include, but shall not be limited to, any natural person, sole proprietor, firm, legal entity, partnership, joint venture, syndicate or other group, or combination acting as a unit, association, corporation, estate, trust, trustee, executor, administrator, receiver, or other fiduciary, and shall include the plural as well as the singular. 
Physically connected means that at least two of the vehicle's wheels are raised from the ground and the connection is in compliance with the requirements of F.S. § 316.222 (related to stop lamps and turn signals) and F.S. § 316.525 (requirements for vehicles hauling loads). 
Property owner means the person who exercises dominion and control over the real property, including, but not limited to, the legal title holder, lessee, a resident manager, a property manager or other agent who has legal authority to bind the owner. An owner, operator, or other agent or employee of a trespass towing service or immobilization service, may not be appointed as an agent for a property owner, unless the property owner also owns or is employed by the trespass towing service. 
Roam towing means towing or removal of a vehicle that is parked on private real property, without the consent of the vehicle's registered owner or other legally authorized person in control of the vehicle, when the tow was not specifically requested by the private property owner or designee, but was done pursuant to an agreement on the form approved by the towing administrator with a tow company for the tow company to monitor non-permitted parking on said private real property. 
Tow means to haul, carry, pull along, or otherwise transport a connected vehicle by means of another vehicle in a direct and continuous movement to the storage site of the towing or immobilization service and applies only to private property or trespass tows as defined in this article. 
Tow operator means a natural person who is operating a tow truck for a trespass towing service. 
Towing administrator means the person(s) appointed by the city manager, to administer Article III of this chapter. 
Trespass towing means towing or removal of a vehicle that is parked on private real property, without the consent of the vehicle's registered owner or other legally authorized person in control of the vehicle. "Trespass towing" includes roam towing and call in towing. 
Trespass towing service includes any person, whether licensed or not, that engages in or that owns or operates a business which engages, in whole or in part, in the towing of vehicles for compensation from private property and does not apply to repossessions, or to the towing or removal of any privately owned vehicle by the operator or of any vehicle towing or removal service when such service is performed at the request of the registered owner of the vehicle, for money or other goods of value. 
Violation shall mean an uncontested citation, conviction of, or a plea of nolo contendere to violating this article, regardless of adjudication of guilt. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 080284, § 1, 3-19-09; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-26. - Vehicle registration provisions. 
(1)  Prior to performing any trespass towing, the trespass towing service shall first register the towing service vehicles with the towing administrator, using a format approved by the towing administrator. The information for registration shall contain the make, model and manufacturer's serial number of the vehicle; date the vehicle was put into service; the driver's license number of the owner and the name of the insurance company or companies with which the owner and operators have liability insurance for the operation of the vehicle as required by law; and the name and driver's license number of all employees involved in the towing of vehicles as defined in the trespass tow ordinance. Each trespass tow vehicle shall be inspected for compliance with this article and must display the medallion issued by the towing administrator to evidence such compliance. 
(2)  Each trespass tow vehicle must be commercially manufactured specifically for towing and must be equipped with the following in order to be registered and utilized for trespass towing purposes: 
(a)  Extra tow chain; 
(b)  Two-way radio or cell phone; 
(c)  Flashing amber emergency lights on the top of the vehicle; 
(d)  Dual rear wheels; 
(e)  Dollies; 
(f)  Flashlight; 
(g)  The name of the trespass towing service in permanent legible three-inch lettering on both doors of the vehicles; 
(h)  Fire extinguisher (5# minimum); 
(i)  Four-way lug wrench; 
(j)  One pry bar; 
(k)  Jumper cables. 
(3)  Registration fees for trespass towing vehicles shall be as provided in Appendix A, Schedule of Fees, Rates and Charges. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-27. - Tow operator permit and trespass tow service permit; violations. 
(a)  No tow operator shall engage in trespass towing without first having obtained authorization from the towing service by whom such tow operator is employed, and then obtaining a tow operator permit from the towing administrator. 
If the permit is lost, damaged, stolen, becomes illegible or the permit holder changes towing services, the permit must be replaced. The replacement permit shall be valid only for the remainder of the time period for which the initial permit was valid. 
Each trespass towing operator shall wear a uniform which shall state the name of the trespass towing service and the first name and first initial of the last name of the trespass towing operator along with the unique identification number assigned to that operator by the towing administrator. The name of the trespass towing service visible on the outer garment and uniform must be the same as the name on the vehicle being operated by the trespass towing operator. In addition, the trespass tow operating permit must be worn on the outer garment, so as to be visible to a person speaking with the operator. The permit must be shown upon request to the person whose car is being towed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the trespass towing service to: 
(1)  Operate within the city without having first obtained a trespass towing service permit issued by the towing administrator. 
(2)  Allow any person to conduct trespass towing for the trespass towing service within the city unless such person has been granted a tow operator permit issued by the towing administrator. 
(c)  Upon issuance of the permits, the trespass towing service and/or tow operator is granted the privilege of engaging in trespass towing within the city limits of the City of Gainesville, Florida, unless such permit expires or is suspended or revoked, as provided in this article. Each trespass towing service permit shall be valid for no more than one year and shall expire on September 30 of each year. Each tow operator permit shall be valid for no more than two years and shall expire on September 30 of the second year. Permits are not transferable or assignable. 
(d)  In order to secure a trespass towing service permit or trespass tow operator permit, an applicant must provide the following information on a form provided by the tow administrator: 
(1)  A certified copy from the Florida Department of Law Enforcement of his/her criminal history and a certified copy of his/her driving record from the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles. 
(2)  Possess a valid Florida Class E and/or commercial driver's license, and provide a photocopy to the towing administrator. 
(3)  Not have been convicted of, found guilty of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, regardless of the adjudication of guilt, for any of the following: 
a.  Any capital felony, any first degree felony, sexual battery, or any violent felony involving the use of a firearm or weapon, as defined in F.S. § 790.01, or which results in great bodily harm. 
b.  Any violent felony which occurred within ten years of the application date. 
c.  Any felony or first degree misdemeanor directly related to the business of towing motor vehicles; repossession of motor vehicles; motor vehicle theft; carjacking; chop shops; or liens for recovering, towing, or storing vehicles and vessels (F.S. § 713.78), which occurred within ten years of the application date. 
d.  Driving under the influence or driving with an unlawful blood alcohol level, in violation of F.S. § 316.193, which occurred within five years of the application date, unless the applicant demonstrates evidence of the successful completion of a substance abuse treatment program approved by the city. 
All timeframes referenced in subsection (d)(3) shall be calculated and run from the date of the offense, as reflected in the charging documents. 
(4)  The applicant shall submit to a background investigation in order for the towing administrator to determine that: 
a.  The applicant does not have a currently suspended permit, has not had its permit revoked by action of the city within two years of the date of application, or has no outstanding and unsatisfied civil penalties imposed for violations of this article. 
b.  Each legal entity applicant is registered and active under the laws of Florida to do business under the name for which it has applied for a permit. 
c.  No fraud or willful or knowing misrepresentation or false statement is made in the application. 
d.  No judgment against the applicant arising out of the activity of recovery, towing or removing a vehicle or providing storage in connection therewith remains unsatisfied, unless a stay or reversal of the judgment was issued through the courts. 
e.  There are no outstanding warrants of arrest against the applicant. 
f.  The applicant, or the trespass towing service purchased by the applicant or the trespass towing service from which all or substantially all of its business assets were purchased by the applicant, has no (i) unpaid civil penalties; (ii) unpaid administrative costs of hearing; (iii) unpaid city investigative, enforcement, testing, or monitoring costs; or (iv) unpaid liens, any or all of which are owed to the City of Gainesville pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Ordinances. 
g.  There has been no fraudulent transfer of the company as described in section 14.5-39.1 of this Code. 
(e)  A complete application for permit shall be reviewed and granted or denied in writing within ten calendar days. If the permit is denied, the reason for such denial shall be provided in writing and shall also advise that the applicant may correct deficiencies in the application within seven calendar days of the notice of denial without incurring an additional application fee. 
(f)  Every applicant for a trespass towing service permit shall file with the towing administrator a certificate of insurance or other proof of insurance providing coverage for all liability claims and claims of damage to property resulting from any action or operation in connection with the trespass towing service, in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for each incident, $50,000.00 of such coverage allocated for property damage. 
(g)  Each trespass towing service shall have a fixed physical office within the Gainesville city limits registered with the towing administrator. The office shall be open and staffed with personnel during normal business hours, as defined in this chapter, allowing for the recovery of towed vehicles and the inspection of the premises and records by the towing administrator. 
(h)  Permit fees shall be as provided in Appendix A, Schedule of Fees, Rates and Charges. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 070455, § 1, 10-8-07; Ord. No. 100306, § 1, 10-21-10; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-28. - Revocation; appeal. 
(a)  The city may revoke the permit of any tow operator or trespass towing service to perform trespass towing as follows: 
(1)  If the trespass towing service or tow operator violates one or more of the following: 
a.  If the permit application contains a false statement of material fact; 
b.  If the trespass towing service and/or tow operator provides monetary or other valuable consideration to the private real property owner for the privilege of towing vehicles from the property under contract; 
c.  The trespass towing service and/or tow operator provides monetary or other valuable consideration to the private real property owner for each or any individual vehicle towed from the property; 
d.  If the trespass towing service and/or tow operator charges fees in excess of that set out in the current fee resolution adopted by the city commission; 
e.  If a tow operator fails to display on or about his/her person easily visible to the public, the tow operator permit while performing a trespass tow; 
f.  If a tow operator or trespass towing service fails to maintain the qualifications and requirements to qualify for a trespass towing permit; 
g.  There has been a fraudulent transfer of the company as described in section 14.5-38.1 of this Code. 
(2)  Three or more violations of any other provision of this article by any trespass towing service and/or tow operator with the third violation occurring within one year of the first violation shall result in the revocation of the trespass towing service permit and/or trespass tow operator's permit, as applicable, subject to the procedures provided in subsection (c) below. A trespass towing service permit shall not be revoked for acts of an employee/tow operator in violation of this section unless the trespass towing service actively participated in or had knowledge of the violation and took no corrective action against the employee/tow operator or unless repeated violations by an employee did not result in progressive discipline. The trespass towing service shall maintain written documentation of all corrective action taken against an employee/tow operator for a minimum period of one year from the date of the last corrective action. In addition to the corrective action taken, the documentation shall detail the type and date of the specific ordinance/statutory violation. 
(b)  If it is found that the towing service or operator meets the requirements for permit revocation, the permit shall be revoked for the following time periods: 
(1)  First revocation: Six months from the final date of the revocation. 
(2)  Second and subsequent revocations: One year from the final date of the revocation. 
(c)  The procedure for revoking a permit is as follows: 
(1)  The towing administrator shall provide written notice to the trespass towing service and/or tow operator, as applicable, by hand delivery or by certified or registered mail at least 15 calendar days prior to the effective date of the revocation. The written notice shall contain notice that the establishment may contest the revocation by requesting a hearing as provided below. Service shall be deemed complete if personally delivered upon the owner or an employee of the trespass towing service or tow operator, as applicable, by any officer authorized by law to serve process or a duly appointed law enforcement officer of the city police department. The person serving process shall make proof of service within the time during which the person served must respond to the process. If service cannot be personally made within the city, then service may be made by notice to a registered agent of the trespass towing service or tow operator as applicable. 
(2)  The trespass towing service and/or tow operator may file a written request for a hearing prior to the effective date of the revocation with the city manager or his designee. Failure to timely request a hearing shall constitute a waiver by the trespass towing service and/or tow operator of any rights to a hearing. Upon request for a hearing, the revocation shall be stayed until final administrative action has been effected. 
(3)  At the hearing, the trespass towing service and/or tow operator shall have the opportunity to present evidence (consisting of testimony and/or written documentation) he/she believes negates or mitigates the revocation. 
(4)  In conducting the hearing, the city manager or designee shall have the power to take testimony under oath, require the production of books, paper, and other documents, and receive evidence. Should a party refuse to provide documents as directed by the city manager or designee, then there may be an adverse inference against the party who failed to produce said documents. All parties shall have an opportunity to respond, to present evidence and argument on all issues involved, to conduct cross-examination and submit rebuttal evidence, and to be represented by counsel. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. Any party desiring the hearing be recorded, shall be responsible for arranging and paying the cost of a court reporter's attendance and services. 
(5)  If the city manager or designee finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the towing service or operator meets the requirements for permit revocation, then the city manager or designee shall uphold the suspension of the trespass towing services or tow operator permit and set the revocation date to begin 15 [days] from the date of the final administrative order, subject to a writ of certiorari being filed pursuant to paragraph (8) below. 
(6)  If the city manager or designee finds that the towing service or operator does not meet the requirements for permit revocation, then the city manager or designee shall rescind the suspension of the trespass towing services or tow operator permit. 
(7)  The city manager or designee shall provide written notice of the final order to the trespass towing service and tow operator as applicable. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be the final administrative action. 
(8)  Right to appeal: The final administrative order of the city is subject to certiorari review in a court of competent jurisdiction in Alachua County, Florida by the timely filing of a petition. Upon the filing of a petition in the Circuit Court, the revocation of the permit shall be stayed pending final disposition of the civil case. 
(9)  Upon the completion of the administrative hearing process and the final determination of the city manager or designee, the city manager or designee shall revoke the trespass towing service permit and/or tow operator permit to engage in the business of trespass towing, if it is found that the towing service or operator meets the requirements for permit revocation for the following time periods: 
a.  First revocation: Six months from the final date of the revocation. 
b.  Second and subsequent revocations: One year from the final date of the revocation. 
(d)  Any trespass towing service and/or tow operator whose permit to engage in trespass towing has been revoked shall not be eligible to obtain a trespass towing service permit or tow operator's permit for trespass towing until such revocation period has expired. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-29. - Prerequisites to towing vehicles parked on private property; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) below, it shall be unlawful for any trespass towing service, tow operator or any person to trespass tow or cause to be towed any vehicle unless the provisions of F.S. § 715.07 have been strictly complied with together with the following requirements: 
(1)  The owners of the real property shall have executed, and filed with the towing administrator, at least 24 hours prior to the towing or removal of any vehicle, a written agreement for trespass towing with a towing service, which agreement shall contain the following provisions: 
a.  The duration of the agreement; 
b.  The time of day that such towing or removal is authorized; 
c.  The days of the week that such towing or removal is authorized; 
d.  The fees to be paid for the towing or removal; 
e.  The signatures of both the property owner or the authorized representative, and the owner, or authorized representative of the towing service, certifying that each has read and is in compliance with all of the provisions of F.S. § 715.07. 
f.  A legal description or sketch of the private real property from which vehicles may be towed. 
The form for such agreement shall be provided by the towing administrator, and may not be amended or modified in any manner that provides for terms or activities that violate the provisions of F.S. § 715.07 and Article III, Chapter 14.5 of this Code. 
(2)  A new completed agreement is submitted each time a property owner changes trespass towing services, or the ownership of the property changes. The property owner shall pay the fee set forth in Appendix A upon filing a new trespass towing agreement and then again annually for each property which is included in a trespass towing agreement. If a private real property owner is terminating an agreement with a trespass towing service, 72 hours advance written notice must be given to the trespass towing service whose agreement is being terminated before any trespass towing can be done by a different trespass towing service. 
(3)  Where the private real property is used for residential parking, other than for a single-family residence, the agreement, except as provided in subsection (a)(4) below, shall not authorize the trespass towing service to tow away or remove any vehicle without a verified request to remove the specific vehicle by the property owner. 
(4)  An owner of private real property used for residential or business purposes may elect to authorize the trespass towing service to tow away or remove vehicles without a verified request to remove a specific vehicle provided that the following requirements are complied with: 
a.  Signage shall be added to each of the existing tow away signs with letters of the same size as the "tow away" language, which provides the following words: "roam towing." The sign shall state the specific hours of roam towing or state "24-hours," if that is applicable. 
b.  Towing contract on file with the towing administrator as required by subsection (a)(1) shall provide for roam towing. 
c.  Photograph(s) of the "offending" vehicle shall be taken prior to its removal and shall be of sufficient detail to demonstrate the violation of rule or regulation for which the vehicle is being towed. The photograph(s) must be date and time stamped and maintained by the trespass towing service for a minimum period of six months. Photos will be available for viewing during normal business hours, commencing the following business day at 8:00 a.m. There can be no charge for viewing the photographs. 
d.  Lease, rental or property owners' association documents shall contain a notice provision indicating that the residential property utilizes roam towing. In the case of properties with existing leases, rental agreements or property owners' association documents, it shall be sufficient to notify by regular mail, at the last known address, each of the tenants/owners of the property prior to the initiation of roam towing. All new leases, rental agreements or property owners' association documents, or amendments thereto, shall contain the provision giving notice that the property owner intends to utilize roam towing. 
(5)  For private real property located within the boundaries of the community redevelopment areas as defined in Division 9 of Chapter 2 of this Code, signage as required by F.S. § 715.07 and subsection (a) above, shall use reflective white lettering on a nonreflective black background. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The towing of vehicles pursuant to section 26-136 et seq., Abandoned, Wrecked and Non-operating Vehicles, of this Code. 
(2)  The towing of vehicles from property appurtenant to and obviously a part of a single-family residence. 
(3)  When notice is personally given to the registered owner or other legally authorized person in control of the vehicle that the area in which that vehicle is parked is reserved or otherwise unavailable and that the unauthorized vehicle will be removed at the registered owner's or operator's expense. 
(c)  The 24-hour notice requirement of this section shall not apply where the tow is an emergency that threatens public safety and the property owner or authorized representative of the trespass towing service or tow operator has notified the city police department prior to removing the vehicle. 
(d)  Each trespass towing service shall staff or monitor the telephone number that is listed on the roam towing signs at all times (pager only does not satisfy this requirement) and immediately advise any registered vehicle owner or authorized representative who communicates with the trespass towing service, the following: 
(1)  Each and every document or other item which must be produced to retrieve the vehicle. 
(2)  Exact charges as of the time of the communication, and the rate at which charges will accumulate thereafter. 
(3)  The acceptable methods of payment. If the trespass towing service or tow operator cannot, or will not provide change to a registered vehicle owner or authorized representative, the trespass towing service or tow operator shall advise the registered vehicle owner or authorized representative to bring exact payment. 
(4)  That the vehicle can be picked up within one hour of request. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 7-23-07; Ord. No. 070510, § 1, 2-28-08; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-29.1. - Trespass tow bill of rights. 
Any trespass towing service engaged in the business of trespass towing shall post the trespass tow bill of rights in a clearly visible, prominent position, not more than ten feet from the place where payment for the tow is made. Posters listing the trespass tow bill of rights shall be supplied by the towing administrator at a cost not to exceed the cost of production. The poster shall read as follows: 
Trespass Tow "Bill of Rights" 
Your car has been trespass towed. You have certain rights under Florida State Statutes and City of Gainesville Ordinances: 
(1)  Your vehicle must be released within one hour after requested, provided the towing fees are paid. 
(2)  You can retrieve any personal property that is in the vehicle within the first 24 hours of the tow prior to paying the towing fees (after the first 24 hours, a fee may be charged). 
(3)  You may inspect your vehicle prior to paying the towing fees. The tow company cannot require you to sign a waiver which would release the trespass tow service from liability for damages noted by you at the time the vehicle is picked up. The tow company is responsible for any damage done by entry into the vehicle if the entry was not done with the "standard of reasonable care". Proper remedy for these damages is through civil court. 
(4)  You may pay the towing charges using cash, debit card, or major credit card (Visa or MasterCard). A fee may be charged to use the debit card. No additional fee can be charged for use of a credit card. 
(5)  A detailed, signed receipt showing the legal name of the person or entity authorizing the tow and the legal name of the trespass towing service, and tow operator must be given to you at the time of payment, whether requested or not. The receipt will also include the following statement: "Notice: Towing from private property is regulated by Section 715.07, Florida Statutes and Chapter 14.5. Article III, City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances." 
(6)  Trespass towing services are required to take photos of your vehicle prior to tow, documenting the violation for which the vehicle was towed. You can make arrangements with the tow company to see the photographs at no charge. Photos will be available for viewing during the normal business hours commencing the following business day after the tow at 8:00 a.m. It is a good idea to make an appointment in advance with the trespass towing service. 
The poster shall also contain contact information to report violations. 
(Ord. No. 070510, § 2, 2-28-08; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-30. - Authorized fees and charges. 
(a)  Any trespass towing service engaged in the business of trespass towing shall not charge the owner of any towed vehicle or personal property in excess of the fees set by the city commission by resolution. The fees set by resolution shall be all inclusive during the first 24-hour period following notification of vehicle tow to the Gainesville Police Department; no additional fees or charges whatsoever may be charged unless specifically established and authorized herein or by state statute. The city commission shall establish, by resolution, a maximum fee for specific classes of vehicles as identified in the Towing and Recovery Association of America's TRAA Vehicle Identification Guide. 
(b)  A trespass towing service that provides trespass towing and storage services pursuant to Article III, section 14.5-25 et seq. of this Code shall accept payment for charges from the registered vehicle owner or authorized representative in any of the following forms: 
(1)  Cash; 
(2)  Major credit card; and/or 
(3)  Debit card. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-31. - Vehicle not connected upon owner or other person in control of the vehicle returning. 
The trespass towing service which is summoned to trespass tow any vehicle on private real property, or stops to tow any vehicle under a valid "Roam Towing" provision on private real property, shall not remove or tow the vehicle away and shall not charge any fee if the registered owner or other person in control of the vehicle returns to the vehicle prior to the tow operator having physically connected the vehicle to the tow vehicle, and the owner or person in control of the vehicle moves the vehicle from the private real property. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-32. - Vehicle not towed upon owner or other person in control of the vehicle returning. 
If the registered owner or other person in control of the vehicle arrives at the scene prior to removal or towing of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be disconnected from the towing or removal apparatus, and that person shall be allowed to remove the vehicle without interference upon the payment of a reasonable service fee of not more than one-half of the posted rate for such towing service for which a receipt shall be given, unless that person refuses to remove the vehicle which is unlawfully parked from the private real property. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-33. - Point of tow to point of storage. 
Except as provided in section 14.5-32 above and except for bona fide emergencies, a vehicle in tow shall be taken from the point of tow to the permanent business address of the trespass towing service where vehicles are normally stored. Temporary storage is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-34. - Vehicles subject to criminal investigation. 
Trespass towing services shall not refuse to relinquish to the police a vehicle which is the subject of a criminal investigation. Relinquishment of the vehicle to the police for impoundment at its contract site shall not affect the trespass towing service's right to payment for services rendered and payment for those services shall be made to the trespass towing service by the registered owner of the vehicle or his/her representative, or other arrangements shall be made with the trespass towing service to receive payment before the vehicle is released to the registered owner or his/her representative. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-35. - Civil citation; violation of ordinance. 
Police officers and code enforcement officers may issue a civil citation to trespass towing services, or their authorized representatives, tow operators and property owners or their authorized representatives, for violations of any section of this article. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-36. - Receipt from towing service to be furnished to owner when vehicle claimed. 
When a trespass towed vehicle is claimed, the trespass towing service shall furnish the registered owner or other legally authorized person with a detailed, signed receipt showing the legal name of the person or entity authorizing the tow and the legal name of the trespass towing service and the tow operator. The receipt shall also include the following language: 
"Notice: Towing from private property is regulated by the provisions of Section 715.07, Florida Statutes and Chapter 14.5, Article III City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances." 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-37. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for a trespass towing service or tow operator to charge any additional fee which is based on police response to a call by the owner of a vehicle who is contesting the towing of the owner's vehicle on scene. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person other than the real property owner or an authorized representative of the owner, or the trespass towing service or authorized representative of the trespass towing service (if the signs are placed by the trespass towing service), to move, remove, or deface any sign relating to towing. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-38. - Penalties. 
In addition to those penalties imposed by F.S. § 715.07, violation of any provisions of this article, including any of the requirements of F.S. § 715.07, shall be subject to the following civil penalties: 
(1)  Any trespass towing service, tow operator or person who violates this article shall be liable to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle for all costs of recovery (including all towing and storage fees) plus attorney's fees and court costs, and shall in addition be liable to the registered owner or lessee of any towed or removed vehicle for damages resulting directly or indirectly from the removal, transportation or storage of the vehicle. 
(2)  Any trespass towing service, tow operator or person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction or entry of a civil judgment, be fined not more than $500.00 per violation. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 050749, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-38.1. - Fraudulent transfer of company. 
For purposes of denial or revocation of a permit under this article, it shall be a violation of this article for the owner(s) to fraudulently transfer a trespass towing service. For purposes of this section, fraudulent transfer is one made by the owner(s) for the purpose of evading civil penalties, restitution, fines and/or fees imposed pursuant to this article. In determining whether a transfer is fraudulent, consideration may be given among other factors, to whether: 
(1)  The transfer was an arm's length transaction; 
(2)  The trespass towing service retained possession or control of the property transferred after the transfer; 
(3)  The transfer was disclosed or concealed; 
(4)  Before the transfer was made or obligation was incurred, the trespass towing service had been sued or threatened with suit; 
(5)  The transfer was of substantially all the trespass towing service's assets; 
(6)  The value of the consideration received by the trespass towing service was reasonably equivalent to the value of the asset transferred or the amount of the obligation incurred; 
(7)  The trespass towing service was insolvent or became insolvent shortly after the transfer was made or the obligation was incurred; and 
(8)  The transfer occurred shortly before or shortly after substantial permit fees or civil penalties were incurred. 
(Ord. No. 120206, § 1, 6-19-14)  
DIVISION 2. - IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 14.5-39. - Intent and purpose; applicability and exemptions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The intent of this division is to protect and safeguard the safety, property and welfare of the public and businesses by providing for the licensure and regulation of business enterprises engaged in the practice of immobilization of vehicles. The purpose of this division is to provide a uniform system for the licensure and regulation of persons and immobilization services who are engaged in or who intend to engage in the practice of immobilization of vehicles which are parked on private real property without the permission or authorization of the owner of the private real property. 
(b)  Applicability and exemptions. Any person who utilizes any vehicle immobilization method for unauthorized vehicles parked on private real property shall comply with the regulations set forth herein below. However, this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Towing of vehicles; or 
(2)  Vehicles on property appurtenant to and a part of a single-family residence. 
(3)  Immobilization of a vehicle which occurs: 
a.  At the direction of a law enforcement officer, police service technician, traffic enforcement technician or any individual who successfully completes a training program established and approved by the Criminal Justice Standards and Training Commission for parking enforcement specialists and, whose current duties with the city include parking enforcement; or 
b.  With the consent of the vehicle's registered owner or other legally authorized person in control of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 080284, § 2, 3-19-09; Ord. No. 120206, § 2, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-40. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Immobilization, immobilize or immobilizing, also known as boot or booting shall mean the act of placing, on a parked vehicle, a "boot" or other device which causes a vehicle to be immobile or prohibits its usual manner of movement or otherwise disables a vehicle from operation. 
Immobilization operator shall mean the actual person who is applying the "boot" or other device which causes a vehicle to be immobile or prohibits its usual manner of movement or otherwise disables a vehicle from operation. 
Immobilization service(s) shall include any person, whether licensed or not, who engages in or owns or operates a business which engages, in whole or in part, in the immobilization or booting of vehicles on private property. 
Normal business hours means Monday through Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., regardless of whether the immobilization service is actively immobilizing vehicles or not, excluding State of Florida holidays. 
Owner(s) means the natural person(s) that own, hold, control, or have beneficial interest in an immobilization service. 
Parked means the state of a vehicle being temporarily left and unattended by its registered owner or other legally authorized person in control of the vehicle. 
Person shall mean and include, but shall not be limited to, any natural person, sole proprietor, firm, legal entity, partnership, joint venture, syndicate or other group, or combination acting as a unit, association, corporation, estate, trust, trustee, executor, administrator, receiver, or other fiduciary, and shall include the plural as well as the singular. 
Property owner means the person who exercises dominion and control over the real property, including, but not limited to, the legal title holder, lessee, a resident manager, a property manager or other agent who has legal authority to bind the owner. An owner, operator, or other agent or employee of a trespass towing service or immobilization service may not be appointed as an agent for a property. 
Recover means to take possession of a vehicle and its contents and to exercise control and supervision over the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 080284, § 2, 3-19-09; Ord. No. 120206, § 2, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-41. - Permit required; prerequisites to immobilization on private property and responsibilities of immobilization service; exceptions. 
(a)  Immobilization service permit required. No person shall engage in the business of immobilization of unauthorized motor vehicles that are parked on private property unless such immobilization service has obtained an immobilization service permit. An application for an immobilization service permit shall be submitted to the towing administrator. Immobilization service permits shall be issued on an annual basis and will expire on September 30 of each year. Permits are not transferable or assignable. 
(b)  Requirements for issuance of immobilization service permit. No person shall be issued an immobilization service permit under this division unless the applicant complies with the following requirements: 
(1)  Proof of insurance. Every applicant for an immobilization service permit shall file with the towing administrator a certificate of insurance or other proof of insurance providing coverage for all liability claims and claims of damage to property resulting from any action or operation in connection with the immobilization service, in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for each incident, $50,000.00 of such coverage allocated for property damage. 
(2)  Fixed office location. Each immobilization service shall have a fixed physical office within the Gainesville city limits registered with the towing administrator. The office shall be open and staffed with personnel during normal business hours. 
(3)  Permit fee. Every applicant shall pay the annual permit fee as set forth in Appendix A, Schedule of Fees, Rates and Charges. 
(4)  An immobilization service shall be responsible for the payment of all outstanding civil penalties, restitution, fines and city or court imposed fees relating to the improper or unlawful operation of the immobilization service. Such civil penalties, restitution, fines and/or fees shall remain the liability of the immobilization service. The purchaser of all, or substantially all , of the assets or business entity, may not obtain an immobilization service permit if the selling immobilization service has outstanding civil penalties, restitution, fines and/or fees. 
(c)  Authorization of the real property-owner. Prior to immobilization of any vehicle, the immobilization service shall have executed a written agreement with the owner of the real property upon which the immobilization will occur, and shall file with the towing administrator, a copy of any and all such agreements for immobilization services on private property within the city limits. The copies of agreements shall be kept current and shall include at a minimum, (a) the address and legal description or sketch of the real property; (b) the date of the agreement; (c) the property owner's name, a contact name and a telephone number; (d) the duration of the agreement; (e) the days of the week and time of day that such immobilization is authorized. The rebate or payment of money or any other valuable consideration, directly or indirectly from the immobilization service to the owners or operators of the property upon which the vehicles are immobilized, for the privilege of immobilizing those vehicles, is prohibited. 
(d)  Record keeping procedures. Every immobilization service and immobilization operator shall keep and maintain an immobilization log with the following information: 
(1)  Date and time the vehicle was observed illegally parked; 
(2)  The date and time of immobilization and the name of the immobilization operator; 
(3)  The location/address of the real property where the immobilization took place; 
(4)  The description of the vehicle including make, model, color, vehicle identification number, and license plate number; 
(5)  The date and time the request for removal of the immobilization device was received and the date and time of response and removal of the immobilization device; 
(6)  The amount and method of payment for release of the immobilization device; 
(7)  The name of the immobilization operator removing the immobilization device; and 
(8)  The name of the person to whom the vehicle was released. 
All immobilization services shall file a copy of all immobilization logs with the towing administrator every Thursday, for the immediately preceding week and shall also keep all such immobilization logs on file at the immobilization service office registered with the tow administrator for a period of one year and shall make such logs and receipts available for immediate inspection by any law or code enforcement officer or designee. 
(e)  Identification. 
(1)  Each immobilization operator shall wear the immobilization operator permit, as provided in section 14.5-42 below, on the outer garment and uniforms which shall state the full name of the immobilization service and the immobilization operator's first name and first initial of last name along with the unique identification number assigned to that operator by the towing administrator. The name of the immobilization service on the outer garment and uniform must be the same as the name on the vehicle being operated by the immobilization operator. 
(2)  All immobilization service vehicles shall be equipped with an amber light bar and shall display the name of the immobilization service on the driver and passenger side of the vehicle in letters at least three inches high. The address and telephone number of the immobilization service shall be displayed on the driver and passenger side of the vehicle in letters at least one inch high. Lettering on the vehicle shall be permanently applied. Temporary lettering or magnetic lettering/signs are prohibited. All vehicles used in providing immobilization services shall be inspected for compliance with this article and must display a medallion issued by the towing administrator to evidence such compliance. The annual fee for the medallion is set forth in Appendix A and shall be paid by September 30 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 080284, § 2, 3-19-09; Ord. No. 120206, § 2, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-42. - Operator permits; application requirements; violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any immobilization operator to engage in the immobilization of vehicles without first having obtained an immobilization operator permit from the towing administrator. Upon issuance of the permit, the immobilization operator is granted the privilege of engaging in immobilization services within the city limits, unless such permit expires or is suspended or revoked, as provided in this article. Each immobilization operator permit shall expire on September 30 of each year and the fee set forth in Appendix A shall be paid to renew the immobilization operator permit. 
If the permit is lost, damaged, stolen, becomes illegible or the permit holder changes immobilization services, the permit must be replaced. The replacement permit shall be valid only for the remainder of the time period for which the initial permit was valid. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any immobilization service to permit any person to be employed as an immobilization operator conducting immobilization within the city unless such person has been issued an immobilization operator permit to engage in immobilization services which has been validated by the towing administrator. 
(c)  In order to secure and maintain an immobilization operator permit, the applicant must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Submit to the tow administrator a certified copy from the Florida Department of Law Enforcement of his/her criminal history and a certified copy of his/her driving record from the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles. 
(2)  Possess a valid Florida Class E and/or commercial driver's license and provide a photocopy to the towing administrator. 
(3)  Not have been convicted of, found guilty of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, regardless of adjudication of guilt for any of the following: 
a.  Any capital felony, any first degree felony, sexual battery, or any violent felony involving the use of a firearm, or weapon, as defined in F.S. § 790.01, or which results in great bodily harm. 
b.  Any violent felony which occurred within ten years of the application date. 
c.  Any felony or first degree misdemeanor directly related to the business of towing or immobilization of motor vehicles; repossession of motor vehicles; motor vehicle theft; carjacking; chop shops; or liens for recovering, towing, or storing vehicles and vessels (F.S. § 713.78), which occurred within ten years of the application date. 
d.  Driving under the influence or driving with an unlawful blood alcohol level, in violation of F.S. § 316.193, which occurred within five years of the application date, unless the applicant demonstrates evidence of the successful completion of a substance abuse treatment program approved by the city. 
All timeframes referenced in this subsection (3) shall be calculated and run from the date of the offense, as reflected in the charging documents. 
(4)  Submit to a background investigation resulting in a determination by the towing administrator that: 
a.  The applicant does not have a currently suspended permit, has not had its permit revoked by action of the city within two years of the date of application, or does not have outstanding and unsatisfied civil penalties imposed for violations of this article. 
b.  No fraud or willful or knowing misrepresentation or false statement is made in the application. 
c.  No judgment against the applicant arising out of the activity of immobilization, recovery, towing or removing a vehicle or providing storage in connection therewith remains unsatisfied, unless a stay or reversal of the judgment is procured through the courts. 
d.  There are no outstanding warrants of arrest against the applicant. 
e.  The applicant has no (i) unpaid civil penalties; (ii) unpaid administrative costs of hearing; (iii) unpaid city investigative, enforcement, testing, or monitoring costs; or (iv) unpaid liens, any or all of which are owed to the city pursuant to the provisions of the code of ordinances. 
(d)  A complete application for permit shall be reviewed and granted or denied in writing within ten calendar days. If the permit is denied, the reason for such denial shall be provided in writing and shall also advise that the applicant may correct deficiencies in the application within seven calendar days of the notice of denial without incurring an additional application fee. 
(Ord. No. 080284, § 2, 3-19-09; Ord. No. 100306, § 1, 10-21-10; Ord. No. 120206, § 2, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-43. - Immobilization; criteria and requirements for immobilizing vehicles; release of vehicle; maximum fee. 
(a)  Immobilization criteria. All immobilization services shall be conducted in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The vehicle is parked in an unauthorized manner on property posted in accordance with subsection (b) below; 
(2)  The immobilization device is placed on the front wheel of the driver's side of the motor vehicle. The device may be placed on any other wheel if placement on the front wheel of the driver's side is not feasible; and 
(3)  Immediately upon immobilization, the immobilization operator shall affix on the driver's side window of such vehicle a warning notice sticker with a completely removable adhesive, measuring four by seven inches or larger containing a warning stating that the vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in damage to the vehicle, and shall provide the name and business address of the person who immobilized such vehicle, the business telephone number to contact for release of the immobilization device, and fee for its removal. 
(4)  Photograph(s) of the "offending" vehicle shall be taken and shall be of sufficient detail to demonstrate the violation of rule or regulation for which the vehicle is being immobilized. The photograph(s) must be date and time stamped and maintained by the immobilization service for a minimum period of six months. Photos must be available for viewing during normal business hours commencing the following business day after the immobilization by 8:00 a.m. at the immobilization service's office registered with the towing administrator. There shall be no charge for viewing the photographs. 
(b)  Sign posting. Prior to immobilizing, in any manner, any vehicle parked on a private property, a separate/individual sign meeting the following requirements shall have been posted on the private property: 
(1)  The sign shall be prominently placed at each driveway access or curb cut allowing vehicular access to the property, within five feet from the public right-of-way. If there are no curb cuts or access barriers, sign(s) must be posted for each 25 feet of property abutting public right-of-way, with a minimum of at least one sign; 
(2)  The sign must clearly indicate, in not less than two-inch high, light reflective letters on contrasting background, that unauthorized vehicles will be immobilized at the owner's expense. The words "vehicle immobilization area" must be included on the sign in not less than four-inch high letters; 
(3)  The sign structure containing the above notices must be permanently installed with the words "vehicle immobilization area" not less than three feet and not more than six feet above ground level and must be continuously located on the property for not less than 24 hours prior to immobilization of any vehicles; 
(4)  The sign must also provide the name and current telephone number of the immobilization service which placed the immobilization device on the vehicle; and 
(5)  The sign shall state whether public parking is permitted and the hours of operation that the property is utilized for public parking. 
(6)  Where property is posted for trespass towing and the immobilization service will be performed by the same entity or company, the signage requirements may be met by adding "vehicle immobilization area" to existing trespass towing signage. 
(c)  Removal of immobilization device; release of vehicle; availability and response time. 
(1)  When a vehicle has been immobilized, the immobilization device shall be removed and the vehicle shall be released or returned to its owner or other legally authorized person within one hour upon request for removal and payment of the immobilization charge. 
(2)  Any immobilization service which places an immobilization device on an unauthorized vehicle parked on private property shall operate a 24-hour, seven-day-a-week answering service, and shall make available on a 24-hour, seven-days-a-week basis, attendants and equipment for the release of the immobilization device within one hour of request for removal and payment of the immobilization charge. 
(d)  Maximum immobilization charge. No immobilization service may charge an immobilization charge or fee for removal of an immobilization device on an unauthorized vehicle parked on private property in excess of the fee authorized by resolution of the city commission. Proof of ownership of the vehicle shall not be required of any person who is paying a fee for the removal of the immobilization device. An immobilization service shall accept payment for charges in any of the following forms: 
(1)  Cash; 
(2)  Major credit card; and/or 
(3)  Debit card. 
The immobilization service is required to be able to accept payment at the site of the immobilization, and shall accept any lawfully tendered payment. 
(e)  Required receipt. Any immobilization service shall provide, at the time of payment, a written receipt for all charges imposed and received from the owner or other person in control of a vehicle. Said receipt shall be made and maintained in duplicate and shall include at a minimum: 
(1)  The date, time, and location of the immobilization; 
(2)  The total charges listed individually and specifically; 
(3)  The date and time of the request for removal of the immobilization device; 
(4)  The date and time of payment of the charges; and 
(5)  The following disclosure in bold capitalized letters of at least 12-point type: 
IF YOU HAVE ANY QUESTION OR COMPLAINT, PLEASE CONTACT THE CITY OF GAINESVILLE'S TOWING ADMINISTRATOR AT THE GAINESVILLE POLICE DEPARTMENT, 413 NW 8 th AVENUE, GAINESVILLE, FL 32601; 
(f)  Return of registered vehicle owner. No immobilization operator or immobilization service shall immobilize a vehicle or charge for its services where the registered owner or other person in control of the vehicle arrives at the scene prior to affixing the immobilization device, unless: the registered owner or other person in control of the vehicle refuses to remove the vehicle. If the vehicle has already been completely connected to the immobilization device, the registered owner or other person in control of the vehicle shall pay a service fee of not more than one-half of the rate set by resolution by the city commission for such immobilization service. The immobilization service or immobilization operator shall wait a minimum of 20 minutes to allow the registered owner or person in control of the vehicle to secure cash or other acceptable payment of the fees enumerated herein. 
The registered owner or other person in control of the vehicle shall not be prevented from accessing any of the vehicle's interior compartments by the immobilization service or immobilization operator. 
(g)  Towing/removal requirements. An immobilized vehicle shall not remain immobilized on private property for more than 24 hours. After such period of time has expired, the vehicle shall be released from the immobilization device and the vehicle may be towed or removed pursuant to this article, and no fee shall be assessed for placement or release of the immobilization device. 
(Ord. No. 080284, § 2, 3-19-09; Ord. No. 120206, § 2, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-44. - Enforcement and inspection. 
The towing administrator shall enforce the provisions set forth in this division. This shall not preclude other law or code enforcement personnel from conducting any action as deemed necessary to assure compliance with all applicable laws. To determine compliance and enforce the provisions of this division, any law or code enforcement official shall have the right of entry upon real property during normal business hours and shall be immune from civil or criminal prosecution for trespass upon real property while in the discharge of his/her duties of enforcing the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 080284, § 2, 3-19-09; Ord. No. 120206, § 2, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-45. - Revocation of immobilization service or immobilization operator permit; appeal. 
(a)  Three violations of the provisions of this article by an immobilization service or immobilization operator within a 12-month period shall result in the revocation of the permit to engage in immobilization services. An immobilization service permit shall not be revoked for acts of an employee/operator in violation of this section unless the owner or officers of the immobilization service actively participated in or had knowledge of the violation and took no corrective action against the employee/operator or unless repeated violations by an employee did not result in progressive discipline. The immobilization service shall maintain written documentation of all corrective action taken against an employee/operator for a minimum period of one year. In addition to the corrective action taken, the documentation shall detail the type and date of the specific ordinance/statutory violation. 
(b)  If it is found that the immobilization service or operator meets the requirements for permit revocation, the permit shall be revoked for the following time periods: 
(1)  First revocation: Six months from the final date of the revocation. 
(2)  Second and subsequent revocations: One year from the final date of the revocation. 
(c)  The procedure for revoking a permit is as follows: 
(1)  The towing administrator shall provide written notice to the immobilization service or immobilization operator, as applicable, by hand delivery or by certified or registered mail at least 15 calendar days prior to the effective date of the revocation. The written notice shall contain notice that the establishment may contest the revocation by requesting a hearing as provided below. Service shall be deemed complete if personally delivered upon the owner or an employee of the immobilization service or immobilization operator, as applicable, by any officer authorized by law to serve process or a duly appointed law enforcement officer of the city police department. The person serving process shall make proof of service within the time during which the person served must respond to the process. If service cannot be personally made within the city, then service may be made by notice to a registered agent of the immobilization service or immobilization operator, as applicable. 
(2)  The immobilization service or immobilization operator may file a written request for a hearing prior to the effective date of the revocation with the city manager, or his designee. Failure to timely request a hearing shall constitute a waiver by the immobilization service or immobilization operator of any rights to a hearing. Upon request for a hearing, the revocation shall be stayed until final administrative action has been effected. 
(3)  At the hearing, the immobilization service or operator shall have the opportunity to present evidence (consisting of testimony and/or written documentation) he/she believes negates or mitigates the revocation. 
(4)  In conducting the hearing, the city manager or designee shall have the power to take testimony under oath, require the production of books, paper, and other documents, and receive evidence. Should a party refuse to provide documents as directed by the city manager or designee, then there may be an adverse inference against the party who failed to produce said documents. All parties shall have an opportunity to respond, to present evidence and argument on all issues involved, to conduct cross-examination and submit rebuttal evidence, and to be represented by counsel. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. Any party desiring the hearing be recorded shall be responsible for arranging and paying the cost of a court reporter's attendance and services. 
(5)  If the city manager or designee finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the immobilization service or immobilization operator meets the requirements for permit revocation, then the city manager or designee shall uphold the suspension of the immobilization service or immobilization operator permit and set the revocation date to begin 15 [days] from the date of the final administrative order, subject to a writ of certiorari being filed pursuant to paragraph (8) below. 
(6)  If the city manager or designee finds that the immobilization service or immobilization operator does not meet the requirements for permit revocation, then the city manager or designee shall rescind the revocation of the immobilization service or immobilization operator permit. 
(7)  The city manager or designee shall provide written notice of the final order to the immobilization service or immobilization operator as applicable. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be the final administrative action. 
(8)  Right to appeal: The final administrative order of the city is subject to certiorari review in a court of competent jurisdiction in Alachua County, Florida by the timely filing of a petition. Upon the filing of a petition in the Circuit Court, the revocation of the permit shall be stayed pending final disposition of the civil case. 
(9)  Upon the completion of the administrative hearing process and the final determination of the city manager or designee, the city manager or designee shall revoke the immobilization service permit or immobilization operator's permit to engage in immobilization, if it is found that the immobilization service or immobilization operator meets the requirements for permit revocation for the following time periods: 
a.  First revocation: Six months from the date of the revocation. 
b.  Second and subsequent revocations: One year from the date of the revocation. 
(d)  Any immobilization service or immobilization operator whose permit has been revoked shall not be eligible to again obtain a permit until such revocation period has expired. 
(Ord. No. 080284, § 2, 3-19-09; Ord. No. 120206, § 2, 6-19-14)  
Sec. 14.5-46. - Violation of ordinance; penalties; civil citation. 
It is unlawful to engage in the immobilization of vehicles on private property without compliance with the requirements of this division. Police officers and code enforcement officers may issue a civil citation to immobilization services or its authorized representatives, immobilization operators, and property owners or their authorized representatives, for violations of any section of this article. 
(Ord. No. 080284, § 2, 3-19-09; Ord. No. 120206, § 2, 6-19-14)  
Secs. 14.5-47—14.5-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT PERFORMANCE ESTABLISHMENT, ESCORT SERVICE AND ESCORT LICENSES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; offenses, Ch. 17; land development code, § 30-61 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 14.5-52. - Authority. 
This article is enacted under the home rule Power of the City of Gainesville, Florida, in the interest of the health, peace, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city, and under the authority of the city to regulate the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages under the twenty-first Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-53. - Scope. 
This article shall be effective throughout the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-54. - Purpose. 
The intent of city commission in adopting this article is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations for adult performance establishments and escort services that will protect the health, safety, property values, and general welfare of the people of the city. It is not the intent of the city commission to legislate with respect to matters of obscenity. These matters are regulated by federal and state law, including F.S. Ch. 847. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-55. - Findings of fact. 
The city commission hereby finds: 
(a)  Commercial establishments exist or may exist within the city and other nearby cities or counties in north central Florida where dancers, entertainers, performers, or other individuals, for commercial gain, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing specified anatomical area; or who engage in straddle dancing or touching with customers. 
(b)  The activities described in subsection (a) occur at establishments which operate for the purpose of making a profit, and, as such, are subject to regulation by the city in the interest of the health, safety, economy, property values and general welfare of the people, businesses, and industries of the city. Promoting tourism is important to the community's continued economic welfare, including tourism by persons seeking to bring children to visit attractions who wish to stay in a community with a family atmosphere. 
(c)  When the activities described in subsection (a) are present in establishments, other activities which are illegal, unsafe, or unhealthy tend to accompany them, concentrate around them, and be aggravated by them. Such other activities include, but are not limited to, prostitution, pandering, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, exposing minors to harmful materials, possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale and possession of controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and property. 
(d)  When the activities described in subsection (a) are competitively exploited in establishments, they tend to attract an undesirable number of transients, blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring businesses, lower real property values, promote the particular crimes described in subsection (c), and ultimately lead residents and businesses to move to other locations. 
(e)  The establishments in which the activities described in subsection (a) occur have exterior signs or appearance that lower the surrounding property values and contribute to urban decline. 
(f)  The concurrence of the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages with the activities described in subsection (a) leads to a further increase in criminal activity, unsafe activity, and disturbances of the peace and order of the surrounding community. 
(g)  The concurrence of the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages with the activities described in subsection (a) creates additional hazards to the health and safety of persons in attendance and further depreciates the value of adjoining property harming the economic welfare of the surrounding community and adversely affecting the quality of life, tone of commerce, and community environment. 
(h)  In order to preserve and safeguard the health, safety, property values, and general welfare of the people, businesses, and industries of the city, it is necessary and advisable for the city to regulate the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages at establishments where the activities described in subsection (a) occur. 
(i)  Employees of establishments at which the activities described in subsection (a) occur engage in a higher incidence of certain types of unhealthy or criminal behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(j)  Physical contact or touching within establishments at which the activities described in subsection (a) occur between employees exhibiting specified anatomical areas and customers poses a threat to the health of both and promotes the spread of communicable and social diseases. 
(k)  In order to preserve and safeguard the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city, it is necessary and advisable for the city to regulate the conduct of owners, managers, operators, agents, employees, entertainers, performers, and customers at establishments where the activities described in subsection (a) occur. 
(l)  Straddle dancing, unregulated private performances, and enclosed adult booths in establishments at which the activities described in subsection (a) occur have resulted in indiscriminate commercial sex between strangers and poses a threat to the health of the participants and promotes the spread of communicable sexually transmitted diseases. Straddle dancing is primarily conduct rather than communication or expression. 
(m)  The potential dangers to the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city posed by permitting an establishment at which the activities described in subsection (a) occur to operate without meeting the requirements for obtaining a license under this article are so great as to require the licensing of such establishments prior to their being permitted to operate. 
(n)  Requiring employees of establishments at which the activities described in subsection (a) occur to keep a list of information concerning current employees and certain recent past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects, and by preventing minors from working in such establishments.  
Sec. 14.5-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult performance establishment means an establishment where any employee or participant in an event sponsored by the establishment: 
a.  Engages in a private performance or displays or exposes any specified anatomical areas to a patron, regardless of whether the employee actually engages in dancing; 
b.  Wears any covering, tape, pastie or other device that simulates or otherwise gives the appearance of the display or exposure of any specified anatomical areas, regardless of whether the employee actually engages in dancing; 
c.  Offers, solicits, or contracts to dance or perform with a patron and accepts any consideration, tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that person; or 
d.  Dances or performs within three feet of a patron while displaying or exposing any specified anatomical areas and accepts any consideration, tip, remuneration, or compensation from or on behalf of that person. 
It is an affirmative defense that an establishment is not an adult performance establishment if the establishment is a bona fide private club whose membership as a whole engages in social nudism or naturism as in a nudist resort or camp, or such other establishment in which the predominant business or attraction of the establishment is not the offering to customers of a product, service, or entertainment that is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to customers, and the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on or the advertising or promotion of materials relating to or employees depicting, describing, displaying, exposing, or simulating specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. An adult performance establishment shall not be deemed a place provided or set apart for the purpose of exposing or exhibiting a person's sexual organs in a manner contrary to the first sentence of F.S. § 800.03, the State's indecent exposure statute, as set forth in the decision of the Supreme Court of Florida in the case Hoffman v. Carson, 250 So.2d 891, 893 (Fla. 1971), appeal dismissed 404 U.S. 981(1971). 
Alcoholic beverage means a beverage described in section 4-1 of this code of ordinances. 
City manager shall mean city manager or designee unless otherwise indicated. 
Conviction means a determination of guilt resulting from plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether imposition of sentence was suspended. 
Employee means a person who works, performs, dances or provides other services at an adult performance establishment or for an escort service, irrespective of whether said person is paid a salary or wage, and shall include, but is not limited to, independent contractors, sub-contractors, lessees, or sub-lessees who work or perform at an adult performance establishment or for an escort service. 
Escort service means a business that: 
(1)  Advertises as an "escort service" or advertises that it can send or provide "escorts," private (one-on-one) dancers or private (one-on-one) models; or 
(2)  Offers or provides for a fee or gratuity employees, other than massage therapists licensed under F.S. Ch. 480, for prearranged private (one-on-one) sessions with customers at a place of business (other than the escort service), hotel room or motel room for the purpose of companionship, entertainment, modeling, massage, conversation or sexual activities. 
Law enforcement officer means an officer who is on official duty for a law enforcement agency. 
Licensee means any person whose application for an adult performance establishment has been granted and who owns, operates or controls the establishment; or whose application for an escort service has been granted and who owns, operates or controls the escort service; or whose application for an escort license has been granted. 
Operator means any person who engages in or performs any activity necessary to, or which facilitates, the operation of an adult performance establishment, including but not limited to the licensee, manager, owner, doorman, bartender, disc jockey, sales clerk, ticket taker, or movie projectionist. 
Patron or customer means any person at an establishment other than employees or operators of the establishment, regardless of whether that person has actually given any consideration or spent any money for goods or services. 
Private performance means modeling, posing, or the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by an employee of an adult performance establishment to a patron while the patron is in an area not accessible during such display to all other persons in the establishment or while the patron is in an area in which the patron is totally or partially screened or partitioned during such display from the view of all persons outside the area. 
Specified anatomical areas and specified sexual activities shall have the meanings set forth in section 30-90 of this Code. 
Specified violation or criminal act means: 
(1)  A violation of this article; 
(2)  An offense under the following chapters of the F.S.: Ch. 794 regarding sexual battery, Ch. 796 regarding prostitution, Ch. 800 regarding lewdness and indecent exposure and Ch. 847 regarding obscene literature; or 
(3)  An offense under an analogous statute of a state other than Florida, or under an analogous ordinance of another county or city. 
Straddle dance also known as a "lap dance," "face dance" or "friction dance," means either of the following acts at an establishment: 
(1)  The use by an employee of any part of his or her body to touch the genital or pubic area of another person, or the touching of the genital or pubic area of any employee by a person. It shall be a straddle dance regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" occurs while the employee is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area. It shall also be a straddle dance regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" is direct or through a medium. 
(2)  the straddling of the legs of an employee over any part of the body of another person at the establishment, regardless of whether there is a touch or touching, or the touch or touching is direct or through a medium. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-57. - Enforcement. 
Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of this article may be enforced by: 
(a)  a suit brought by the city attorney, with the consent of the city commission, in the circuit court to restrain, enjoin, or prevent a violation of this article; or 
(b)  enforcement proceedings by the city code enforcement board; or 
(c)  prosecution in a court of competent jurisdiction; or 
(d)  civil citation process. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-58. - Appeals. 
Any final decision of the city pursuant to this division of this article ("Licensing Provisions") may be immediately reviewed as a matter of right by the circuit court upon the filing of an appropriate pleading by an aggrieved party. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-59. - Notice. 
Any notice required under this article shall be accomplished by sending a written notification by certified mail to the mailing address set forth on the application for the license, which shall be considered the correct address for service unless the city manager has been otherwise notified in writing, or by personal service or delivery to the applicant or licensee. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-60. - Immunity from prosecution. 
The city or any of its departments or agents or any law enforcement officer shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good-faith trespass upon an adult performance establishment or escort service while acting within the scope of the authority under this article. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-61. - Construction. 
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of licensing and regulating adult entertainment and related activities. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 14.5-62. - Adult performance establishment license required. 
Requirement. No adult performance establishment or escort service is permitted to operate without having been first granted an adult performance establishment license or escort service license, respectively, by the city manager under this article. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-63. - Application for license; application fee; consent by applicant. 
(a)  Required. Any person desiring to operate an adult performance establishment or an escort service shall file with the city manager a sworn license application on a standard application form supplied by the city manager. 
(b)  Contents of application. The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he is 18 years of age or older; or 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names and residential addresses and residential telephone numbers of all partners whether general or limited, the residence address of at least one person authorized to accept service of process, and provide a copy of any existing partnership agreement; or 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name and address of the registered corporate agent for service of process, the name, residential address, and residential telephone number of the person making the application for the corporation and provide a copy of its articles of incorporation; 
(2)  If the applicant intends to conduct the establishment or escort service under a name other than that of the applicant, the fictitious name registration under F.S. § 865.09; 
(3)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) has, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a felony of any state or of the United States or any specified violation or criminal act, and, if so, the specified violation or criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction; 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) has had a previous license under this article suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the business for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or stockholder of five percent or more of the voting shares of a corporation whose license under this article has previously been suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the business for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation; 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) holds any other licenses under this article and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses; 
(6)  The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing; 
(7)  The commercial location of the proposed business, including a legal description of the property site and a legal street address; 
(8)  The applicant's mailing address, business addresses, and business telephone number; 
(9)  If an adult performance establishment, building plans drawn to appropriate scale of the proposed establishment, including, but not limited to: 
a.  All windows, doors, entrances and exits, fixed structural features, walls, stages, partitions, projection booths, admission booths, adult booths, concession booths, stands, counters and similar structures; 
b.  All proposed improvements or enlargements to be made, which shall be indicated and calculated in terms of percentage of increase in floor size; 
(10)  A recent photograph of the applicant; and 
(11)  The applicant's social security number or employer's tax identification number and either the applicant's drivers license number or the number of a state or federally issued identification card. 
(c)  Application fee. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as provided in Appendix A. If the application for a license is approved and a license is granted, the fee shall be applied as a credit towards the annual license fee required for the first year pursuant to section 14.5-67 of this article. 
(d)  Incomplete application. In the event the city manager determined or learns at any time that the applicant has not properly completed the application for a proposed establishment or escort service, the applicant shall promptly be notified of such fact and shall be allowed ten days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a license under this article shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. 
(e)  Consent. By applying for a license under this article, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the city manager of the responsibilities under this article. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 000047, § 1, 7-24-00; Ord. No. 050120, § 2, 9-26-05)  
Sec. 14.5-64. - Processing of application. 
Upon receipt of a complete application properly filed with the city manager and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the city manager shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall begin processing of the application. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-65. - Grant; denial; rejection. 
(a)  Time period for granting or denying license. The city manager shall grant or deny an application for a license under this article within 30 days from the date of its property filing. If the city manager does not grant or deny the application in the timeframe given, the license will be considered to have been granted and the applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the business for which a license is sought. 
(b)  Granting application for license. If the city manager has not made a finding that would require that the application be denied, the city manager shall grant the application, notify the applicant of the granting, and issue the license to the applicant upon payment of the appropriate annual license fee provided in sections 14.5-66 and 14.5-67 with credit as provided in section 14.5-63(c). 
(c)  Denial of application for license. 
(1)  The city manager shall review staff's findings and deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
a.  The application contains material false information, is incomplete, or the applicant has failed to comply with [F.S.] Ch. 607 regarding corporations, [F.S.] Ch. 620 regarding partnerships, or F.S. [§] 895.09 regarding fictitious names. 
b.  The granting of the application would violate a statute or ordinance, or an order from a court of law that prohibits the applicant from obtaining an adult performance establishment or escort service license. 
c.  The applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to section 14.5-63(b) has had a license under this article or under an analogous ordinance of another jurisdiction suspended or revoked within the past three years. 
d.  The applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to section 14.5-63(b) has been convicted of a specified violation or criminal act as listed in section 14.5-56(k)(2) or an analogous statute of a state other than Florida within the last five years. 
(2)  If the city manager denies the application, the applicant shall be notified of the denial and the reason(s) for the denial. 
(d)  Rejection of application. If a person applies for a license at a particular location within a period of nine months from the date of denial of a previous application for a license at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which will probably lead to a different decision regarding the former reason(s) for denial, the application shall be rejected. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 000047, § 2, 7-24-00)  
Sec. 14.5-66. - Licenses; terms; renewal; expiration; cancellation; reports; consent. 
(a)  Contents. A license granted under this article shall state the name of the licensee, the name of the business, the street address of the business, the classification of the license, the date of issuance, and the date of expiration. 
(b)  Terms. All licenses issued under this article shall be annual licenses which shall commence running on October 1, if they have been paid for, and shall expire on September 30 of the following year. If a license is issued after October 1, but by March 31 of the following year, the applicant shall pay the applicable license fee. If a license is issued after March 31, but by October 1 of the same year, the applicant shall pay one-half the applicable license fee. 
(c)  Renewals. Licenses shall be renewed annually. Subject to other provisions of this article, a licensee under this article shall be entitled to a renewal of its annual license from year to year, as a matter of course, by October 1, by presenting the license for the previous year, restating and updating all information required for a license application, and by paying the appropriate license fee. 
(d)  Expiration. A license that is not renewed under this article by October 1 of each year shall expire. An expired license may be renewed by November 30 of the same year upon presentation of an affidavit stating that the business has conducted no activity regulated by this article subsequent to expiration, upon payment of the appropriate license fee, and upon payment of a penalty of ten percent of the appropriate license fee for the month of October, or fraction thereof, and an additional penalty of five percent of the appropriate license fee for the month of November, or fraction thereof. 
(e)  Cancellation. All expired licenses not renewed by November 30 shall be canceled summarily by the city manager. 
(f)  Reports and records. Each licensee shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the city manager to implement this code and to carry out its purpose. Whenever the information required by or provided under section 14.5-63(b) has changed, the licensee shall promptly report to the city manager the changed information. 
(g)  Consent. By holding a license under this article, the licensee shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the city manager of responsibilities under this article. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-67. - Annual license fee. 
(a)  Levy. There is hereby levied for an adult performance establishment license and for an escort service license the annual license fee as provided in Appendix A. 
(b)  Fees regulatory. The annual license fees collected pursuant this article are declared to be regulatory fees which are collected for the purpose of examination and inspection of adult performance establishments and escort services under this article and the administration thereof. These regulatory fees are in addition to and not in lieu of the business tax imposed by other ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 050064, § 3, 9-26-05; Ord. No. 070022, § 4, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 14.5-68. - Transfer. 
(a)  Requirements. No adult performance establishment license or escort service license is transferable to another person by surrendering or transferring possession, control, or operation of the licensed business. For the purposes of this provision, the change of ownership of more than ten percent interest of the business shall be considered a transfer of the licensed business. 
(b)  No transfer to different location. A licensee shall not transfer a license to another location. 
(c)  Attempted improper transfer void. Any attempted transfer of a license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the license shall be deemed void. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-69. - Changing name of business. 
No licensee may change the name of an adult performance establishment or escort service unless and until the licensee satisfies each of the following requirements: 
(a)  Gives the city manager 30-days notice in writing of the proposed name change, accompanied by an affidavit stating there has been no change of ownership of the business since the last reporting to the city; 
(b)  Pays the city manager or designee the change-of-name fee as provided in Appendix A; and 
(c)  Complies with F.S. § 865.09, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 050064, § 4, 9-26-05)  
Sec. 14.5-70. - Suspension. 
(a)  Violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation. In the event the city manager learns or finds upon sufficient cause that a licensed business is operating in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state or local, contrary to the respective general requirements of section 14.5-73(a), (b), (c), or (d), the city manager shall promptly notify the licensee of the violation and, unless the violation is a life-safety violation, shall allow the licensee a reasonable period in which to correct the violation. If the licensee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the reasonable period or if the violation is a life-safety violation the city manager shall forthwith suspend the license, and shall notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the city manager finds that the violation of the provision in question has been corrected. 
(b)  Illegal transfer. In the event the city manager learns or finds upon sufficient cause that a licensee engaged in a license transfer contrary to section 14.5-68, the city manager shall forthwith suspend the license, and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the city manager is satisfied that the ownership has been restored to that licensed. 
(c)  Convictions for violations of division 4 of this article. 
(1)  In the event three or more violations of any specified violation or criminal act occur at an adult performance establishment or escort service within a two-year period, and convictions result from at least three of the violations, the city manager shall, upon receiving evidence of the third conviction, suspend the license, and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of 30 days. 
(2)  In the event one or more violations of any specified violation or criminal act occur at the establishment or escort service within a period of two years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 30 days under subsection (c)(1), but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 30 days, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations, the city manager shall, upon receiving evidence of the first conviction, suspend the license again, and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of 90 days. 
(3)  In the event one or more violations of any specified violation or criminal act occur within a period of two years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 90 days under subsection (c)(2), but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 90 days, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations, the city manager shall, upon receiving evidence of the first conviction, suspend the license again, and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of 180 days. 
(4)  The transfer or renewal of a license pursuant to this article shall not defeat the terms of subsection (c)(1)—(3). 
(d)  Effective date of suspension. All periods of suspension shall begin ten days after the date the city manager mails the notice of suspension to the licensee or on the date the licensee delivers the license to the city manager, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-71. - Revocation. 
(a)  False information. In the event the city manager receives evidence that a license was granted based upon false information, misrepresentation of fact, or mistake of fact, the city manager shall forthwith revoke the license, and notify the licensee of the revocation. 
(b)  Repeat convictions: 
(1)  In the event one or more violations of any specified violation or criminal act occur at an adult performance establishment or escort service which has had a license suspended for a period of 180 days pursuant to subsection 14.5-70(c)(3), and the violation(s) occur within a period of two years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 180 days, but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 180 days, the city manager shall, upon receiving evidence of a conviction for the subsequent violation, forthwith revoke the license, and notify the licensee of the revocation. 
(2)  The renewal of a license pursuant to this article shall not defeat the terms of subsection (b)(1). 
(c)  Effect of revocation. If a license is revoked, the licensee shall not be allowed to obtain another adult performance establishment license or escort service license and no license shall be issued again to any other person for the location upon which the adult performance establishment or escort service was situated for a period of three years. 
(d)  Effective date of revocation. The revocation shall take effect ten days after the date the city manager mails the notice of revocation to the licensee or on the date the licensee delivers the license to the city manager, whichever happens first. If the licensee appeals the revocation to the circuit court as provided in section 14.5-58, the revocation shall be stayed until such appeal has been exhausted or abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 000047, § 3, 7-24-00)  
Sec. 14.5-72. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL OPERATIONAL RULES 
 
Sec. 14.5-73. - General requirements. 
Each adult performance establishment and escort service is subject to all of the following general requirements and shall: 
(a)  Conform to all applicable building, fire, health, zoning and land use statutes, codes, ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, state or local; 
(b)  On the first Monday of each month provide the city manager with a report of all persons who are employees or who were employees during the previous month, which report shall contain the name, date of birth, and stage name, if any, of such persons. 
(c)  Keep its license posted in a conspicuous place at the licensed location available for inspection by the public at all times; 
(d)  Install, construct, keep, maintain or allow only those signs at the licensed location which comply with the city sign ordinances. In addition, no sign shall contain any flashing lights, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner (except for the logo of the establishment, provided the logo shall not contain any specified anatomical areas, or any male or female forms at or below the clavicle); 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-74. - Reserved.  
Sec. 14.5-75. - Adult performance establishment. 
In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in section 14.5-73, an adult performance establishment shall comply with the following special requirements: 
(a)  Cover opaquely each window or other opening through which a person outside the establishment may otherwise see inside the establishment; and 
(b)  Have a stage provided for the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by an employee to a patron consisting of a permanent platform (or other similar permanent structure) raised a minimum of 18 inches above the surrounding floor and encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet; and 
(c)  Any area in which a private performance occurs shall: 
(1)  Have a permanently open entrance not less than 32-inches wide and not less than six feet high, which entrance shall not have any curtain rods, hinges, rails, or the like which would allow the entrance to be closed or partially closed by any curtain, door, or other partition; and 
(2)  Have a wall-to-wall, floor-to-ceiling partition of solid construction without any holes or openings, which partition may be completely or partially transparent, and which partition separates the employee from the person viewing the private performance; and 
(d)  Maintain the exterior walls and surfaces of the establishment, excluding signs, a single achromatic or light pastel color, and maintain all awnings, canopies, window shutters, window treatments, or other trim the same color or a single different shade of the same achromatic or light pastel color. The trim color shall not exceed 20 percent of the entire exterior surface of the building. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of an establishment such as brick or stone. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-76. - Reserved.  
Sec. 14.5-77. - Employee records. 
(a)  An adult performance establishment or escort service shall maintain a record of all employees who currently work for or perform at the business, and of all former employees who worked for or performed at the business during the preceding one-year period. The record shall contain the current or former employee's full legal name, including any aliases, date of birth, and a recent photograph of the employee. The record shall also state whether each employee is a paid employee for whom income taxes are withheld or is a lessee, sublessee, independent contractor, or subcontractor who is allowed to work for or perform at the business. 
(b)  The original records required by subsection (a), or true and exact photocopies thereof, shall be kept at the licensed location at all times. 
(c)  All operators of the establishment shall be responsible for knowing the location of the original records, or the true and exact photocopies thereof. 
(d)  An operator of the licensed business shall, upon request by a law enforcement or code enforcement officer when the business is open, immediately make available for inspection the original records, or the true and exact photocopies thereof.  
DIVISION 4. - VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 14.5-78. - Operation without valid license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult performance establishment or escort service when: 
(a)  The business does not have the appropriate license; 
(b)  The license of the business is under suspension; 
(c)  The license of the business has been revoked or canceled; or 
(d)  The business has a license which has expired. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-79. - Operation contrary to certain provisions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult performance establishment or escort service: 
(1)  Which does not satisfy all of the general requirements of section 14.5-73; 
(2)  Which is an adult performance establishment and does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 14.5-75; or 
(3)  While the entrance or exit of the establishment is locked when a patron is inside the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-80. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for an employee of an adult performance establishment to commit any of the following acts or for an operator of an adult performance establishment to knowingly or with reason to know, permit, suffer, or allow any employee to commit any of the following acts: 
(a)  Engage in a straddle dance with a person at the establishment; 
(b)  Offer, contract or otherwise agree with a person to engage in a straddle dance with a person at the establishment; 
(c)  Engage in any specified sexual activity at the establishment; 
(d)  Display or expose at the establishment specified anatomical areas while such employee is not continuously positioned at least three feet away from all other persons or while such employee is not in an area as described in [section] 14.5-75(a); 
(e)  Display or expose specified anatomical areas at an establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold, offered for sale, distributed, or consumed. 
(f)  Display or expose any specified anatomical area while simulating any specified sexual activity with any other person at the establishment; 
(g)  Engage in a private performance unless such employee is in an area which complies with the requirements of section 14.5-75(c); 
(h)  Intentionally touch any person at the adult performance establishment while engaged in display or exposure of any specified anatomical area; or 
(i)  Intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed body of any person at the adult performance establishment, at any point below the waist and above the knee of the person, or to intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any female person. 
(j)  Exception—notwithstanding any provision indicating to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any employee of an adult performance establishment to expose any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom, or bona fide use of a dressing room that is used and occupied only by other employees. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-81. - Touching employees prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in an adult performance establishment to intentionally touch an employee who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area at the adult performance establishment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in an adult performance establishment, other than another employee, to intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any employee, or to touch the clothed body of any employee at any point below the waist and above the knee of the employee. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-82. - Advertising prohibited activity. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult performance establishment to advertise, encourage or promote any activity prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-83. - Minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator or employee of an adult performance establishment or escort service to knowingly, or with reason to know, permit, suffer, or allow a person under 18 years of age to: 
(a)  Enter or remain in the establishment; or 
(b)  Purchase goods or services at the establishment; or 
(c)  Work at the business as an employee. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-84. - Failure to maintain employee records. 
It shall be unlawful to be an operator of a licensed adult performance establishment or escort service at which all records for employees required by section 14.5-73 have not been compiled, are not maintained, or are not made available for inspection by a law enforcement or code enforcement officer upon request when the establishment is open for business.  
Sec. 14.5-85. - Reserved.  
Sec. 14.5-86. - Alteration of license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city manager to alter or otherwise change the contents or appearance of an adult performance establishment or escort service license. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-87. - False statement in application for license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person applying for an adult performance establishment or escort service license pursuant to division 2 of this article to make a false statement or provide false information which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license on the application required by section 14.5-63, to provide false information in the reports required by section 14.5-66, or to falsify the records required by section 14.5-73 or 14.5-77. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-88. - Solicitation or personal advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for any employee of an adult performance establishment while situated outside any structure at the adult performance establishment, or at a place at the adult performance establishment where the employee is visible from any public right-of-way or sidewalk, to display or expose specified anatomical areas or to engage in personal advertising, pandering, or solicitation, whether passive or otherwise, on behalf of the employee, any other employee, or the adult performance establishment. Personal advertising is defined as encouraging or enticing, by whatever direct or indirect means, potential customers beyond the adult performance establishment to enter the adult performance establishment. Additionally, it shall be unlawful for an operator or any employee to suffer, permit, or allow any door that is visible from a public right-of-way or sidewalk to be opened or remain opened except when a person is entering or exiting the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-89. - Prohibited activity. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator or an employee of an adult performance establishment to knowingly or with reason to know, permit, suffer, or allow any person or patron to engage in any specified sexual activity at the establishment. It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section that the operator or employee immediately left the establishment and notified the police of the illegal activity. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-90. - Existing establishments. 
(a)  General. All adult performance establishments and escort services that are in existence and open to the public as of November 27, 1995, shall apply for a license by 5 p.m. on December 29, 1995, and complete all required building modifications by June 30, 1996. 
(b)  Escort services. All escort services that are in existence and providing service to the public under a valid, current home occupation permit as of November 13, 1995, may continue to provide service under that permit until it expires on September 30, 1996. No new home occupation permit shall be issued for an escort service after November 13, 1995, and no home occupation permit for an escort service shall be renewed. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-91. - Penalties. 
Anyone who is convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.  
DIVISION 5. - ESCORT LICENSE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 14.5-92. - License required. 
On and after December 15, 1995, no person shall become or remain an employee of an escort service and meet any customer within the city limits without having been first granted an escort license by the city manager. Persons who are employees of more than one escort service must obtain a separate license for each escort service for whom they meet any customer within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-93. - Application for license; application fee; consent by applicant. 
(a)  Required. Any person desiring to obtain a escort license shall file with the city manager a sworn license application on a standard application form supplied by the city manager. 
(b)  Contents of application. The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  The person's legal name and any aliases; 
(2)  Proof that the person is 18 years of age or older; 
(3)  A statement of whether the applicant has, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a felony of any state or of the United States or any specified violation or criminal act, and, if so, the specified violation or criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction; 
(4)  A statement of whether the applicant has had a previous escort license suspended or revoked, including the date of the suspension or revocation; 
(5)  The name and location of the escort service or services for which the applicant will be working; 
(6)  The applicant's mailing address, and business telephone number; 
(7)  A recent photograph of the applicant; and 
(8)  The applicant's Social Security number and either the applicant's driver's license number or the number of a state or federally issued identification card. 
(c)  Application fee. Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as provided in Appendix A. If the application for license is approved, and the license is granted, the fee shall be applied as a credit towards the annual license fee required for the first year pursuant to section 14.5-95. 
(d)  Incomplete application. In the event the city manager determines or learns at any time that the applicant has not properly completed the application for an escort license, the applicant shall promptly be notified of such fact and shall be allowed ten days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during this period. 
(e)  Consent. By applying for an escort license, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this division and to the exercise by the city manager of the responsibilities under this division. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 050064, § 5, 9-26-05)  
Sec. 14.5-94. - Processing of application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complete application properly filed with the city manager and upon receipt of the non-refundable application fee, the city manager shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall begin processing of the application. 
(b)  Time period for granting or denying license. The city manager shall grant or deny an application for an escort license within five business days from the date of its proper filing. 
(c)  Granting application for license. If the city manager has not made a finding that would require the application be denied, the city manager shall grant the application, notify the applicant of the decision, and issue the license to the applicant upon payment of the appropriate annual license fee. 
(d)  Denial of application for license. 
(1)  The city manager shall review staff's findings and deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
a.  The application contains material false information or is incomplete; 
b.  The granting of the application would violate a statute or ordinance, or an order from a court of law that prohibits the applicant from obtaining an escort license. 
c.  The applicant has had a license under this article or under an analogous ordinance of another jurisdiction suspended or revoked within the past three years. 
d.  The applicant has been convicted of a specified violation or criminal act as listed in section 14.5-56 or an analogous statute of a state other than Florida within the last five years. 
(2)  If the city manager denies the application, the applicant shall be notified of the denial and the reason(s) for the denial. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-95. - Licenses; terms; renewal; expiration; cancellation; reports; consent. 
(a)  Contents. An escort license shall state the name of the licensee, the date of issuance, name of escort service and the date of expiration, and shall contain a photograph and signature of the licensee. The license shall be laminated or enclosed in plastic so that it may be attached to a garment. 
(b)  Terms. All licenses issued under this division shall be annual licenses which shall commence running on October 1, if they have been paid for, and shall expire on September 30 of the following year. If a license is issued after October 1, but by March 31 of the following year, the applicant shall pay the applicable license fee. If a license is issued after March 31, but by October 1 of the same year, the applicant shall pay one-half the applicable license fee. 
(c)  Renewals. Licenses shall be renewed annually. Subject to other provisions of this division, a licensee under this division shall be entitled to a renewal of its annual license from year to year, as a matter of course, by October 1, by presenting the license for the previous year, restating and updating all information required for a license application, and by paying the appropriate license fee. 
(d)  Expiration. A license that is not renewed under this division by October 1 of each year shall expire. An expired license may be renewed by November 30 of the same year upon payment of the appropriate license fee, and upon payment of a penalty of ten percent of the appropriate license fee for the month of October, or fraction thereof, and an additional penalty of five percent of the appropriate license fee for the month of November, or fraction thereof. 
(e)  Cancellation. All expired licenses not renewed by November 30 shall be canceled summarily by the city manager. 
(f)  Consent. By holding a license under this article, the licensee shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this division and to the exercise by the city manager of responsibilities under this division. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-96. - Annual license fee. 
(a)  Levy. As provided in Appendix A. 
(b)  Fees regulatory. The annual license fee is declared to be a regulatory fee collected for the purpose of administration of this division. The fee is in addition to and not in lieu of the business tax imposed by other ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 050064, § 6, 9-26-05; Ord. No. 070022, § 4, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 14.5-97. - Transfer. 
The escort license is personal not transferable to another person. Any use of the license by a person other than the licensee shall result in revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-98. - Regulations. 
(a)  Display of license. Licensees must have their licenses attached to an outer garment while they are inside a place of business, hotel or motel for the purpose of, or subsequent to, meeting a customer. 
(b)  Notification. Licensee must notify the front desk of any hotel or motel that they have entered for the purpose of meeting a customer, and provide the name and room number of the customer. They must again notify the front desk immediately before leaving the hotel and motel. 
(c)  Prohibited activities. No escort shall engage in any specified sexual activity or display or expose any specified anatomical area to a customer while on duty. 
(Ord. No. 950263, § 1, 11-27-95)  
Sec. 14.5-99. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  An escort license issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked or suspended for a specified period of time by the city manager if the holder has been convicted of any specified violation or criminal act. 
(b)  Prior to suspension or revocation, the licensee shall be given reasonable notice of the proposed action to be taken, and shall have an opportunity to present to the city manager evidence as to why the escort license should not be revoked or suspended.  
ARTICLE V. - DANCE HALLS 
 
Sec. 14.5-100. - Legislative findings, intent, and purpose. 
(a)  The city hereby finds and determines as a matter of fact that late night and all night dance halls and similar forums of assembly commonly referred to as "raves" are sites conducive for the sale, possession and use of illicit drugs. 
(b)  The city also finds such raves expose drug activity to the uninitiated youth of our city, and such exposure to drug activity occurring at such raves is often found to result in drug addiction, overdose and death of both juveniles and adults. 
(c)  The city hereby finds raves provide an arena for predatory-type sexual crimes, thus, for the protection of our city's youth, juveniles should not congregate in such social settings with adults; additionally, regulation of raves is also necessary for the protection of adult victims of such crimes. 
(d)  The city hereby finds raves are often times the sites for violent criminal activity. 
(e)  The city hereby finds that the dangerous criminal activity occurring at such raves occurs predominately in the late night/early morning hours. 
(f)  The city hereby finds that the actions of rave patrons entering and exiting dance hall establishments has a deleterious effect on nearby residential and commercial properties in terms of excessive noise, traffic and debris, and such impacts are exacerbated by the fact that rave patrons enter and exit such raves at extraordinarily late night/early morning hours when citizens have a reasonable expectation of peace and quiet. 
(g)  The city hereby finds that the above-referenced problems associated with raves are unique and specific to such late night dance hall establishments and are not prevalent in other types of unregulated places of assembly. 
(h)  It is the intent of the city to address the unique problems associated with raves by implementing dance hall regulations for both juvenile and adult dance halls; to prevent dance hall contact between juveniles and adults so as to prevent and/or reduce illicit or undesirable juvenile involvement and exposure to illegal drugs and dangerous criminal activity; and further to protect both juveniles and adults from criminal activity that occurs at such raves. 
(i)  The city hereby asserts that the following purposes of the dance hall regulations set forth herein are matters of legitimate, substantial and compelling governmental interests: 
(1)  To protect juveniles and adults from illegal drug activity, including use, sale and drug abuse such as overdoses and to reduce, if not eliminate, such activity from occurring in dance halls; 
(2)  To protect juveniles and adults from violent, criminal activity occurring in dance halls; 
(3)  To protect juveniles and adult victims from predatory-type sexual crimes occurring in dance halls; 
(4)  To reduce the amount of criminal activity occurring predominately in the late night/early morning hours; 
(5)  To prevent the deleterious impacts of noise, traffic and debris on adjacent residential and commercial property that occurs in the late night/early morning hours. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-101. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Adult dance hall means any dance hall whose patrons or admittees are 18 years of age or older. 
Conviction or convicted means the finding of guilt for a violation of a municipal or county ordinance or state or federal law, adjudication withheld on such a finding of guilt, an adjudication of guilt on any plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond or bail when charged with a violation of a municipal or county ordinance or state or federal law. 
Dance hall means any place, area or property operated as open to the public which: 
(1)  Has music either live or electronically produced or transmitted; 
(2)  Has space available for dancing or dancing is permitted whether such dancing takes place or not; 
(3)  Allows admission by payment of a direct or indirect charge, fee, donation, or any form of consideration, or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token; and 
(4)  Is not zoned for the sale of alcoholic beverages or does not sell or serve alcoholic beverages. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a "dance hall" as defined herein, does not include: 
(a)  A private residence or residential facility from which the general public is excluded; 
(b)  A place owned by the federal, state, or local government; 
(c)  A public or private elementary school, secondary school, college or university; 
(d)  A place owned and operated by a bona fide religious organization, created, organized, existing and recognized as such pursuant to all applicable laws; or 
(e)  An adult performance establishment as defined in Article IV of Chapter 14.5 of this Code, lawfully established, existing, permitted and licensed under the provisions of this Code, during such hours of the day as said establishment is being lawfully and principally operated as an adult performance establishment. 
Dance hall regulations means the regulations set forth in this article. 
Juvenile dance hall means any dance hall whose patrons or admittees are 18 years of age or younger. 
Knowingly means with actual knowledge of a specific fact or facts, or with reasonable inquiry a reasonable person should have known a specific fact or facts. 
Permit or dance hall permit means a permit to operate a dance hall. 
Permittee means a person in whose name a permit to operate a dance hall has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a dance hall permit. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 040406, § 1, 10-11-04)  
Sec. 14.5-102. - Permit required; application for permit. 
(a)  No person may operate a dance hall without a permit. 
(b)  A notarized application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the city manager or designee. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The applicant shall indicate whether the application is for a juvenile dance hall or adult dance hall. 
(d)  A person who wishes to operate a dance hall shall sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a dance hall is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as an applicant. Each applicant must meet the requirements of section 14.5-103(6), and each applicant shall be considered a permittee if a permit is granted. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-103. - Requirement for issuance of permit; posting. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall approve issuance of a dance hall permit within 60 days after receipt of an application unless the city manager or designee finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant failed to answer or falsely answered a question(s) or request for information on the application provided. 
(3)  An applicant has been convicted of a violation of any dance hall regulations within two years immediately preceding the application. 
(4)  An applicant has failed to obtain a certification from the fire marshall that the dance hall complies with all applicable provisions of Chapter 10, Fire Prevention and Protection, relative to places of assembly, including but not limited to maximum permitted occupancy load. 
(5)  An applicant has failed to obtain a certification from the director of planning and development services or designee that the dance hall complies with all applicable provisions of the land development code, including, but not limited to, parking. 
(6)  An applicant has been convicted of a crime, 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any felony; or 
2.  Any misdemeanor offense of F.S. Ch. 784, Assault; battery; culpable negligence; Ch. 787, Kidnapping; false imprisonment; luring or enticing a child; custody offenses; Ch. 790, Weapons and firearms; Ch. 794, Sexual battery; Ch. 800, Lewdness; indecent exposure; Ch. 812, Theft, robbery and related crimes; Ch. 827, Abuse of children; Ch. 837, Perjury; Ch. 856, Drunkenness; open house parties; loitering; prowling; desertion; Ch. 859, Poisons; adulterated drugs; Ch. 870, Affrays; riots; routs; unlawful assemblies; Ch. 874, Street terrorism enforcement and prevention; Ch. 877, Miscellaneous crimes; and Ch. 893, Drug abuse prevention and control, as said chapters currently exist or may be amended from time to time; or 
3.  Any violation of dance hall regulations of any other city, county, state or government; and 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the disqualification of the applicant under subsection (a) above. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (a)(6)a. may qualify for a dance hall permit only when the time period required by subsection (a)(6)b. has elapsed. 
(d)  The application shall be reviewed by the appropriate city departments. Review shall be conducted by those departments within 30 days from the receipt of the application by the city manager or designee, and their comments forwarded to the city manager or designee for consideration in issuance of the permit in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(e)  The city manager or designee, upon approving issuance of a dance hall permit, shall send to the applicant, by hand delivery or U.S. mail, written notice of that action and state where the applicant must pay the permit fee and obtain the permit. The city manager's approval of the issuance of a permit does not authorize the applicant to operate a dance hall until the applicant has paid all fees required by this chapter and obtained possession of the permit. 
(f)  The permit shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the dance hall, and whether it is issued for a juvenile dance hall or adult dance hall. 
(g)  The permit must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the dance hall so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-104. - Fees. 
The city commission, may, by resolution, establish nonrefundable fees for the city to review the contents of a dance hall permit application and for each permit issued under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-105. - Persons under 18 prohibited in adult dance hall. 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 years may enter an adult dance hall unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(b)  No person shall falsely represent himself to be either a parent or guardian of another person under the age of 18 years for the purpose of gaining the other person's admission into an adult dance hall. 
(c)  Except as noted in subsection (a) above, no permittee or employee of an adult dance hall shall knowingly allow a person under the age of 18 years to enter or remain on the premises of an adult dance hall. 
(d)  No permittee of an adult dance hall shall maintain or operate the premises without posting a sign at each entrance to the business that reads: "It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to enter this premises without a parent or guardian." 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-106. - Persons age 19 and over prohibited in juvenile dance hall. 
(a)  No person age 19 and over may enter a juvenile dance hall except: 
(1)  A permittee or employee of the dance hall; 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a person inside the dance hall; or 
(3)  A governmental employee in the performance of official duties. 
(b)  No person shall falsely represent himself to be under age 19 for the purpose of gaining admission to a juvenile dance hall. 
(c)  No permittee or employee of a juvenile dance hall shall knowingly allow a person age 19 or over to enter or remain on the premises of the juvenile dance hall. 
(d)  No permittee of a juvenile dance hall shall maintain or operate the premises without posting a conspicuous sign at the entrance to the business that reads: "It is unlawful for any person age 19 or over to enter these premises." 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-107. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  No person shall operate a juvenile dance hall during any hours other than 4:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, and from 4:00 p.m. on Friday to 12:01 a.m. of the following day, and from 1:00 p.m. Saturday to 12:01 a.m. of the following day. The establishment shall close and all customers or members shall vacate the premises when it is required to close until the time that the club may legally open for operation. 
(b)  No person shall operate an adult dance hall during any hours other than 1:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. of the following day. The establishment shall close and all customers or members shall vacate the premises from 2:00 a.m. until the time that the club may legally open for operation. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-108. - Code of Ordinances. 
No person shall operate a dance hall in violation of any applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-109. - Dance hall supervisor. 
(a)  A person who operates a dance hall shall designate a person as the dance hall supervisor and shall register that supervisor's name with the city manager or designee. 
(b)  The person designated as the dance hall supervisor shall meet the requirements set forth in section 14.5-103(a)(6)a. and b. for applicants. 
(c)  The person designated dance hall supervisor shall remain on the premises of the dance hall during all hours of operation and until 30 minutes after closing to ensure that the operation is conducted in accordance with all dance hall regulations herein. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-110. - Inspection. 
(a)  Application for, and issuance of, any dance hall permit shall constitute consent by the permittee for representatives of the city to enter and inspect the premises of the dance hall at any time it is open for business or occupied for the purpose of verifying compliance with the law. 
(b)  No person who operates a dance hall or a person designated as the dance hall supervisor shall refuse to permit a lawful inspection of the premises of a dance hall by a representative of the city at any time it is open for business or occupied. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-111. - Expiration of permit. 
(a)  A permit for a dance hall expires one year from the date of issuance. A permit may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 14.5-102. Application for renewal should be made at least 60 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 60 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected by the pendency of the application. 
(b)  If the city manager or designee denies renewal of a permit, the applicant may not be issued any dance hall permit for one year from the date denial becomes final. If, subsequent to denial, the city manager or designee finds that the basis for denial of the renewal permit has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-112. - Suspension. 
The city manager or designee shall suspend a dance hall permit for a period of time not exceeding 30 days if the city manager determines that a permittee or an employee of a permittee has committed any one or more of the following acts: 
(1)  Violated any provisions of the dance hall regulations; 
(2)  Engaged in the use of alcoholic beverages on the dance hall premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the dance hall premises so authorized in this article; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted an intoxicated person to remain on the premises; 
(5)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the dance hall premises; 
(6)  Knowingly permitted the possession, consumption, or sale of an alcoholic beverage on the premises of a dance hall; 
(7)  Knowingly permitted the possession, consumption or sale of any illegal drugs on the premises of the dance hall; 
(8)  Knowingly allowed performances or activity that violates Chapter 17, Article II of this Code, which regulates nudity in public places. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-113. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension under section 14.5-112 occurs and the permit has been previously suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The city manager shall revoke a permit if the city manager determines that one or more of the following is true: 
(1)  A permittee has given false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city during the application process. 
(2)  A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances or any derivative thereof on the premises. 
(3)  A permittee or an employee knowingly permitted dancing or a live performance during a period of time when the dance hall permit was suspended. 
(4)  A permittee has been: 
a.  Convicted of an offense listed in section 14.4-103(a)(6)b. for which the time period required in section 14.5-103(6)(a)b. has not elapsed; or 
b.  Convicted of or is under indictment for any felony offense while holding a dance hall permit. 
(5)  While an employee of the dance hall, and while on the permitted premises, a person has committed an offense listed in section 14.5-103(a)(6)a., for which a conviction has been obtained, two or more times within a 12-month period. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit. 
(d)  When the city manager or designee revokes a permit, the revocation will continue for one year, and the permittee may not be issued any dance hall permit for one year from the date revocation became final. If, subsequent to revocation, the city manager finds that the basis for the revocation action has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became final. If the permit was revoked under subsection (b)(4) hereof, an applicant may not be granted another permit until the appropriate number of years required under section 14.5-103(a)(6)b. has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-114. - Appeals. 
If the city manager denies the issuance or renewal of a permit, suspends or revokes a permit, the chief of police shall send the applicant or permittee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party (applicant or permittee only) may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city commission in accordance with the following procedures. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the city manager in suspending or revoking a permit until the city commission makes a final decision. 
(1)  The aggrieved party may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the clerk of the commission a written request for a hearing before the city commission. Such request shall constitute notice of appeal. 
(2)  If a written request is filed under subsection (1) hereof with the clerk of the commission within the ten-day limit, the city commission shall consider the request. The clerk of the commission shall set a date for the hearing within 30 days from the date the written request is received. 
(3)  The city commission shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person to determine whether the city manager properly denied issuance or renewal, or properly suspended or revoked the permit in accordance with the provisions of this division. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
(4)  The city commission shall grant or deny the appeal by majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote will result in denial of the appeal. Any dispute of fact must be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the city commission is final. 
(5)  If the city commission denies the appeal, the aggrieved party may not re-apply until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the commission's action. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-115. - Transfer of permit. 
A permittee shall not transfer a permit to another person, nor shall a permittee operate a dance hall under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-116. - Penalties and remedies. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a dance hall without a valid permit or in violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to the following penalties and/or remedies: 
(1)  Violations of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(2)  Each day that any violation continues after receipt of a written notice of such violation shall constitute a separate violation and a separate offense for purposes of the penalties and remedies specified herein. 
(3)  In addition to the penalties and remedies above, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or abate a violation of this article, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Sec. 14.5-117. - Existing establishments. 
All dance halls that are in existence and open to the public as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 990985 shall apply for a permit by 5:00 p.m. on March 15, 2000. These establishments may continue to operate until the permit is granted, or the appeal process if final. Failure to apply for a permit by March 15, 2000, or to diligently pursue issuance of the permit shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 990985, § 1, 2-14-00)  
Secs. 14.5-108—14.5-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CABLE TELEVISION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14.5-120. - Title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Gainesville Cable Television Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-121. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
Access channels means channels set aside for non-commercial access programming as authorized by federal law, with specific programming uses and purposes as determined by the city commission consistent with federal law. 
Affiliate, when used in relation to any person, means another person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, such person. 
Applicable law means all federal, state, and local laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, now in force or hereafter enacted, and all amendments thereto applicable to operation of a cable system or to any activities of a Grantee permitted by this article or by a franchise. 
Basic service tier means all signals of domestic television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system), any public, educational and governmental programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier, and any additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier by the cable operator. 
Cable act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as they may be amended, succeeded, supplemented or augmented by subsequent laws. 
Cable communications system, also referred to as "cable television system" or "cable system" or "system," means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community; but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right of way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provision of Title II of the Cable Act, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or 
(4)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service, and the subscriber interaction, if any, required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service, or as otherwise provided by applicable law. 
Capacity means the capability of the cable communications system to carry signals. At the time of the effective date of this article, capacity may be described in terms of portions of the total radio frequency bandwidth by specifying a number of MHz, but this is subject to changes in technology. 
Channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel (as television channel is defined by applicable law). 
City means the City of Gainesville, Florida. 
Commercial subscriber means a subscriber who receives a service in a place of business. 
Commission means the city commission of the City of Gainesville. 
Complaint shall mean any written communication by any person or any oral communication by a subscriber or potential subscriber reduced to writing, including a computer form, expressing dissatisfaction with any non-programming aspect of Grantee's business or operation of the cable communications system. 
Days means calendar days unless otherwise specified. 
Drop means a connection from feeder cable to a demarcation point, as specified from time to time by the FCC, outside a subscriber's or potential subscriber's residence, dwelling unit, commercial establishment or other service location. A standard drop shall be a drop whose length is not more than 150 feet. 
Dwelling unit means any building or portion thereof that is lawfully occupied for residential purposes. Each apartment or dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling unit shall be counted as one residential subscriber for purposes related to this Ordinance and any franchise agreement unless otherwise provided. 
Easement dedicated for compatible use means an easement open for the use of a cable operator pursuant to F.S., ch. 177. 
External costs shall have the same meaning as found in federal rules and regulations. 
Fair market value means the price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing in the industry at the time. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, any of its agencies or bureaus, and any legally appointed or elected successor. 
Fiber means a transmission medium of optical fiber cable capable of carrying cable services by means of light wave impulses, or any similar successor technology. 
Fiber node means the local transition point between the fiber distribution portion and the coaxial distribution portion of the cable television system. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a renewal of an authorization which has been granted subject to Section 626 of the Cable Act), issued by the city, which authorizes the construction, operation or maintenance of a cable system along the public rights-of-way within all or a specified area of the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any business tax receipt or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required by applicable law. 
Franchise agreement means the contract voluntarily entered into by the city and a grantee embodying a franchise awarded in accordance with this article, containing the specific terms and conditions under which the franchise shall be exercised. Any franchise granted pursuant to this article grants the nonexclusive rights to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system along the public rights-of-way within specified areas of the city. 
Franchise area means the area in which a grantee is permitted to operate a cable communications system. 
Grantee means any person on which a franchise is conferred and shall include the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of such person. 
Gross revenues means all revenue received by the grantee or its agents for delivery of cable service or from the operation of its cable system within the incorporated areas of the city, with no deductions except for bad debts written off or other restriction of state or federal laws, rules and regulations. 
Headend means that part of a cable system used for the reception and dissemination of signals on the cable television system. 
Installation means the connection of the system from feeder cable or other facilities to the subscribers' point of entry as designated from time to time by the FCC. 
Interconnect or interconnection means the physical linking of the grantee's cable television system with any other designated cable system or other separate communications network so that cable services, as specified in the franchise agreement, of technically adequate quality may be sent to and received from such other systems. 
Line extensions means the activation of the cable system to areas of the city not served by cable system. 
Multiple dwelling unit or MDU means condominiums, apartments, and other multiple-resident buildings having more than four dwelling units. 
Non-commercial means use of the cable system by any tax-exempt organization or by any other user for a purpose that is not intended to generate income for the user or any other person and is not otherwise related to a profit-making activity. 
Normal business hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week or some weekend hours. 
Normal operating conditions means those service conditions that are within the control of grantee. Those conditions that are not within the control of grantee include but are not limited to natural disasters, substantial regulatory changes, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are within the control of grantee include but are not limited to special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular, peak or seasonal demand periods, changes in the billing cycle, changes in channel lineups that are within grantee's control, and repairs, rebuilds, maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
Open video system or OVS means any channel or a facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable television service, which includes video programming, to multiple subscribers within a community, and which the Federal Communications Commission or its successor has certified as compliant with 47 C.F.R. Part 76, as amended from time to time. 
Overbuild means a cable system or portion thereof constructed to serve subscribers in an area served by an existing cable system, including those parts of an existing system that will be constructed and activated within six months pursuant to plans filed with the city. 
Parent corporation means a corporation, other person, or other legal entity with greater than 50 percent ownership of the grantee or having control, in whatever manner exercised or if voluntarily not exercised, over the grantee. 
Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint venture, organization, corporation, limited liability company or other entity, or any lawful successor or transferee of said individual, partnership, association, organization, corporation, limited liability company or other entity. 
Public property shall mean any real property owned by the city other than the public rights-of-way. 
Public rights-of-way means any land owned or controlled by the city that is dedicated, deeded, used, or to be used for a public street, highway or road. 
Reasonable notice means written notice addressed to the grantee or the city at that party's respective principal office within the city, as set forth in a franchise, or such other office as the grantee or the city has designated as the address to which notice shall be transmitted to the respective party sent by certified mail and postmarked not less than 14 days prior to that day in which the party giving such notice shall commence any action which requires the giving of notice. In computing said 14 days, holidays recognized by the city shall be excluded. 
Rebuild means the replacement of a cable system's active electronic and passive devices and replacing more than 50 percent of the coaxial cable or fiber optic plant with new plant over a period of two years or less. 
Resident means any person residing in the city except as otherwise defined by applicable law. 
Residential subscriber means a subscriber who receives a service in an individual dwelling unit or a multiple dwelling unit of four or fewer units and the subscriber's use is for non-commercial purposes. 
Sale includes any sale, exchange or barter transaction. 
School means any public K-12 school, excluding charter, non-public and "home" schools. 
Service call means the visit of a cable television representative to a service address. 
Service interruption or outage means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
Simplified tax law means the Communications Services Tax Simplification Law, Chapter 202 of the Florida Statutes, as amended. 
State means the State of Florida. 
Subscriber means any person, firm, corporation or other entity who or which legally subscribes to a cable service provided by a grantee. 
Transfer means any disposal by the grantee or any owner(s) thereof, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, of five percent or more at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in a system, grantee or franchise, or 20 percent cumulatively over the term of a franchise of such interests to a person or group of persons. 
Upgrade means improving the cable system, through the exchange of electronic and passive devices, while utilizing a significant portion of the existing coaxial cable or fiber optic plant. 
User means a person utilizing channel or equipment and facilities for the purpose of producing or transmitting programming, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04; Ord. No. 070022, § 4, 6-25-07)  
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE GRANT 
 
Sec. 14.5-122. - Franchise terms. 
(a)  Grant. Pursuant to the authority of federal, state and local laws and regulations, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, the city may grant revocable and nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate, and maintain a cable communications system in the public rights-of-way within the City of Gainesville for the purpose of providing cable services. If the city grants to a grantee a non-exclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system within the city, said franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide cable services within the specified franchise area. In exercising its rights pursuant hereto, a grantee shall not endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, interfere with any installations of the city or with installations of any public utility serving the city or with any other person permitted to use the public rights-of-way, or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the use of the public rights-of-way. The grant of one franchise does not establish priority for use over the other present or future permit or franchise holders or the city's own use of the public rights-of-way. The city shall at all times control the distribution of space in the public rights-of-way occupied by the cable communications system. All rights granted for the construction, operation, and maintenance of a cable communications system shall be subject to the continuing right of the city to require such reconstruction, relocation, change or discontinuance of the system facilities as shall in the opinion of the city be necessary in the public interest. 
(b)  Authorization to provide cable service. A franchise granted pursuant to this article solely authorizes the grantee to provide a cable service and shall not authorize nor prohibit the provision of other communications services. A grantee shall comply with all applicable city requirements and authorizations prior to providing other communications services in the city. 
(c)  Franchise nonexclusive. All franchises granted hereunder are nonexclusive and shall not affect the right of the city to grant to any other person a right to occupy or use the public rights-of-way for the construction and operation of a cable communications system within the city or the right of the city to permit the use of the public rights-of-way for any purpose whatever. No privilege or power of eminent domain is bestowed on a grantee by the grant of a franchise. 
(d)  Conflict between terms and conditions. In the event of conflict between the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise, the article shall control. 
(e)  Franchise subject to provisions of other ordinances of the city. Any franchise granted by the city, as well as the obligations and rights of a grantee and the city as set forth in this article, are hereby made subject to the exercise of the city's police powers and the provisions of other applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the city now in effect and hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise or in this article shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various applicable codes and ordinances of the city regarding permits, manner of construction, or other matters, including but not limited to right-of-way and construction ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-123. - Use of public streets and ways. 
(a)  For the purpose of constructing, operating and maintaining a cable communications system in the city and subject to compliance with all applicable ordinances, a grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, rebuild, upgrade and retain in the public rights-of-way within the franchise area such wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary to the operation of the cable communications system, provided, however, that a grantee complies with all design, construction, safety and performance provisions contained in this article, the franchise and other applicable laws. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this permission to use public rights-of-way shall not include use of any public property. 
(b)  Grantee shall contract separately with the city for use of any public property, other than for rights-of-way, and enter into pole attachment agreements for use of any utility poles or other utility facilities required in connection with the operation of a cable system. 
(c)  No location of any of grantee's facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be a vested right, and any change in or vacation of a public right-of-way shall create an obligation of the grantee to remove at its own expense any such facilities on any such property that is no longer a public right-of-way, unless the grantee shall independently reach an agreement with the new owner of the property. 
(d)  No reference herein or in any franchise to the "public rights-of-way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain only such rights to use property in the city as the city may have the undisputed right and power to give. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-124. - Use of system facilities. 
Grantee shall locate new lines underground to the same extent that telephone and electric utilities are required to do so. No poles shall be erected by a grantee in the public rights-of-way without prior approval of the city, and any such poles must comply with location, height, type and any other pertinent rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances. No location of any pole of a grantee shall be a vested right, however; and such poles shall be removed, relocated or modified by a grantee at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby, or where telephone and electric utilities are located underground or whenever a public right-of-way is vacated. A grantee shall utilize existing poles and conduits where possible. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public rights-of-way by grantee shall be placed in such a manner as to not interfere with travel on such public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-125. - Small system exclusion. 
Small system operators, as classified by FCC guidelines or regulations, or cable communications systems serving fewer than 1,000 subscribers within the city shall be permitted to petition the city to secure waivers of reporting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-126. - Term of franchise. 
The term of a franchise shall commence on the date specified in a franchise agreement or, if no such date is specified, upon execution of the franchise by the city and the grantee and shall continue for a period specified in the franchise, unless sooner terminated as provided herein or in the franchise. The city may grant a franchise for a period not to exceed ten years. The grantee shall have no further right to utilize the public rights-of-way nor to operate the cable system within the city, subject to applicable law, upon the revocation, non-renewal, or other termination of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-127. - Franchise required. 
No cable communications system, open video system, or person providing cable service shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets of the city or be allowed to operate within the city without a franchise granted pursuant to this article. All cable television franchises in the city shall be subject to the terms of this article. Any franchise granted for an open video system shall comply with all sections of this article, unless precluded from compliance by specific sections of applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-128. - Police and regulatory powers reserved. 
Grantee shall be subject to all lawful exercise of the city's police and regulatory powers. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-129. - Right of condemnation reserved. 
Nothing in this article or a franchise shall limit any right the city may have to acquire by eminent domain or otherwise any real property of a grantee as permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-130. - City's right to perform public works. 
Nothing in this article or in any franchise granted by the city shall operate to limit the right of the city or any governmental authority to perform or carry on, directly or indirectly, any public works or public improvements of any description. Should a cable communications system in any way interfere with the construction, maintenance or repair of such public works or public improvements, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect or relocate its cable communications system or part thereof as reasonably directed by city officials. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-131. - Emergency removal of system. 
If at any time, in case of fire, disaster, or other emergency in the city, it shall become necessary in the reasonable judgment of the city to cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances or appurtenances of the cable communications system, the city shall have the right to do so using reasonable care at the sole cost and expense of the grantee. The grantee shall bear all costs of reinstallation, repair, and other costs resulting from or arising out of the emergency cutting or removal of the cable communications system. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-132. - Removal and relocation. 
The city shall have the power at any time to order and require a grantee to remove or relocate any pole, wire, cable or other structure that is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life or property. For a removal, restoration shall be made to a condition reasonably similar to that which existed immediately prior to installation of such pole, wire, cable or other structure. For a relocation, the new location must eliminate the danger or potential danger. If grantee, after notice, fails or refuses to act within a reasonable time, the city shall have power to remove or relocate the same. Any removal or relocation hereunder, whether by grantee or the city, shall be at the sole cost and expense of the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-133. - Removal or abandonment. 
Upon termination of a franchise by passage of time or otherwise, the grantee shall retain ownership of the cable communications system, except as otherwise provided herein or in the grantee's franchise, but shall have no further right to use of public rights-of-way, subject to applicable law. In such event and unless the grantee transfers the cable communications system to a subsequent grantee approved by the city, the grantee, as directed by the city, shall remove its supporting structures, poles, transmission and distribution systems, all underground facilities, and all other appurtenances from the streets and public rights-of-way, and shall restore all affected property, public or private, to its original condition prior to the installation, erection, or construction of the cable communications system. Restoration of city property including but not limited to the public rights-of-way shall be accomplished in accordance with the directions and specifications of affected departments and agencies of the city and all applicable law. The grantee shall accomplish such restoration at its expense. such removal shall be made with the supervision of the city. If such removal and restoration are not completed within 12 months after the notice by the city delivered in writing to the grantee, all grantee's property remaining in the affected public rights-of-way shall, at the option of the city, be deemed abandoned and shall, at the option of the city, become the property of the city. If the grantee fails or refuses to remove its system or to restore all areas to the satisfaction of the city, the city, at its option, may perform such work and collect the cost thereof from the grantee. No surety on any bond shall be discharged until the city has certified to the grantee in writing that the system has been dismantled or removed, and all other property has been restored to the reasonable satisfaction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-134. - Fees. 
(a)  Nothing in a franchise or this article shall be construed to limit the authority of the city to impose a tax, fee, or other assessment of any kind on any person. The grantee shall pay all fees necessary to obtain all applicable federal, state and local licenses, permits and authorizations required for the construction, installation, maintenance or operation of its cable system. 
(b)  Grantee shall collect from subscribers and remit to the proper governmental entity any lawfully levied local option taxes, including the communications services tax. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-135. - Limitation on use of financial commitments. 
Any financial commitments obtained by a grantee that have been specifically confirmed to the city in a franchise for use in connection with the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable communications system or the grantee's performance of the terms, obligations, and conditions of this article and the franchise shall be used only for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-136. - Transfer of ownership or control. 
(a)  Transfer of franchise or cable communications system. Only a grantee shall operate, manage and maintain a cable communications system or provide cable services by use of a cable system. No franchise granted hereunder nor title to all or part of the cable communications system can be transferred without the prior written consent of the city, and then only under such conditions as the city may reasonably establish. 
(b)  Transfer of control. Control of a grantee or its parent company, in whatever manner exercised, shall not be transferred without the prior written consent of the city, and then only under such conditions as the city may reasonably establish. A request for approval of transfer or control shall be filed at least 120 days prior to such transfer, along with any information the city may reasonably require in order to ascertain the legal, financial and technical capability of the proposed transferee. The word control as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. The city manager or designee may consent to such transfer of control. If no response is received from the city by the grantee within 45 days of request, then consent may be assumed by the grantee. 
(c)  Transfer of ownership. Ownership of a grantee shall not be transferred to a person or group of persons without the prior written consent of the city and then only under such conditions as the city may reasonably establish. 
(d)  Corporate reorganization. An application for approval of a transfer of the franchise or the cable system to an affiliate entity where there is no substantial change in the ultimate ownership of grantee shall be considered granted on the thirty-first calendar day following the filing of an application with the city, unless, prior to that date, reorganization transfer shall clearly identify the application as such. The city may require the new entity to affirm its ability and willingness to comply with the terms of the franchise. 
(e)  Approval. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of a grantee or a cable system shall make the applicable franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, the city may consider the legal, financial and technical capabilities of the prospective transferee, the quality of cable services provided by the prospective transferee, operational changes proposed and other relevant qualifications and circumstances of the prospective transferee or person acquiring control. In furtherance of such consideration, the city shall have the right to make such inquiry of a grantee as the city shall reasonably deem necessary, and the grantee shall provide the city with all information requested by the city in conjunction with such inquiry and its consideration of the proposed change, transfer, or acquisition of control. Failure to provide all information reasonably requested by the city as part of said inquiry or consideration shall be grounds for denial of the proposed change, transfer or acquisition of control. The city shall have 120 days from the date of receipt of a complete and accurate FCC Form 394, and such additional relevant information as requested by the city within 30 days of receipt of the FCC Form 394, to determine the qualifications of the prospective transferee to operate the system and to act upon any such request for consent. If the city fails to act upon such request for consent within such 120-day period, such consent shall be deemed to have been given unless the city and the Grantee otherwise agree to an extension of time. 
(f)  Assumption of control. Any financial institution having a pledge of a franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the city that it will take control and operate the cable communications system. If the financial institution takes possession of the cable communications system, the city shall take no action to effect a termination of the franchise without first giving to such financial institution written notice thereof and a period of six months thereafter, unless otherwise provided herein, to allow the financial institution, or its agent(s), to continue operating as the Grantee under the franchise or to request the city to consent to the assignment of the grantee's rights, title, interest and obligations under the franchise to a qualified operator. The financial institution shall be entitled to such possession and other rights granted under this paragraph until such time that the city determines whether to consent to such assignment (the "extended time"). If the city finds that such transfer, after considering the legal, financial, technical, and other relevant qualifications and circumstances of the applicant, is satisfactory, the city will consent to the transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the public interest. During the six-month period or extended time, the financial institution shall enjoy all the rights, benefits and privileges of the grantee under the franchise, and the city shall not disturb such possession by the financial institution, provided the financial institution complies in all respects with the terms and provisions of the franchise and this article. The various rights granted to the financial institution under this paragraph are contingent upon its continuous compliance with the terms and provisions of this article and the franchise during the entire aforementioned six-month period, or extended time if applicable. For example, should an agent of the financial institution take possession of the cable communication system pursuant to rights granted to the financial institution under this paragraph, and such agent fails to comply with the level of service requirements set forth in this article or the franchise, the rights granted to the financial institution under this article or the franchise may be terminated in accordance with the procedures set forth below. 
(g)  City's rights. The consent or approval of the city or any other public entity to any transfer of ownership or control of a grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in any public rights-of-way that may be utilized by the grantee under the franchise and any public property that may be utilized by the grantee under separate agreements. Any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of this article, the franchise, and any rules and regulations reasonably adopted by the city manager or designee. 
(h)  Construction completion required. In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city will not approve any transfer or assignment of a franchise prior to completion of any initial construction of a cable system or substantial completion of a rebuild required by a franchise. This provision shall not apply to line extensions. 
(i)  Conditions of transfer. The city reserves the right to impose such reasonable conditions on the prospective transferee as are considered appropriate by the city. Such conditions may include but are not limited to a requirement that the prospective transferee assume responsibility for any non-compliance by grantee or that grantee comply prior to the city's approval of any transfer; and a requirement that a guaranty or other performance security be provided by the prospective transferee's parent corporation, but shall not include any substantive changes in an existing but unexpired franchise agreement for the duration of the franchise. Any approval by the city of transfer of ownership or control shall be contingent upon the prospective controlling party's becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement. 
(j)  Lease. A grantee shall not lease or sublease its franchise in whole or in part, or any of the rights or privileges granted or authorized by this article or the franchise without the city's consent. A grantee may not permit any other entity to collocate in any of its facilities that are located above, within, underneath or upon the public rights-of-way without the express written consent of the city. The grantee remains solely responsible for locating, servicing, repairing, relocating or removing its cable communications system, or that of any other entity with collocated facilities as approved by the city, unless the city manager or designee has consented in writing to the sharing of responsibility for collocated facilities. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-137. - Right to purchase the system. 
(a)  Right to purchase. If the city denies the renewal of a franchise under applicable law, the city shall have the right to purchase or effect a transfer of ownership of the cable communications system to another person. Any such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. The city shall provide the grantee with notification of the city's intent to purchase or effect a transfer within 90 days of a final determination of a renewal request. If the franchise held by the Grantee is revoked for cause, the city may acquire ownership of the cable system or effect a transfer of ownership of the system to another person at an equitable price. The city reserves the right of first refusal in any proposed transfer of the cable system other than a corporate reorganization. If the city elects to exercise this option, it shall give the grantee notice of such intent within 45 days of grantee's notice of proposed transfer. Thereafter, the city and the grantee shall effect such transfer under similar or the same terms and conditions as the proposed transfer or on such other terms and conditions as the parties may agree. 
(b)  Date of valuation. The date of valuation shall be no earlier than the day following the date of expiration or revocation of the franchise and no later than the date the city makes an offer consistent with the above mentioned valuation or the date of transfer of ownership, whichever occurs first. 
(c)  Intent of the City to purchase. Upon receipt of notice of the city's intent to purchase the system, the grantee and the city shall have 180 days within which to negotiate the purchase price of the system. 
(d)  Transfer to city. Upon exercise of this option, and the payment of the agreed upon sum by the city and its service of official notice of such action upon the grantee, the grantee shall immediately transfer to the city possession and title to all facilities and tangible property, real and personal, required for the provision of cable services or, if different, assets specifically covered in the sales agreement, free from any and all liens and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the city in lieu of some portion of the purchase price set forth above; and the grantee shall execute such warranty deeds, bills of sale, and other instruments of conveyance to the city as shall be necessary for this purpose. 
(e)  Limitations on purchase. Nothing herein shall be deemed to require a grantee to discontinue the operation of or sell a cable system, to the extent such a cable system is used for the provision of a telecommunications service, by reason of the failure of such grantee to obtain a franchise renewal with respect to the provision of such communications service. The city shall not acquire ownership of the cable system or effect a transfer of ownership of the system to another person in order to offer multi-channel video service to the public. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-138. - Franchise renewal. 
Upon completion of the term of any franchise granted under this article, the city shall proceed with the renewal process in accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-139. - Taxes, fees and payments. 
(a)  Each grantee shall promptly pay, to the appropriate governmental entity, all taxes, fees, and other amounts that may be levied or imposed as a result of the operation by grantee of its cable system or the provision of services through its cable system, including without limitation taxes required by F.S., ch. 202, as amended from time to time, and other applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)  If the local option tax of F.S., ch. 202, is invalidated or otherwise removed by future legislation, each grantee shall pay to the city a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues, unless otherwise prohibited by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-140. - Forfeiture or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. The city reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated with a franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach under this article and the franchise grant: 
(1)  If the franchise were fraudulently obtained. 
(2)  If a grantee shall default in the performance of any of the material obligations under this article or under the franchise, agreement upon transfer, or settlement agreement. 
(3)  If a grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect the liability and indemnification coverage or any construction, performance, or employee bonds as required herein. 
(4)  If a grantee shall knowingly violate any lawful orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this article or a franchise. 
(5)  If a grantee or officer or director is convicted, by any court of competent jurisdiction, of any fraud or deceit upon the city, fraud or deceit on cable subscribers as a whole, or fraud or deceit on any class or group of subscribers. 
(6)  If a grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, is adjudged bankrupt, files a voluntary petition for bankruptcy or reorganization or for an order protecting its assets from the claims of creditors, makes a general assignment for the benefit or creditors, or takes the benefit of any insolvency act, or a temporary receiver or trustee is appointed for the grantee's property and such appointment is not vacated and set aside within 90 days from the date of such appointment. 
(7)  If, in any franchised service areas inside the city limits, a grantee withholds or abandons provision of cable services or fails to operate the cable system or restore cable service after one week of total system outage or interrupted service, or otherwise suspends or discontinues its business, except when approval for such interruption is obtained from the city manager or designee. 
(8)  If a grantee materially misrepresents fact in the application for a franchise or any extension or renewal thereof. 
(9)  If a grantee transfers ownership or control of a cable system, or if ownership or control of a grantee or control of the grantee's parent company is transferred, without prior approval of the city. 
(10)  If a grantee fails to comply with any non-appealable federal or state judgment arising directly from the grantee's actions related to its cable communications system or provision of cable services. 
(11)  If a grantee attempts to dispose of any cable communications system or system facilities to prevent the city from recovering any payments due or any losses or damages arising out of the franchise or this article. 
(12)  If a grantee's construction schedule is materially delayed later than the schedule contained in the applicable franchise or beyond any extended date set by the city. 
(13)  If a grantee shall withhold or threaten to withhold or terminate service conditioned upon a subscriber's providing any benefit to the grantee other than payment for services or a right to enter the property to construct, reconstruct, maintain, repair or install the equipment or lines on that property necessary to service that property. 
(b)  Effect of circumstances beyond control of grantee. A grantee shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this article in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented due to acts of God or other reasons beyond the grantee's control. A fault shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee's control if committed by a corporation or other business entity in which the grantee holds a controlling interest whether held directly or indirectly, or which holds a controlling interest in grantee, whether held directly or indirectly and whether or not such control is exercised. 
(c)  Procedure prior to revocation. 
(1)  The city shall make written demand that the grantee comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the Grantee continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand, the City may place its request for revocation of the franchise upon a city commission meeting agenda. The city shall cause to be served upon such grantee at least seven days prior to the date of such commission meeting reasonable notice of its intent to request such revocation, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the clerk of the commission in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with state law and customary procedures. 
(2)  At the meeting, the commission shall hear any persons interested in the revocation proceeding, and shall determine in its reasonable discretion whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. 
(3)  If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, as determined by the commission, the commission shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as it may consider reasonable. 
(4)  If the commission shall determine that such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then the commission shall declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be revoked and bonds or other applicable security forfeited, pursuant to their terms, and other corrective action, as may be required by the commission, shall be promptly taken by grantee. 
(5)  Nothing in this article shall prevent a grantee from seeking judicial review of a revocation decision in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-141. - Equal opportunity policy. 
EEO. Equal employment opportunity shall be afforded by all Grantees to all qualified persons, and no person shall be discriminated against in employment because of race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex, sexual orientation or physical handicap. Each Grantee shall comply with all equal opportunity provisions enacted by the City, federal and state authorities, as well as all such provisions contained in this article and the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATION OF FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 14.5-142. - Regulatory authority. 
(a)  On-going regulation. The City shall exercise regulatory authority under the provisions of this article and applicable law. The City Manager or designee is authorized to administer any franchises granted under this article and to enforce the provisions of this article and any such franchises. 
(b)  Applications. No person shall operate any cable system within the city without having first obtained from the city, and continuing to maintain in full force and effect, a franchise therefor pursuant to this article. Each application submitted for a new franchise by a first-time grantee shall be accompanied by the required nonrefundable application fee to offset the reasonable cost of processing and evaluating the application. Fees are set forth in the schedule of fees, rates and charges of the Gainesville Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Governing requirement. At all times during the term of a franchise, the grantee shall comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations relating to the construction and operation of the cable communications system. The city shall have the maximum plenary authority to regulate the cable communications systems, grantees and franchises, as may at any time be lawfully permissible. If, during the term of any franchise, applicable law permits or prohibits the regulation of cable communication systems or services not permitted or prohibited to the city on the effective date of any franchise, the city shall either engage in any such additional regulation as may then be permissible or forbear from such regulation as may then be prohibited, whether or not contemplated by this article or the franchise, including without limitation regulation respecting franchise fees, taxes, rates charged to subscribers, consumer protection, or any other similar or dissimilar matter. The city, at its option, may notify the grantee that it wishes to negotiate those provisions which are affected in any way by such modification in regulations or statutory authority. 
(d)  Right of inspection of records. The city shall have the right to inspect books, records, reports, maps, plans, and other materials of a grantee reasonably necessary to enable the city to ascertain the grantee's performance under this article and a franchise, or to satisfy its obligations pursuant to applicable regulatory authority. The city shall ensure privacy and business confidentiality of any records as requested by grantee but only to the extent permitted by applicable law. Such inspection shall be during normal business hours. In the event the city lawfully imposes a franchise fee, tax, or other revenue-based imposition, the city shall have the right to inspect financial records of a grantee to ascertain accurate payment of such tax, fee or imposition. The grantee shall provide such information in such form as may be reasonably required by the city for said records. 
(e)  Right of inspection of construction. The city shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of a franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this article and other pertinent provisions of applicable law. The grantee shall not be precluded or prevented from any such inspection. 
(f)  Right of inspection of property. At all reasonable times, a grantee shall permit a duly authorized representative of the city to inspect system facilities situated within the city. Any inspection of facilities located on private property shall be conducted under the supervision of a representative of the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-143. - Supervision of the franchise. 
(a)  Regulatory authority. The city shall have the following regulatory authority: 
(1)  Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and any franchise granted hereunder. 
(2)  Award, renewal, modification, expansion, extension or revocation of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this article, the franchise, and other applicable law. 
(3)  Consent prior to sale or transfer of any franchise granted hereunder. 
(4)  Performance evaluation. 
(5)  Rate regulation as applicable. 
(b)  City's right to perform certain functions. The city also reserves the right to perform the following functions: 
(1)  Develop objectives and coordinate activities or delegate the development and coordination related to the operation of access channels. 
(2)  Approve procedures and standards for access operations and services. 
(3)  Coordinate plans for expansion, interconnection and growth of cable services among governmental entities. 
(4)  Analyze the possibility of integrating cable communications with other city, state or regional communications networks. 
(5)  Formulate and recommend long-range communications policy for the city and determine the future cable-related needs and interests of the community. 
(6)  Provide the administrative effort necessary for the conduct of performance evaluations and any other activities required for the administration of this article or the franchise. 
(7)  Monitor a grantee's process for handling citizen complaints and periodically inspect and analyze the records related to such complaints as permitted by law. 
(8)  Review rate filings for which the city has regulatory authority and require such information and backup as requested from grantee as the city deems necessary to adequately support the filings and related calculations. 
(9)  Monitor a grantee's compliance with operational standards, service requirements and line extension policies. 
(10)  Monitor compliance by a grantee with applicable law. 
(11)  Arrange tests and analysis of equipment and performance, as needed to ensure compliance with this article and the franchise. 
(12)  Assure continuity in service by grantee. 
(13)  Receive for examination all data and reports required by this article or the franchise. 
(14)  Such other regulatory authority as appropriate to carry out the intent of this article or the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-144. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  Schedule of rates. Each grantee shall maintain on file with the city current schedules that shall describe all services and channels offered, all rates and charges of any kind, and all terms and conditions relating thereto, for all classes of customers, regardless of whether the services and offerings are subject to the city's regulatory authority. Changes to any and all rate schedules shall be filed with the city at least 30 days prior to the proposed effective date of any change in rates or charges. 
(b)  Nondiscrimination. To the extent required by law, each Grantee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within the same general class of subscribers, which must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services as provided in applicable law. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee from offering discounts to commercial and multiple-family dwelling subscribers billed on a bulk basis; promotional discounts; reduced installation rates for subscribers who have multiple services; or discounts for senior citizens or low-income residents. 
(c)  Authority to regulate rates. To the extent that federal or state law or regulation may now, or may hereafter be amended to, authorize the city to regulate the rates for any particular service tiers, service packages, equipment, or any other cable service provided by the grantee, the city shall have the right to exercise rate regulation to the full extent authorized by law, or to refrain from exercising such regulation for any period of time, at the sole discretion of the city. The city and the grantee shall comply with FCC rules and regulations governing the regulation of rates. 
(d)  Notice of certain costs. At the time a grantee files its rate forms with the city, grantee shall include a schedule identifying costs which grantee claims are external costs under FCC rate regulations in effect at the time such rates become effective. Grantee shall also provide supporting documentation for any such costs upon the request of the city and within the time frames established in this article. 
(e)  Transfers. If the transfer is between a grantee and an affiliate of grantee, or one or more officers or directors of grantee, then the city shall have the right to review the purchase price and supporting documentation to ensure that resulting charges allocated to the regulated rate tiers are reasonable and consistent with an arms' length transaction. 
(f)  Provisions generally applicable to rate orders. 
(1)  Rate orders. Any rate order of the city commission shall be effective and deemed issued on the date adopted. Each rate order shall be released to the public and a copy shall be delivered to the grantee. In any case where the city approves, denies, or tolls a rate; orders that a rate may go into effect subject to refund; or orders refunds or establishes rates, any such rate order shall be in writing and shall be available to the public on the city's website. 
(2)  Rate order protection of public interest. The city commission may take any steps not prohibited by federal law to protect the public interest as part of any rate order. Any order prescribing a rate must explain why the grantee's proposed rate was unreasonable and why the prescribed rate is reasonable. Before prescribing a rate or ordering a refund to subscribers, the city shall ensure that grantee has had reasonable notice and opportunity to comment on the proposed rate or refunds. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit a grantee from seeking review of a rate order issued by the city as allowed by applicable law. 
(g)  Grantee's duties. 
(1)  Implementation of remedial requirements. A grantee must implement remedial requirements, including prospective rate reductions and refunds, within 60 days of the date the city commission adopts an order mandating a remedy, unless applicable law provides otherwise. 
(2)  Books and records of refunds. The grantee shall keep books and records of account so that it can refund any amounts owed to subscribers. 
(3)  Complete filing. Grantee's rate filings for rates regulated by the city shall be complete in every instance, and additional information reasonably requested by the city shall be provided in complete and sufficient detail within 30 days of any such request. 
(4)  Information requests. 
a.  A grantee or affiliate that has records of revenues or expenses that are allocated to the grantee's system must respond to requests for information from the city by reasonable deadlines established by the city. A grantee is responsible for ensuring that such affiliate responds to the city's requests. 
b.  Because federal law limits the time available for an initial response to a filing by a grantee, before any rate order is adopted, the grantee must fully respond to requests for information regarding its filing within 30 days of the date a request for information is mailed to it. The information may include the information the grantee would be required to provide as part of any supplementary filing. 
(h)  Duties of the city manager. The city manager or designee shall be responsible for administering the provisions herein. Without limitation and by way of illustration, the city manager or designee: 
(1)  Shall ensure notices are given to the public and each grantee as required herein and by FCC regulations; 
(2)  May submit requests for information to a grantee and establish reasonable deadlines for response to them; 
(3)  Shall rule on any request for confidentiality; and 
(4)  Shall prepare recommendations to the city commission regarding issuance of, or action on, any rate order. 
The city manager may recommend that any increase be denied in whole or in part. The city manager shall propose a new rate or the same rate, explain the basis for the recommendation, recommend whether and on what basis refunds should issue, and notify the grantee of its recommendation. 
(i)  Confidentiality of information. The city is a governmental entity subject to the Florida Public Records Law (F.S., ch. 119). Any materials or documents provided to the city by a grantee or an applicant may be "public records" and, as such, may be subject to disclosure to and copying by the public unless otherwise specifically exempt by statute. Should a grantee or applicant provide the city with any materials which it believes, in good faith, contain information which would be exempt from disclosure or copying under Florida law, that grantee or applicant shall indicate that belief by typing or printing, in bold letters, the phrase "contents exempt from disclosure" and cite the authority for such belief on the face of each affected page of such material and shall submit to the city both a complete and a redacted version of each affected page. Should any person request to examine or copy any material so designated, the city will produce for that person only the redacted version of the affected page(s). If the person requests to examine or copy the complete version of the affected page(s), the city shall notify the grantee or applicant of that request, and the grantee or applicant, within 36 business hours of receiving such notification, shall either permit or refuse to permit such disclosure or copying. If the grantee or applicant refuses to permit disclosure or copying, the grantee or applicant shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend the city, with counsel agreeable to the city attorney, for all expenses, costs, damages, attorney's fees and penalties of any kind whatsoever which may be incurred by the city, or assessed or awarded against the city, in regard to the city's refusal to permit disclosure or copying of such material. If litigation is filed in relation to such request and the grantee or applicant is not initially named as a party, the grantee or applicant shall promptly seek to intervene as a defendant in such litigation to defend its claim regarding the confidentiality of such material. By submitting an application or entering into a franchise agreement, an applicant or grantee acknowledges and agrees to be bound by this provision. nothing herein shall prevent the city from complying with any validly issued court order or shall be construed as permitting or allowing a grantee to cause the city to violate the public records laws of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-145. - Performance evaluation. 
(a)  Special evaluation meetings. Special evaluation meetings may be held at any time during the term of the franchise or annually, at the request of the city. Such meetings will be properly noticed and will be open to interested members of the public. 
(b)  Evaluation meeting topics. Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation meeting may include but not be limited to system performance and construction, grantee compliance with this article and the franchise, customer service and complaint response, subscriber privacy, services provided, programming offered, service rate structures, if applicable, franchise fees, penalties, free or discounted services, applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings, and line extensions. The city shall provide a Grantee with reasonable notice of the specific topics of discussion at any evaluation session. 
(c)  Grantee cooperation with city during evaluation. During the review and evaluation by the city, the grantee shall fully cooperate with the city and shall provide access to original information and documents as the city may reasonably need or request to perform its review or, if acceptable to the city, provide copies thereof; provided, however, that the grantee will not be required to create any new records solely for the purpose of providing such information, if it is otherwise available. 
(d)  Franchise administration. Nothing in this section shall preclude meetings between the city manager or designee or other authorized city staff and authorized representatives of a grantee in the ordinary course of administering a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
DIVISION 4. - BONDS, INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION 
 
Sec. 14.5-146. - Franchise and completion bonds and crime insurance. 
(a)  Franchise bond. 
(1)  Maintenance of franchise bond. Prior to the effective date of any franchise, a grantee shall obtain and maintain during the entire term of such franchise and any extensions and renewals thereof, at its cost and expense, and file with the city a franchise bond in an amount specified in the franchise to guarantee the faithful performance by the grantee of all its obligations provided under this article and the franchise. Failure to timely obtain, file or maintain said bond shall constitute a violation within the meaning of this section. Such bond must be issued by a surety and in a form acceptable to the city. 
(2)  Franchise bond surety. Each franchise bond shall be issued by a surety reasonably acceptable to the city and licensed to do business in Florida and shall provide security for faithful performance by the Grantee of its obligations under its franchise, this article, and other applicable law, including, without limitation, payment of all fines and liquidated damages and penalties due to the city and any and all damages, losses, costs, and expenses suffered or incurred by the city resulting from the failure of the grantee to: 
a.  Faithfully comply with the provisions of this article and the franchise; or 
b.  Comply with all orders, permits and directives of any city agency or body having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults; or 
c.  Pay fees as they become due to the city; or 
d.  To pay any claims due the city as resulting from judicial action; or 
e.  Pay any claims, liens or taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system. 
Such losses, costs and expenses shall include but not be limited to attorney's fees and other associated expenses. 
(3)  Occurrences requiring forfeited bond. In addition to providing security as provided in subsection (2) above, actual damages up to the total amount of the bond shall be paid to the city as liquidated damages, and not as a penalty, if any of the following occurs: 
a.  The grantee abandons the cable system or fails to initiate or complete construction of the cable system as specified in the franchise or any extension thereto; or 
b.  The grantee assigns the franchise without the express written consent of the city; or 
c.  The franchise is terminated by reason of the default of the grantee. 
(b)  Completion bond. Prior to commencing any initial construction or any major construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable communications system, the grantee shall obtain and maintain during the initial construction or rebuild, upgrade or rebuild, at its cost and expense, and shall file with the city, a completion bond, in such amount as may be specified by the city, consistent with its general rules and regulations governing construction in the public rights-of-way. The bond shall be maintained until 90 days after completion of such construction or rebuild and for such longer period as necessarily required for the grantee to correct any deficiencies, which deficiencies shall be identified to the grantee by the city within 90 days following the grantee's written notice of completion to the city. Failure to timely obtain and file or to maintain said bond shall constitute a violation within the meaning of this article. Such bond must be issued by a surety and be in a form acceptable to the city. 
(c)  Conditions. The city may draw upon the bonds if the grantee fails to faithfully comply with the provisions of this article and the franchise; comply with all orders, permits and directives of any city agency or body having jurisdiction over its acts; or defaults in paying fees due to the city or pay any claims, liens or taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable television system. 
(d)  Use of bonds. Prior to making a claim upon a bond issued for the purposes described in this article, the city shall notify the grantee in writing that the amount claimed is due and the basis for such claim; and the grantee shall have ten days from the receipt of such written notice to make a full and complete payment. If the grantee does not make the payment within ten days, the city may proceed to make such claim, with interest and penalties, from the particular bond. 
(e)  Notification. Within three days of a withdrawal by the city from the performance bond or construction bond, the city shall send to the grantee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal. 
(f)  Reinstatement of franchise bond. In the event that a claim is made against the franchise bond posted by the grantee, the grantee shall within 30 days reinstate the bond to the required amount. 
(g)  Non-renewal, alteration, or cancellation of bond. Each bond required herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the city and shall require 30 days' written notice to both the city and the grantee of any non-renewal, alteration or cancellation. If notice is given as herein provided, the grantee shall pay all premiums or other payments for the renewal of such bonds or the issuance of replacement bonds within 30 days following receipt by the city or the grantee of any notice of non-renewal or cancellation and file written evidence thereof with the city. 
(h)  Increase in bond amounts. To offset the effects of consumer price inflation, the amounts of each bond provided for herein are subject to reasonable increases at the end of every three-year period (should a franchise term be greater than three years) during the term of the franchise at the sole discretion of the city. Inflationary compensation shall be computed by the city in accordance with the regional consumer price index. Within 30 days following receipt of notice of such increase from the city, the grantee shall obtain and deliver to the city new bonds in the increased amount. No increased bonds or letters of credit shall be required, however, unless the newly computed bond amount would exceed the amounts actually in effect by five percent or more, taking into account any years in which the bond amount was not increased because of changes of less than five percent. Such bonds must meet, and shall be subject to, all other applicable requirements and conditions of this article. Increases of less than $100,000.00 will be waived. 
(i)  City rights. The rights reserved to the city with respect to any bond are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this article, the franchise agreement or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such bonds shall affect any other right the city may have. 
(j)  Employee crime insurance. The grantee shall conduct police background checks on all employees who enter subscribers' premises in the course of their employment to ensure that said employees are unlikely to pose a public safety risk to subscribers. The grantee shall provide crime insurance in the amount of $1 million per occurrence. 
(k)  Right to require replacement of bonds and insurance. If the city becomes aware that the financial condition of any bonding or insurance company issuing a performance bond or insurance policy to the grantee, as required herein, was poor or unstable at the time of issuance, and the city would not have approved the surety of the bond or the city would not have found the form of the bond or the insurance policies satisfactory if such conditions had been known by the city at the time, or if the financial condition of such bonding or insurance company materially changes to the extent that such approvals would not have been made had such conditions existed at the time of issuance, the city may, at any time after such conditions are discovered, require that any such bond or insurance policy be replaced with such other bond or insurance policy consistent with the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-147. - Liability and insurance. 
(a)  Certificates of insurance. Prior to commencement of construction, but in no event later than 60 days after the effective date of a franchise and thereafter continuously throughout the duration of the franchise and any extensions or renewals thereof, each grantee shall furnish to the city certificates of insurance, approved by the city, for all the types of insurance required under this section. Deductibles or self-insured retention in excess of $100,000.00 must be disclosed to the city, and adequate backup financial data must be provided in the case of self-insurance or self-insured retention. Failure to furnish said certificates of insurance in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this article. At the city's reasonable request, a grantee shall make policies related to these insurance requirements available for inspection at the local office. 
(b)  No limit of liability. None of the provisions of this article or any insurance policy limits required herein or any damages recovered by the city hereunder shall be construed to limit, or shall limit, the liability of a grantee for damages under any franchise issued hereunder. 
(c)  Notice of cancellation. Grantee shall provide 30 days written notice of policy cancellation to city. 
(d)  City named as additional insured. All commercial general liability and automobile liability insurance policies (including any umbrella policy used to meet the limits of the required liability) maintained pursuant to this article or a franchise shall include the City as an additional insured. 
(e)  Inflation. To offset the effects of inflation and to reflect changing liability limits, all of the coverages, limits and amounts of the insurance provided for herein are subject to increases at the end of every three-year period of the franchise term if such franchise shall have been granted for more than three years. The city shall compute the inflationary adjustment in accordance with the regional consumer price index. Increases of less than $100,000.00 will be waived. 
(f)  Insurance company ratings. All insurance policies provided under the provisions of this article or a franchise shall be written by companies authorized to do business in the State of Florida and rated at least A- in the current Best's Insurance Guide. 
(g)  Self insurance. A grantee may self-insure as permitted by and in accordance with Florida law. In such event, the grantee shall provide the city with appropriate certificates providing evidence of such self-insurance and supporting financial documents as required by the city evidencing an ability to pay. Insurance provided by or through an affiliate that is not itself a registered and regulated insurance company shall be deemed self-insurance for purposes of this section. 
(h)  Occurrence basis. All policies required by this article or by the franchise shall be written on an occurrence basis. 
(i)  Commercial general liability insurance (including umbrella coverage). Each grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain, general liability insurance including umbrella coverage insuring the grantee throughout the term of the franchise in the minimum amounts as follows: 
(1)  One million dollars property damage per occurrence; 
(2)  Two million dollars property damage aggregate; 
(3)  Five million dollars personal bodily injury or death to any one person; 
(4)  Ten million dollars personal bodily injury or death aggregate per single accident or occurrence; 
Such general liability insurance must include coverage for all of the following: comprehensive form, premises-operations, explosion and collapse hazard, underground hazard, products/completed operations hazard, contractual insurance, broad form property damage, and personal injury. 
(j)  Automobile liability insurance. Each grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, automobile liability insurance for owned, non-owned and rented vehicles in the minimum amount of $1 million combined single limit each occurrence. 
(k)  Workers' compensation and disability insurance. Each grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, workers' compensation and disability insurance and employer's liability, valid in the State of Florida, in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  Statutory limit for workers' compensation; 
(2)  $100,000.00 for employers' liability. 
Before beginning initial construction of its cable television system and within 30 days of the effective date of any franchise agreement, a Grantee must provide the City written proof that the Grantee provides the levels of workers' compensation and disability coverage required by the State of Florida. 
(l)  Insurance for contractor and subcontractors. Each grantee shall provide coverage for any contractor or subcontractor involved in the construction, installation, maintenance or operation of its cable communications system by either obtaining the necessary endorsements to its insurance policies or requiring such contractor or subcontractor to obtain appropriate insurance coverage consistent with this article and appropriate to the extent of its involvement in the construction, installation, maintenance or operation of a grantee's cable communications system. 
(m)  Payment. A grantee shall be solely responsible for payment of all premiums for insurance required by the franchise or this article and shall be solely responsible for the payment of any deductible or retention to which such policies are subject, whether or not the city is an insured under the policy. 
(n)  No limitation on liability. None of the provisions of this article or any insurance policy required herein or any damages recovered by the city hereunder shall be construed to excuse the faithful performance of any task by or limit the liability of a grantee for damages under this article or the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-148. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)  Disclaimer of Liability. The city shall not at any time be responsible or liable for any injury or damage occurring to any person or property arising in any way out of any acts or omissions of grantee or out of grantee's construction, maintenance, repair, use, operation, condition or dismantling of its cable system or its provision of cable service. 
(b)  Indemnification. A grantee shall indemnify, defend (with counsel acceptable to the city) and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, elected officials, agents, boards, consultants, independent contractors, commissions and any successors to city's interest, from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, damages (including but not limited to personal injury resulting in death), liabilities (including those arising from releases of hazardous materials), suits, fines, penalties, charges, administrative and judicial proceedings and orders, judgments and all costs and expenses incurred in connection therewith, including without limitation reasonable attorney's fees and costs of defense (collectively, the "losses") arising from acts or omissions of the grantee or its successors, agents, contractors or employees, in connection with or related in any way to the construction, maintenance, repair, use, operation, condition or dismantling of its cable communications system or its provision of cable services, or otherwise arising out of or related to the franchise, except to the extent any losses arise from the negligent or wrongful act or omission of the city or its employees acting within the course and scope of their employment. The foregoing obligation shall extend, but shall not be limited to, claims for the following: damages to persons or property; invasion of the right of privacy; defamation of any person; violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or of any other intellectual or proprietary right of any person; failure to comply with the provisions of applicable law. 
(c)  Notice to grantee of claims. The city shall give a grantee prompt notice of its receipt of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding that it believes is subject to indemnification under this provision. The city, at its option, may either undertake its own representation in regard to any such claim or action, subject to reimbursement therefor from the grantee, or may allow grantee, at its expense, to provide such defense utilizing counsel acceptable to the city attorney. 
(d)  Damages and penalties. Damages and penalties shall include but not be limited to damages arising out of copyright infringement and all other damages arising out of the construction, installation, operation or maintenance of grantee's cable television system, and grantee's provision of cable services, whether or not any such act or omission is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or the franchise agreement. Expenses shall include all incidental expenses including attorney fees and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the office of the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
DIVISION 5. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 14.5-149. - Authority to commence or continue construction. 
All necessary applications for permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations shall be applied for in a timely fashion so that such filing and processing shall not interfere with or cause delay with any construction scheduled as outlined in a franchise. Failure to make such timely application and timely filing shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-150. - Construction and technical standards. 
(a)  Compliance with construction and technical standards. A grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with applicable law and with construction and technical standards or regulations adopted by the FCC and with technical standards provided for in a franchise. The system shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained for 24-hours-a-day continuous operation. 
(b)  Contractor qualifications. All contractors retained for work or construction, installation, operation, maintenance and repair of system equipment must be in compliance with applicable law. 
(c)  Minimum interference. A grantee's system and associated equipment erected by a grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the use of public rights-of-way, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin such public rights-of-way. No pole or other fixtures placed in any public rights-of-way by a grantee shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere with normal travel on such public rights-of-way. 
(d)  Substructure verification. The city does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps showing the horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In public rights-of-way, where necessary, the location shall be verified by excavation. Each grantee shall comply with the Sunshine One-Call or successor administrator. 
(e)  Workmanship. Construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the cable communications system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, in accordance with then current applicable standards. All cables and wires shall be installed underground where required and, if overhead, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for aesthetic and engineering considerations. 
(f)  Technical codes. A Grantee shall at all times comply with the following: 
(1)  National electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); 
(2)  National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); 
(3)  Applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations; 
(4)  Utility pole attachment agreements entered into with the city and any other entity; and 
(5)  Standards as set forth in the franchise. 
(g)  Safety. The cable system shall not be constructed or maintained so as to endanger the safety of persons or property in the franchise area. 
(h)  Antenna structure or tower. Any antenna structure or tower used in the cable communications system shall comply with construction, marking, and lighting of antenna structure and tower standards as required by applicable law. 
(i)  OSHA compliance. All worker facilities, conditions and procedures that are used during construction, installation, operation and maintenance of a cable system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(j)  Emergency alert. Grantee shall comply with the requirements of the federal emergency alert system as specified by the FCC (47 CFR Part 11.1, et seq.) and the franchise. 
(k)  Stand-by power. The GRantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power for a minimum of eight hours for the headend and four hours for transportation and trunk amplifiers. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-151. - Extension of service. 
The grantee shall provide service to all dwelling units and commercial entities requesting service within the service area where the area has a minimum density of 18 dwellings per cable mile as measured from the point of furthest extension back to and into Grantee's nearest existing cable facilities. No operator shall be required to overbuild the cable communications system or OVS system to serve subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-152. - Use of streets. 
(a)  Aboveground or underground installations. All installations shall be underground in those areas of the city where public utilities providing electric and telephone service are underground at the time of cable installation, or as otherwise provided in this Code. In areas where electric and telephone utility services are above ground at the time of cable installation, a grantee may install its service above ground, provided that at such time as electric and telephone utility services are required to be placed underground or are placed underground, the grantee shall likewise place its services underground at its own cost and expense. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by this article or the franchise, a grantee's system shall be located underground at the request of the adjacent property owner, provided that any excess cost over the aerial location shall be borne by the property owner making the request. All cable traversing a roadway shall be installed in conduit. 
(b)  City approval required. A grantee shall in each case file plans with the city, complete use agreements with the utility companies, obtain all construction permits, and receive written approval of the city before proceeding. 
(c)  Interference with persons, improvements, public and private property and utilities. A grantee's system and facilities, including poles, lines, equipment and all appurtenances, shall be erected, located, relocated, and maintained so that such facilities shall: 
(1)  Not create a health or public safety hazard; 
(2)  Cooperate with and not interfere with any improvements the city or other governmental entity may reasonably make; 
(3)  Not interfere with the free and proper use of public streets, alleys, bridges, easements or other public ways, places or property, except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair; 
(4)  Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private property owners, except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair; and 
(5)  Not obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas, electric, water or telephone facilities or other utilities located within the city. 
(d)  Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any public right-of-way disturbed, in as good a condition as, or better than, before said work was commenced and in a good, workmanlike, timely manner in accordance with standards for such work set by the city. Such restoration shall be undertaken within no more than ten business days after the damage is incurred and shall be completed as soon as possible thereafter. 
(e)  Relocation of the facilities. If at any time during the period of a franchise, the city or state shall lawfully elect to alter or change any utility poles, or any street, alley or other public ways, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the proper authority, shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. If a public right-of-way is vacated, the grantee shall remove its property from such right-of-way within 60 days of being notified of such vacation, unless the situation is an emergency that would require sooner removal for health or public safety reasons or unless the grantee has made alternative arrangements with the new landowner. 
(f)  Cooperation with building movers. A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building-moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wire to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, except that no such expense shall be incurred or owed for any building moved by the city; and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 15 working days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(g)  Easements. All necessary easements over and under private property shall be arranged for by the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-153. - Erection and common use of poles. 
(a)  Approval for pole construction. Before any pole attachments may be made or the cable erected over the city's rights-of-way, a grantee must provide evidence of an agreement with any pole owner permitting a grantee to make such attachments. 
(b)  Existing poles. Where poles already exist for use by a grantee, but the grantee elects not to use them, the city may deny a grantee the use of public rights-of-way for the purpose of setting the grantee's poles. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-154. - Construction reporting requirements. 
(a)  Schedule of construction. For a major construction or rebuild of its cable system, a grantee shall provide the city with a written progress report detailing work to be done and a schedule for completion of construction. Such report shall include a description of any necessary agreements, licenses, or certifications and any other information the city manager or his designee may reasonably deem necessary. 
(b)  Progress reports. Upon commencement of such major construction or rebuild of a cable system, written progress reports shall be submitted to the city on a monthly basis, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, throughout the entire construction or rebuild process. The reports will designate work completed to date and any changes in the implementation or in the previously submitted proposed construction schedule. 
(c)  Notice of construction to residents. Prior to the commencement of any major construction or rebuild of a cable system, a Grantee shall produce an informational document to be distributed to all residents of the area of the proposed construction, which shall describe the activity that will be taking place. The informational document shall be reviewed and approved by the city manager or designee prior to its distribution. In an upgrade situation, if a customer will be materially impacted, notice will be given. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-155. - Tests and performance monitoring. 
(a)  System completion test. Not later than 30 days after any new or rebuilt portion of the system is made available for service to subscribers, the grantee shall conduct technical performance tests to demonstrate full compliance with all technical standards contained in this article, the franchise, and the technical standards and guidelines of the FCC. 
(b)  Report. Such tests shall be performed by a qualified technician. A report shall be submitted to the city, describing test results, instrumentation, calibration and test procedures. 
(c)  Test points. System monitoring test points shall be established, and such periodic tests shall be made at the test points as shall be required by the FCC. 
(d)  On-going performance tests. In addition to the performance test reports required herein, a copy of any performance test reports required by the FCC shall be submitted to the city within 30 days of a request for such copy. 
(e)  City requested tests. If the city has a reasonable basis to believe that a grantee is not complying with one or more performance standards specified in rules or regulations promulgated by the FCC, it may provide notice of such noncompliance to the grantee. The grantee shall have 30 days after such notice to demonstrate that it is complying with applicable FCC standards. Thereafter, the city may conduct proof-of-performance tests to determine if the grantee is in compliance with FCC performance standards. The grantee shall have the right to conduct such proof-of-performance tests jointly with the city; provided, however, that the grantee's participation shall not unreasonably delay the testing. If the city's proof-of-performance testing demonstrates that the grantee does not comply with any performance standard, the grantee shall bring the cable system into compliance with such standards within 30 days. 
(f)  Consultants to the city. The city shall have the right to employ qualified consultants if necessary or desirable to assist in the review, evaluation, and monitoring of the grantee's performance under this section or any other section of this article or the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
DIVISION 6. - SERVICE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 14.5-156. - Services to subscribers and institutions. 
Programming. Concurrently with the activation of a cable communications system in the city, each grantee shall provide all services to subscribers: 
(1)  Programming and services. The system shall carry the broad categories of programming and services listed in the franchise. Should a grantee desire to change the programming and services listed in the franchise, it shall maintain the mix, quality and level of services provided over the system. Any such change in programs or services offered shall comply with the conditions and procedures contained in the franchise, and shall be reported to the city at least 30 days prior to the proposed implementation. Each grantee shall use its best efforts to ensure diversity of programming. 
(2)  Basic services. Basic service tier shall be offered to subscribers throughout the term of the franchise. 
(3)  Access channels. Each grantee shall provide and maintain, as required by the city, up to three access channels on the basic service tier for uses as determined by the city commission consistent with federal rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-157. - Installations, connections, and other grantee services. 
(a)  Standard installations. Standard installation shall consist of a drop 150 feet from a single point or pedestal attachment to the customer's residence or commercial establishment. For installation of service in excess of 150 feet and concealed wiring, a subscriber shall be charged only for that cost exceeding 150 feet or the cost of concealed versus overhead wiring. The desire of the subscriber as to the point of entry into the residence or commercial establishment shall be observed whenever possible. Runs in building interiors shall be as unobtrusive as possible. A grantee shall use due care in the process of installation and shall repair any damage to the subscriber's property caused by said installation. Such restoration shall be initiated as soon as possible thereafter. Subscribers may not be charged for repairing damage to the property effected by grantee's employees. In all other matters regarding installation and customer service, grantee shall comply with the FCC standards. 
(b)  Nondiscrimination. Subscribers shall be offered cable television service on a uniform, nondiscriminatory basis. Grantee shall not deny nor delay service, deny or delay access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on any basis whatsoever. A rate increase shall not precede availability of service upon which it is based. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens in its franchise area on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, sexual orientation or physical or mental handicaps, provided the subscriber shall pay all applicable fees for the service desired. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable law, relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this article by reference. 
(c)  Equal employment opportunity requirements. Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local regulations, as may be applicable, and as amended from time to time. 
(d)  Grantee business office. No franchise shall be granted to any cable operator that does not have a business office inside Alachua County that is open for customer service during normal business hours. 
(e)  Filing of rules and regulations with the city. Grantee shall file with the city copies of its rules and regulations in connection with the handling of inquiries, requests and complaints. 
(f)  Time period for resolution of complaints. Except where another time period is required by any other provision of this article, grantee shall make a good faith effort to resolve all complaints within a reasonable time after they are received and in no event later than 30 days after receipt by grantee. 
(g)  Credits. If applicable law requires, at any time during the term of the franchise, that the city or the FCC requires grantee to retroactively decrease or roll back rates, fees or charges for any service provided pursuant to the franchise agreement, grantee shall automatically provide a credit on each subscriber's bill affected by such decrease or rollback or as prescribed by FCC regulation. 
(h)  Guarantees to customers. Any service guarantees offered by a Grantee that involve credits, whether applied to customer's account balance or paid out to a customer in cash, must be provided automatically and without any specific request from the customer. 
(i)  Records of service interruptions. Grantee shall maintain records of all service interruptions of basic tier cable service from two or more fiber nodes simultaneously. Such records shall indicate the estimated number of subscribers affected, the date and time of first notification or of grantee knowledge of such service interruption, the date and time service was restored, the cause of such service interruption and a description of the corrective action taken. Such records shall be available to the city during normal business hours upon reasonable prior notice. An annual written summary of such records shall be prepared by grantee and submitted to the city. 
(j)  Access signal quality. The access channel delivery system from the signal input points shall meet the same technical standards as the remainder of the cable system. 
(k)  Closed captioning and video description. Grantee shall pass through all closed-captioning and video description signals received by the cable system for hearing and visually impaired customers. Such signals shall be deemed received for these purposes if they are transmitted by the original programming provider. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-158. - Operation after termination or expiration of franchise. 
(a)  Right to service. It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive continuous, uninterrupted service insofar as their financial obligations to grantee are honored. 
(b)  Failure to provide continuity. If grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days, the city may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as Grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city or until a permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for grantee, grantee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the system received by the city that are the result of Grantee's failure to perform. 
(c)  Requirements for continued operation. If a franchise is terminated, or upon its expiration, the city commission may require grantee to continue operation for a period of six months or longer after the date of such termination or expiration upon the same terms and conditions as are contained in the expired or terminated franchise. Upon the expiration of such period grantee shall remove, at its own expense, all portions of its cable communications system from all public rights-of-way and restore such public rights-of-way in accordance with the requirements of this article, the franchise, and any other applicable agreement with the city unless the city has previously approved a transfer of the system in accordance with this article. Grantee shall maintain, in full force and effect, all bonds and letters of credit posted in compliance with this article until the conclusion of all operations under the franchise and this article, including the removal of all equipment and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-159. - Protection of subscriber privacy. 
Protection of subscriber privacy mandatory. Grantee shall at all times comply with the subscriber privacy provisions of applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-160. - Reports required. 
Grantee shall file with the city the reports, or copies thereof, enumerated in this and other subsections. 
(1)  Regulatory Communications. All 10-Q and 10-K reports filed with the securities and exchange commission and eeo reports filed with the equal employment opportunity commission shall be filed with the city simultaneously with their submission to the related regulatory agency. 
(2)  Facilities report. Each grantee shall file an annual report setting forth a summary of the previous year's activities in the development of grantee's cable system, including but not limited to cable services begun or discontinued, a list of upgrades, the number of basic service tier subscribers, the number of subscriber locations passed, and the miles of cable system facilities in service or under construction. This report shall include maps differentiating overhead and underground facilities, fiber and coaxial installations in sufficient detail and adequate scale for the city to determine what is impacting its public rights-of-way and where. The annual report for the preceding year shall be provided no later than June 30th of each year. 
(3)  Construction reports. The city may, from time to time, require the submission of reports regarding any major construction or upgrade or rebuild of a cable system undertaken during the term of a franchise. 
(4)  Change in service. Notification of any change in programming or service on the basic service tier shall be filed, in writing, no later than 30 days prior to implementation. 
(5)  Customer service and related reports. Grantee shall provide annually customer service and related information demonstrating compliance with FCC customer service standards or such other standards as are adopted by the city. 
(6)  Officers and board of directors. An annual report listing officers and members of the board of directors of grantee and of any parent corporations, subsidiaries, and other affiliated entities, along with mailing addresses and telephone numbers. 
(7)  Proof of bonds and insurance. The required bond(s) and written evidence of payment of required premium, and all policies of insurance required by this article, or certificates, in a form acceptable to the city, shall be filed with the city as evidence that such policies are in effect, and shall be updated with each new policy effective date or renewal date. 
(8)  Additional reports. Grantee shall prepare and provide to the City such additional reports or information as may reasonably be determined by the city to be necessary and appropriate to the performance of any regulatory or oversight functions of the city in connection with the franchise agreement, this article or other controlling law, rules or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
DIVISION 7. - OTHER PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 14.5-161. - New franchise applications. 
(a)  Invitation of applications for a franchise; public notice of request for proposals. The city may invite applications for cable television franchises in accordance with applicable law by means of a public notice advertising the availability of its request for proposals. The provisions of this section shall govern the granting of new franchises and not the renewal of existing franchises governed by section 14.5-138 of this article. The public notice shall contain, but need not be limited to: 
(1)  A description of the franchise area which is sought. 
(2)  A statement that a formal request for proposals is available to prospective applicants from a city official whose name, address and telephone number are specified. 
(3)  A statement that applications for the franchise must be submitted in writing in the form and manner specified in the request for proposals no later than a day certain. 
(4)  A statement that all applications will be made available for public inspection during normal business hours at a specified location. 
In addition to responding to issuance of such a public notice, a person at any time may request from the City, complete, and file with the City an application for a cable television franchise. 
(b)  Request for proposals. Prior to inviting applications for a franchise, the city may prepare a request for proposals that shall contain but need not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant and identification of the ownership and control of the applicant, including the names and addresses of the ten largest holders of an ownership interest in the applicant, and all persons with five percent or more ownership interest; the persons who control the applicant whether directly or indirectly and, if those persons represent tiered, consolidated entities, the persons controlling them, whether directly or indirectly; all officers and directors of the applicant; a description of the applicant's other business affiliations and cable system ownership interests and, where the applicant or the parent corporation or an affiliated, consolidated affiliate of the applicant issues stock which is publicly traded, a copy of its most recent 10-K and 10-Q. 
(2)  A statement as to whether the applicant, or any person controlling the applicant, or any local officer or major stockholder of the applicant, has been adjudged bankrupt, had a cable franchise revoked, or been found guilty by any court or administrative agency of a violation of a security or antitrust law, or a felony, or any crime involving moral turpitude; and, if so, identification of any such person or entity and a full explanation of circumstances; 
(3)  A demonstration of the applicant's technical, legal and financial ability to construct and operate the proposed cable facility, including identification of key personnel; 
(4)  A description of applicant's prior experience in cable operations and identification of communities in which applicant or its principals have, or have had, a cable franchise or an interest therein, including the identification of any litigation between any such applicants and their franchising authorities; 
(5)  Identification of the area of the city to be served by the cable system, including a description of the service area's boundaries; 
(6)  A detailed description of the physical facility proposed, including channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics, headend and access facilities to be provided to satisfy the requirements of this agreement; 
(7)  A description of the construction of the proposed system, including an estimate of above-ground and below-ground mileage and its location, the proposed construction schedule, a description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and information on the availability of space on poles and conduits including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of rearrangement of facilities to accommodate such use; 
(8)  For informational purposes, a description of the services to be provided initially, including all broadcast and non-broadcast signals to be carried and all non-television services to be delivered over the cable system and, if services will be offered by tiers, identification of the signals or services to be included on each tier; 
(9)  For informational purposes, the proposed rate structure including charges for each service tier, installation, converters, and other equipment and services; 
(10)  A demonstration of how the proposal will reasonably meet future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including a description of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent community needs assessment conducted by or for the city; 
(11)  Pro forma financial projections for the franchise term, including a statement of projected income and expenses, and a schedule of planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules; 
(12)  Identification of and nature of affiliation or ownership of or control resting in any affiliated entities with which applicant intends to routinely do business in the conduct of its cable services provided inside the city; 
(13)  An affidavit of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the proposal meets all federal and state requirements; 
(14)  If an applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already served by an existing cable grantee, the identification of the area where the overbuild would occur, the potential subscriber density in the area which would encompass the overbuild, and other information as necessary for the city to make its determination; and 
(15)  Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this agreement or any information that the city may request of applicant that is relevant to the city's consideration of the application. 
(c)  Franchise application. Any applicant for a franchise shall submit a timely response to the city's request for proposal, comply with all FCC regulations and submit a copy of its FCC certification to the city. 
(d)  Resubmission. The city may require the resubmission of an application if change or correction of an application are deemed necessary. 
(e)  Evaluation of application. In evaluating an application for a new franchise, the city shall consider, among other things, the following factors: the applicant's character, the applicant's technical, financial, and legal qualifications to construct and operate the proposed system; the nature of the proposed facilities equipment, and services; the applicant's record in other communities, if any; the economic impact on private property within the proposed service area; the capability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed system; the potential disruption to existing users of the public rights-of-way and the public; and whether the proposal will meet reasonably anticipated community needs and serve the public interest. Where an applicant proposes an overbuild of an existing cable system, the city shall also consider, pursuant to F.S., § 166.046, the economic feasibility of multiple cable operators, the impact on the existing grantee, including whether the operations of the existing cable grantee will be interfered with or disrupted, and whether any adverse consequences to the public interest will result if the application is granted. 
(f)  Right of rejection. The city in its discretion may reject any application for a franchise. In awarding a new franchise, the city shall allow the applicant's cable communications system a reasonable period of time to become capable of providing cable service to all households in the franchise area; may require adequate assurance that the cable operator will provide adequate public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities, financial support or institutional network facilities; and may require adequate assurance that the cable operator has the financial, technical, or legal qualifications to provide cable service and that to award a cable franchise is in the best interests of the public. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-162. - Grant of franchise. 
(a)  Requirement for public hearing on reasonable notice. The city shall conduct a properly noticed public hearing prior to awarding or denying any cable television franchise. The hearing shall be conducted by the city commission in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Applicant's appearance at hearing. Every person who has applied for a franchise shall appear at the hearing either in person or by authorized representative. The application of any applicant not so appearing shall not be further considered, except for good cause shown. 
(2)  Opportunity to participate. All persons shall be given opportunity to participate in the hearing, but nothing contained herein shall limit the power of the presiding officer to establish reasonable time limits and otherwise limit repetitive statements or questions. 
(b)  Grant or deny franchise. Based upon the application, the recommendations of the staff, the testimony presented at the public hearing, any recommendations of the city manager and any other information deemed relevant to the application, the commission shall decide whether to grant or deny a franchise application and the terms and conditions of a grant. Any grant of a franchise that covers a service area which overlaps, in whole or in part, the service area of another franchise shall be under terms and conditions that are neither more favorable nor less burdensome than those in the existing franchise. 
(c)  Conditions of grant. The city may make the grant of a franchise conditioned upon the completion of construction within a prescribed time or upon performance of other specific obligations, which are to be set forth in the franchise, specifying that failure to timely comply with the condition will cause the franchise to become null and void without further action by the city. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 14.5-163. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  No waiver of breach. No failure by the city to insist upon the strict performance of any covenant, agreement, term or condition of this article, or to exercise any right, term or remedy upon a breach thereof shall constitute a waiver of any such breach or such covenant, agreement, term or condition. No waiver of any breach shall affect or alter this article or any associated franchise, but each and every covenant, agreement, term or condition of this article shall continue in full force and effect with respect to any other than existing or subsequent breach thereof. 
(b)  No recourse against city. To the extent provided by law, Grantee's recourse against the city or its officials, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any claim arising from any provision or requirement of this article shall be limited to injunctive and declaratory relief. 
(c)  Time is of the essence to this article. Whenever the article shall set forth any time for an act to be performed by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of the grantee to perform within the time allotted shall be sufficient grounds for the city to invoke an appropriate penalty, including possible revocation of the franchise, subject to notice and a time to cure. 
(d)  Notices. Every notice to be served upon the city shall be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the city manager or designee as specified in the franchise agreement. Every notice to be served upon the grantee shall be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the grantee at its local office or as specified in the franchise agreement. 
(e)  Force majeure. If, by reason of force majeure, the grantee is unable, in whole or in part, to carry out its obligations hereunder, said party shall not be deemed in violation or default during the continuance of such inability. The term force majeure, as used herein, shall mean the following: acts of God; acts of public enemies; orders of any kind of the government of the United States of America or of the State of Florida or of any of their departments, agencies, political subdivisions or officials or any civil or military authority; insurrections; riots; epidemics; landslides; lightning; earthquakes; fires; hurricanes; volcanic activity; storms; floods; washouts; droughts; civil disturbances; and explosions. 
(f)  Captions. The captions to sections throughout this article are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this article. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 040116, § 2, 7-26-04)  
Secs. 14.5-164—14.5-169. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CONVENIENCE BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 14.5-170. - Definition. 
"Convenience business" means any place of business that primarily is engaged in the retail sale of groceries, or both groceries and gasoline, and that is open for business at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. The term "convenience business" does not include the following: 
(1)  A business that solely or primarily is a restaurant. 
(2)  A business that always has at least five employees on the premises between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(3)  A business that has at least 10,000 square feet of retail floor space. 
(4)  A business at which the owner or members of the owner's family work between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 090119, § 1, 1-21-10)  
Sec. 14.5-171. - Minimum security and safety standards for convenience businesses. 
Each convenience business shall be equipped with and meet the following safety and security devices and standards. 
(a)  (1)  A security camera system of the type and quality, and located and operating, so as to record and retrieve image(s) which will assist in offender identification and apprehension. 
(2)  A drop safe or cash management device for restricted access to cash receipts. 
(3)  A lighted parking lot illuminated at an intensity of at least two foot-candles per square foot at 18 inches above the surface. 
(4)  A conspicuous notice at the entrance which states that the cash register contains $50.00 or less. 
(5)  Window signage that allows a clear and unobstructed view from outside of the building and in a normal line of sight of the cash register and sales transaction area. 
(6)  Height markers at the entrance of the convenience business which display height measures. 
(7)  A cash management policy to limit the cash on hand at all times after 11:00 p.m. 
(b)  A convenience business shall not have window tinting that reduces exterior or interior view in a normal line of sight. 
(c)  Every convenience business shall be equipped with a silent alarm which activates to law enforcement or a private security agency, unless application for an exemption is made to and granted by the attorney general. 
(d)  If a murder, robbery, sexual battery, aggravated assault, aggravated battery, or kidnapping or false imprisonment, as those crimes are identified and defined by Florida Statutes, occurs or has occurred at a convenience business since July 1, 1989, and arises out of the operation of the convenience business, that convenience business shall implement at least one of the following security measures: 
(1)  Provide at least two employees on the premises at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.; 
(2)  Install for use by employees at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. a secured safety enclosure of transparent polycarbonate or other material that meets at least one of the following minimum standards: 
a.  American Society for Testing and Materials Standards D3935 (classification PC110 B 3 0800700) and that has 200 foot pounds; or 
b.  Underwriters Laboratory Standard UL 752 for medium power small arms (level one), bullet resisting equipment; 
(3)  Provide a security guard on the premises at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.; 
(4)  Lock the business premises throughout the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m., and only transact business through an indirect pass-through through, trapdoor, or window; or 
(5)  Close the business at all times 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, any convenience business that by law implemented any of the security measures set forth in paragraphs (d)(1)—(4) and has maintained said measures as required by the Florida Department of Legal Affairs, without any occurrence or incidence of the crimes identified by subsection (d) for a period no less than 24 months immediately preceding the filing of a notice of exemption, may file with the Florida Department of Legal Affairs a notice of exemption from these enhanced security measures in which case the enhanced security measures required under subsections (d)(1)—(5) such shall not apply, absent any occurrences or incidents as described immediately below. In no event shall this exemption be interpreted to preclude renewed full compliance with the security measures set forth in subsection (d) should any occurrence or incidence of the crimes identified by subsection (d) occur subsequent to the filing of the notice of exemption. In no event shall the city or any enforcement officer incur any liability for the regulation and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 090119, § 1, 1-21-10)  
Sec. 14.5-172. - Penalties. 
The provisions of this article may be enforced by civil citation as provided in Chapter 2, Division 6, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 090119, § 1, 1-21-10)  
Chapter 15 - NOISE[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 3868, adopted June 22, 1993, repealed former Ch. 15, §§ 15-1—15-9, which pertained to similar subject matter. Section 1 of the ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15, §§ 15-1—15-6, as herein set out. Former Ch. 15 was derived from §§ 17A-1—17A-9 of the 1960 Code and Ord. No. 3803, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 21, 1992. 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 11.5; nuisances, Ch. 16; offenses, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Environmental control, F.S. Ch. 403. 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Legislative findings; declaration of necessity. 
It is found and declared that: 
(1)  Excessive sound within the limits of the city is a condition which has existed for some time and the amount and intensity of such sound is increasing. 
(2)  Such excessive sound is a detriment to the public health, safety, welfare and quality of life of the residents of the city. 
(3)  The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, safety, welfare and quality of life of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 3868, § 1, 6-22-93)  
Sec. 15-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows: 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The unit of measurement is the dB(A). 
Commercial (land use) means all areas not otherwise classified as residential, as defined in this section. 
Construction means any site preparation, any assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, excluding demolition, for or on public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Continuous airborne sound means sound that is measured by the slow-response setting of a meter manufactured to the specifications of ANSI § 1.4-1971 "Specification for Sound Level Meters," or its successor. 
Daytime means 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. the same day. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit for measuring the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). 
Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures from the utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which necessitates immediate action. Economic loss shall not be the sole determining factor in the determination of an emergency. It shall be the burden of an alleged violator to prove an "emergency." 
Emergency work means any work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following an emergency, or to protect property threatened by an imminent emergency, to the extent such work is necessary to protect persons or property from exposure to imminent danger or damage. 
Frequency means the number of complete oscillation cycles per unit of time. 
Impulsive sound means sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions and drop forge impacts. 
Nighttime means 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. the following day. 
Noise means any sound which disturbs humans or other animals, or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans or other animals. 
Noise disturbance means any sound which: 
(1)  Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; 
(2)  Exceeds the sound level limits set forth in this chapter; or 
(3)  Is plainly audible as defined in this section. 
Person means any person, person's firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity public or private in nature. 
Plainly audible means any sound or noise produced by any source, or reproduced by a radio, tape player, television, CD player, electronic audio equipment, musical instrument, sound amplifier or other mechanical or electronic soundmaking device, or nonamplified human voice that can be clearly heard by a person using his/her normal hearing faculties, at a distance of 200 feet or more from the real property line of the source of the sound or noise. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, sidewalk, bike path or alley, or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Public space means any lot, as that term is defined in section 30-23 of the land development code, which contains at least one building that is open to the general public during its hours of operation. 
Reasonable time when the limits of Table I and Table I-A in section 15-3(b) are exceeded or for a radio, tape player or other mechanical soundmaking device or instrument within a motor vehicle is instantly. Otherwise, absent special circumstances, "reasonable time" is 15 minutes in the case of nonvehicular sound emitters and two calendar days for vehicular sound emitters. 
Residential (land use) means all areas designated as "residential districts" in section 30-41(a)(1) of the land development code; as well as hospitals, as classified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987, group number 806; public and private elementary schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, colleges and universities; areas designated as "conservation districts" in section 30-41(a)(6) of the land development code; areas designated as planned development districts that contain dwelling units as defined in section 30-23 of the land development code; and places of religious assembly as defined in section 30-23 of the land development code. 
Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level as measured in dB(A) by a sound level meter and as specified in American National Standards Institute (ANSI) specifications for sound-level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971 (R1976)). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
Sound level meter means an instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks, for the measurement of sound levels. 
Weekday means any day Monday through Friday that is not a "paid holiday" as defined in F.S. § 110.117(1). 
All technical definitions not defined above shall be in accordance with applicable publications and standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(Ord. No. 3868, § 1, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 960008, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 981314, § 1, 4-10-00; Ord. No. 110199, § 2, 9-15-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 15-3. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  General prohibition. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to make, cause or allow the making of any sound that causes a noise disturbance, as defined in section 15-2. 
(b)  Sound causing permanent hearing loss. 
(1)  Sound level limits. Table I and Table I-A specify sound level limits which, if exceeded, will have a high probability of producing permanent hearing loss in anyone in the area where the sound levels are being exceeded. No sound shall be permitted within the city which exceeds the parameters set forth in Table I and Table I-A. 
TABLE I. MAXIMUM CONTINUOUS SOUND LEVELS* 
Duration per Day, 
Continuous Hours 	Sound level (dB(A)) 
    8 	 90 
    6 	 92 
    4 	 95 
    3 	 97 
    2 	100 
    1½ 	102 
    1 	105 
     ½ 	110 
     ¼ 	115 
 
*When the daily sound exposure is composed of two or more periods of sound exposure at different levels, the combined effect of all such periods shall constitute a violation of this section if the sum of the percent of allowed period of sound exposure at each level exceeds 100 percent. 
TABLE I-A. MAXIMUM IMPULSIVE SOUND LEVELS 
Number of Repetitions per 24-Hour Period 	Sound Level (dB(A)) 
  1 	145 
 10 	135 
100 	125 
 
(2)  Exemptions. No violation shall exist if the only persons exposed to sound levels in excess of those listed in Table I and Table I-A are exposed as a result of: 
a.  Trespass; 
b.  Invitation upon private property by the person causing or permitting the sound; or 
c.  Employment by the person or a contractor of the person causing or permitting the sound. 
(c)  Continuous airborne sound decibel limits. No person shall create, operate or cause to be operated on private property any source of sound in such a manner as to create a continuous airborne sound which exceeds the limits set forth for the source land use category as defined in section 15-2 in Table II when measured at a distance of 200 feet or more from the real property line of the source of the sound. Any source of sound in violation of this subsection shall be deemed prima facie to be a noise disturbance. 
TABLE II. MAXIMUM SOUND LEVELS (IN dB(A)) FOR SOURCE LAND USES* 
Residential 	Commercial 
Daytime 	Nighttime 	Daytime 	Nighttime 
61 	55 	66 	60 
 
*See section 15-2, Definitions, for daytime and nighttime hours, and for land use definitions. 
(d)  Specific prohibitions. In addition to the general prohibitions set out in subsection (a), and unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, the following specific acts, or the causing or permitting thereof, are hereby regulated as follows: 
(1)  Motor vehicles. No person shall operate or cause to be operated a public or private motor vehicle, or combination of vehicles towed by a motor vehicle, that creates a sound exceeding the sound level limits in Table II when the vehicle(s) are not traveling on public streets, highways, driveways, parking lots and ways open to vehicle travel. 
(2)  Radios, televisions, electronic audio equipment, musical instruments or similar devices. No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, tape player, television, electronic audio equipment, musical instrument, sound amplifier or other mechanical or electronic soundmaking device that produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary. However, this subsection shall not apply to any use or activity exempted in subsection (e) below and any use or activity for which a special permit has been issued pursuant to section 15-4. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and public address systems. No person shall operate, or permit the operation of, any loudspeaker, public address system or similar device, for any purpose, during nighttime hours in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance. 
(4)  Animals. No person shall own, possess or harbor an animal or bird that howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds that: 
a.  Create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary; 
b.  Are of frequent or continued duration for ten or more consecutive minutes; or 
c.  Are intermittent for a period of 30 or more minutes. 
(5)  Construction and demolition. No person shall operate or cause the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration or demolition work between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a real property boundary, except for emergency work by public service utilities or for other work approved by the city manager or designee. This section shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools as provided below. 
(6)  Emergency signaling devices. 
a.  No person shall intentionally sound or permit the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren or whistle, or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing as follows: 
1.  Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not occur between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day. 
2.  Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall use only the minimum cycle test time, in no case to exceed 60 seconds. 
3.  Testing of a complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall only occur on weekdays and not during nighttime hours, and shall be exempt from the time limit specified in paragraph 2. above. 
b.  No person shall permit the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm unless such alarm is automatically terminated within 15 minutes of activation. 
(7)  Domestic power tools. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any mechanically, electrically or gasoline motor-driven tool during nighttime hours so as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(8)  Pumps, air conditioners, air-handling equipment and other continuously operating equipment. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any pump, air conditioning, air-handling or other continuously operating motorized equipment in such a manner so as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(e)  Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the sound level regulations except the levels provided in Table I and Table I-A: 
(1)  Nonamplified human voice, except yelling, shouting, whistling, hooting, or generally creating a racket such that it creates a noise disturbance during the nighttime hours in a residential area in other than time of emergency. 
(2)  Sounds resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(3)  Sounds resulting from emergency work as defined in section 15-2. 
(4)  Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to, federal law, federal air regulations and air traffic control instruction used pursuant to and within the duly adopted federal air regulations; and any aircraft operating under technical difficulties in any kind of distress, under emergency orders of air traffic control, or being operated pursuant to and subsequent to the declaration of an emergency under federal air regulations. 
(5)  All sounds coming from the normal operations of interstate motor and rail carriers, to the extent that local regulation of sound levels of such vehicles has been preempted by the Noise Control Act of 1972 (42 U.S.C. § 4901 et seq.) or other applicable federal laws or regulations. 
(6)  Sounds from the operation of motor vehicles, to the extent they are regulated by F.S. § 316.293. 
(7)  Any nonamplified noise generated by public speaking activities conducted on any public property or public right-of-way pursuant to legal authority. 
(8)  Sounds produced at organized sporting events, by fireworks and by permitted parades on public property or public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 3868, § 1, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 960008, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 981314, § 1, 4-10-00; Ord. No. 110672, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-12)  
Sec. 15-4. - Special permits. 
(a)  Permit process. 
(1)  Applications for a special permit for relief from the maximum sound level limits designated in this chapter, except from Table I and Table I-A, for the events or activities described below, may be made in writing to the city manager or designee. Except as provided in Table I and Table I-A, a special permit is not required under this section if sound levels, including amplified sound, will not exceed the maximum sound level limits designated in this chapter. 
(2)  The permit application shall include the name, address and telephone number of the permit applicant; the date, hours and location for which the permit is requested; and the nature of the event or activity. The application must be submitted at least ten days in advance of the event, not including holidays and weekends. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the permit application, the city manager or designee will review the application and issue a decision promptly, but in no event less than three days prior to the date of the event. If no decision is issued by the time specified, the permit will be considered to be issued. The permit shall be issued provided the proposed activity meets the requirements of this section. 
(4)  Any permit granted must be in writing and shall contain all conditions upon which the permit shall be effective. 
(5)  The city manager or designee may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements he/she deems necessary to minimize noise disturbances upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood, including use of mufflers, screens or other sound-attenuating devices. 
(6)  Any final decision of the city manager or designee pursuant to this section which denies the applicant the right to create sound levels, including amplified sound, which do not exceed the maximum sound level limits designated in this chapter, except as provided in Table I and Table I-A, will be immediately reviewed as a matter of right by the circuit court upon the filing of an appropriate pleading by the city. 
(b)  Permits for entertainment. Permits may be granted for the purpose of entertainment under the following conditions: 
(1)  The function must be open to the general public (admission may be charged). 
(2)  The function must take place on public property, or public space, provided only six functions requiring a special permit may be held on any particular public space per calendar year. 
(3)  The permit will be granted for only four hours in one 24-hour day or any reasonable extension thereof as authorized by the city manager or designee. 
(4)  The permit will only be granted for hours between 9:00 a.m. and. 12:00 midnight on all days other than Friday and Saturday; and, on Friday and Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. of the following day, except in the following circumstances: 
a.  A permit will be granted for hours between 9:00 a.m. on New Year's Eve and 1:00 a.m. the following day (New Year's Day). 
b.  A permit will be granted for hours between 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. the following day if there are no private residences, hospitals or nursing homes within a 0.5 mile radius of the property where the function is taking place. 
(5)  Functions for which the permits are issued shall be limited to a continuous airborne sound level not to exceed 70 dB(A), as measured 200 feet from the real property boundary of the source property. When one or more streets are closed adjacent to the source of the sound, the measurement shall be taken 200 feet from the boundary of the closed area. 
(c)  Other permits. Special permits for nonentertainment special purposes, other than for emergency work that is exempt pursuant to section 15-3(e)(3), may be issued under the following conditions: 
(1)  Nonrecurring. 
a.  If the special purpose relates to the operation of a trade or business, the special purpose shall not be in the ordinary course of that trade or business; or 
b.  If the special purpose does not relate to the operation of a trade or business, the special purpose shall not be an ordinary event in the affairs of the applicant; 
(2)  Recurring. If the special purpose is a recurring purpose, it shall not recur more often than four times each calendar year; and: 
a.  The special purpose shall be essential to the operation of the applicant's trade or business; or 
b.  If the special purpose is not essential to the operation of a trade or business, the special purpose shall be compatible with the ordinary activities of the surrounding neighborhood; 
(3)  Hours. The special permit may be issued only for hours between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. the same day on weekdays; and 
(4)  Duration. Special permits may be issued for no longer than one week, renewable by further application to the city manager or designee provided the applicant otherwise meets the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Use of loudspeakers on exterior of building. No permit may be issued to permit the use of any loudspeaker or sound device on the exterior of any building which at any time exceeds the sound level limits in Table II, except those used for emergency systems or devices as allowed by section 15-3(d)(6) above. 
(e)  Fraternity or sorority events. Special permits shall be issued for off-campus fraternity/sorority events as follows: 
(1)  Sound level permits may be obtained to allow an increased residential sound level of 65 dB(A) between 9:00 p.m. and 1:00 a.m. the following day on designated dates, which permits will be valid only at the fraternity/sorority residence and only when all sources of music are located in a completely enclosed building as defined in section 30-23 of the land development code. Each fraternity/sorority is responsible for obtaining its sound level permit on the appropriate date. 
(2)  All fraternities/sororities will receive sound level permits on five dates each year, three of which shall be the last Saturday of fall and spring rush and the Saturday of the University of Florida Homecoming. 
(3)  The off-campus fraternities/sororities, collectively, shall choose the two optional dates on which they may receive additional sound level permits, which dates shall be submitted to the city manager or designee on or before September 30th of each year. After the submission of dates, the city manager or designee will approve and designate the optional dates hereinabove described. 
(4)  Other student organizations officially registered with the University of Florida may file an application with the city manager or designee for issuance of a special permit for comparable events. 
(Ord. No. 3868, § 1, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 960423, § 1, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 960008, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 970646, § 1, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 980395, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 980590, § 1, 10-26-98; Ord. No. 981314, § 1, 4-10-00; Ord. No. 000048, § 1, 8-14-00; Ord. No. 000712, § 1, 1-8-00)  
Sec. 15-5. - Measurement or assessment of sound. 
(a)  Measurement with sound level meter. 
(1)  The measurement of sound shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by ANSI S1.4-1971 (R1976). The instruments shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. A calibration check shall be made of the system at the time of any sound level measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the source of the sound. The microphone during measurement shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured sound. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used at all times. However, a violation of this chapter may occur without the occasion of the measurements being made as otherwise provided. 
(2)  The slow meter response of the sound level meter shall be used in order to best determine the average amplitude. 
(3)  The measurement shall be made at any point on the property into which the sound is being transmitted and shall be made at least three feet away from any ground, wall, floor, ceiling, roof and other plane surface. 
(4)  In case of multiple occupancy of a property, the measurement may be made at any point inside the premises to which any complainant has right of legal private occupancy; provided that the measurement shall not be made within three feet of any ground, wall, floor, ceiling, roof or other plane surface. 
(5)  All measurements of sound provided for in this chapter will be made by qualified officials of the city who are designated by the city manager or designee to operate the apparatus used to make the measurements. 
(b)  Assessment without sound level meter. Any police officer or other official designated by the city manager or designee who hears a noise or sound that is plainly audible, as defined in section 15-2, in violation of this chapter, shall assess the noise or sound according to the following standards: 
(1)  The primary means of detection shall be by means of the official's normal hearing faculties, so long as the official's hearing is not enhanced by any mechanical device, such as a hearing aid. 
(2)  The official must have a direct line of sight and hearing to the real property of the source of the sound or noise so that the official can readily identify the offending source of the sound or noise and the distance involved. If the official is unable to have a direct line of sight and hearing to the real property of the source of the sound or noise, then the official shall confirm the source of the sound or noise by approaching the suspected real property source of the sound or noise until the official is able to obtain a direct line of sight and hearing, and identify the identical or same sound or noise that was heard at the place of original assessment of the sound or noise. 
(3)  The official need not determine the particular words or phrases being said or produced or the name of any song or artist producing the noise or sound. The detection of a rhythmic bass reverberating type of noise or sound is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible noise or sound. 
(Ord. No. 3868, § 1, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 981314, § 1, 4-10-00)  
Sec. 15-6. - Violation procedures. 
(a)  Violation of sound level limits; violation of plainly audible standard on other than posted property. 
(1)  Warnings: 
a.  When a designated official of the city determines that there is a violation of section 15-3 and the sound is coming from non-posted property, the official shall issue a written warning to the person or persons responsible for the sound. The warning shall advise the person of the violation, and of the possible penalty if the person fails to eliminate the sound or reduce the sound so that it is within permitted limits. 
b.  The person or persons receiving the warning shall have a reasonable time, as defined in section 15-2, to comply with the warning. 
c.  For the purposes of this section, it is sufficient warning for all prohibited sounds if the person or persons responsible for any succeeding sounds are warned of, or cited for, one or more offending sounds of the same type within the previous year (365 days), or in the case of a business, in the time period since ownership of the business changed, whichever is less. 
(2)  Citation; confiscation of sound emitter. 
a.  If the sound is not eliminated or is not reduced to allowable limits within a reasonable time after the warning, or if the noise or sound is abated after warning and then reoccurs, the person so warned and not complying shall be cited for a violation of this chapter. 
b.  The city manager or designee shall notify the operator of any device that produces sound in excess of the limits set by Table I or Table I-A in section 15-3(b) that the device is a health hazard. The city manager or designee shall have the power and authority to have the device removed or toned down instantly until such time as it can be otherwise operated in compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Violation of plainly audible standard on posted property. 
(1)  When a designated official of the city determines a person or persons are making, causing or allowing the making of sound that is in violation of the plainly audible standard on property posted as described below, the official shall issue a citation for violation of this chapter to such person or persons. 
(2)  Property shall be considered posted for the purposes of this subsection if at least one warning sign is posted in a conspicuous place on the property, clearly visible and readable to all persons entering the property, warning persons that noise that is plainly audible is prohibited. Signs shall read as follows: 
WARNING 
Playing a stereo 
radio, or amplifier 
that can be heard 200 feet 
away is prohibited. 
City Ord. Sec. 15-3 
Letters in the word "WARNING" must be at least two inches high in bold type. Letters for the remaining text must be at least one inch high in normal type, and the words "City Ord. Sec. 15-3" must be at least one-half inch high in normal type. All letters must be light-reflective on a contrasting background. The sign structure containing the required warning must be permanently installed with the word "WARNING" not less than three feet and not more than six feet above ground level. 
(3)  The city manager or designee may require a property to be posted if it is used for commercial purposes, including as a parking lot for an adjacent business, and: 
a.  The business is generally unattended by the owner or an agent of the owner during normal operating hours; or 
b.  Two or more citations for violation of this chapter resulting in payment of a fine or adjudication of guilt by a judge are issued due to acts of patrons or visitors during any 90-day period. 
(c)  Other limits; complaint procedure. 
(1)  Any complaint regarding a sound or noise disturbance based solely on its disturbing a reasonable person of normal sensitivities must be filed by a person who is disturbed by the sound or noise. The burden of proof of this complaint will be on the complainant if the complaint results in a hearing before a judge. The complaint may be filed at the time of the disturbance or within a reasonable period of time after the fact. 
(2)  When a complaint has been received, a designated official shall investigate the charges. If the official finds probable cause to believe the owner/operator is in violation of this chapter, the official shall issue a warning to cease and desist the violation. 
(3)  If the owner/operator does not take corrective action within a reasonable time as defined in section 15-2, or if the noise or sound is abated after warning and then reoccurs, the official may issue a citation or file a sworn complaint with the state attorney. For purposes of section 15-3(d)(5) (animal noises), the noise will be considered to be unabated, or abated and reoccurring, if the official hears the same noise more than ten minutes after issuing the warning; and the official may then issue a citation based on this violation. 
(d)  Joint and several responsibility. The owner, tenant or lessee of property, or a manager, overseer or agent, or any other person lawfully entitled to possess the property from which the offending sound is emitted at the time the offending sound is emitted, shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter. It shall not be a lawful defense to assert that some other person caused the sound. The lawful possessor or operator of the premises shall be responsible for operating or maintaining the premises in compliance with this chapter and shall be punished whether or not the person actually causing the sound is also punished. 
(e)  Violation may be declared public nuisance. The operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provisions of this chapter which endangers the public health, safety and quality of life of residents in the area is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 3868, § 1, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 4016, § 1, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 951346, § 1, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 960008, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 981314, § 1, 4-10-00; Ord. No. 050635, § 1, 10-23-06)  
Sec. 15-7. - Penalties. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by civil citation or by criminal citation. Any person not in compliance with this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties designated in section 1-9 or section 2-339. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense, which can be prosecuted separately. 
(b)  Any person responsible for an unlawful sound shall be subject to the confiscation of the sound emitter or emitters if convicted three times under this chapter within a 12-month period and provided the convictions are for sounds created by the same or same type of sound emitter. Upon the third conviction, the appropriate court shall authorize the city to confiscate the sound emitter until such time as the offender can positively demonstrate to the court both willingness and ability to operate the emitter within the limits prescribed by this chapter. Any further conviction shall authorize the permanent confiscation of the sound emitter by the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 4016, § 2, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 981314, § 1, 4-10-00)  
Chapter 16 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 2-376 et seq.; health and sanitation, Ch. 11.5; housing, Ch. 13; noise, Ch. 15; offenses, Ch. 17; abandoned, wrecked, nonoperating vehicles, § 26-136 et seq.; land development code, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances by injunction, F.S. § 60.05; nuisances injurious to health, F.S. Ch. 386; public nuisances, F.S. Ch. 823. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 16-1—16-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS BUILDING AND HAZARDOUS LAND CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6. 
 
Sec. 16-16. - Declaration of necessity and purpose. 
This article is declared to be remedial and essential to protect the public interest, health, welfare and safety, and for such purposes it is intended that this article be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes stated herein. It is the intent of this article to provide for protection from dangerous conditions created or maintained on privately-owned properties within the city to the public generally and to the occupants of such lands; to require the owners of such lands to remedy such dangerous conditions by the means least expensive and least detrimental to the owner's property and the public environment; to require that such dangerous conditions be remedied within a reasonable time; and, in the absence of compliance by the property owners, to provide a means for effectuating the required remedy at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1960, § 8-5)  
Sec. 16-17. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Dangerous buildings shall mean all buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects: 
(1)  Those whose interior walls or other structural members list, lean, or buckle, or the support for which has become damaged or deteriorated, to such an extent that there is a reasonable likelihood that such walls or other structural members may fall or give way; 
(2)  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used; 
(3)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city; 
(4)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to the decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living therein; 
(5)  Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may work therein; 
(6)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic, or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of egress, according to the standards in effect when the building was constructed; 
(7)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that there is a reasonable likelihood they may fall and injure members of the public or property in general; 
(8)  Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe and are unsanitary or dangerous to a degree that constitutes a hazard to the health, safety, or general welfare of the people of this city; 
(9)  Those which are vacant and not sufficiently secured to prevent easy access to trespassers, loiterers and vagrants; 
(10)  Those which are untended or unkempt to the extent that they pose a health or safety hazard. 
Enforcing official shall mean the city manager of the city, the general manager for utilities or their respective designees. 
Excessive growth shall mean vegetation over 12 inches high that is or may reasonably become infested by pests or may create a fire or safety hazard. Excessive growth includes vegetation growing from private lands into or across public rights-of-way, utility easements, sidewalks, drainage ditches, swales or streets. It does not include the following unless the growth constitutes a fire or safety hazard: 
(1)  Shrubs, trees or bushes (natural or cultivated) used for landscape purposes; 
(2)  Vegetation located on a lot over five acres in area that is in a natural state, or vegetation that has not been mowed within the past five years; or 
(3)  Vegetation located more than 200 feet from the boundary line of an improved property, street or public right-of-way; or 
(4)  Controlled, managed and maintained low-maintenance natural landscaping; or 
(5)  The understory of hammocks that are protected through development regulations, conditions or agreements, and vegetation within wetlands, stormwater retention lake littoral zones, or within 150 feet of a regulated creek. 
(6)  Land designated agriculture or conservation of the future land use map. 
Hazardous lands shall mean lands unoccupied as well as occupied upon which there exists a condition or conditions dangerous to the health, welfare or safety of the public generally, or of the occupants of surrounding properties, or of the occupants of such lands, including, but limited to: 
(1)  Land upon which there exists an accumulation of material or items stored outside of a structure, including, but not limited to, lumber, tires, automobile parts, trash, hazardous waste, abandoned personal property, unusable or discarded household items, inoperative or discarded machinery or equipment, inoperative automobiles, appliances, solid waste, dangerous chemicals, explosives or other hazardous substances without sufficient protections for the control of same, junk, used scrap, construction or demolition materials, tanks, drums, glass, iron or any other material or items that may 
a.  Create noxious odors or harmful fumes or particulate. 
b.  Serve as a breeding or nesting place for mosquitoes, rats, mice, poisonous snakes, dangerous wild animals, or insect vermin, in such manner and to such extent as to pose an immediate danger to the public health and safety. 
c.  Contribute to any other unsafe or unsanitary conditions or create a dangerous nuisance attractive to children. 
d.  Create a fire, safety or health hazard. 
(2)  Land upon which there is excessive growth of vegetation as defined above. 
Owner shall mean any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others, holds legal or equitable title to any building or land within the scope of this article and shall include the occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent and all other persons having an interest in said building or land as shown by the records of the clerk of the circuit court of Alachua County, Florida. 
Unfit for human occupancy shall mean in such disrepair as to be unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, containing filth or contamination, or lacking ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by the housing code, or so located as to constitute a hazard to the occupant of the building or to the public. 
Unsafe building shall mean a building that is dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such building contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
Unsafe equipment shall include any absent or malfunctioning grease trap or grease interceptor, if required by the Code, boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the building that is such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or building. 
(Code 1960, § 8-7; Ord. No. 950517, § 1, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 980745, § 2, 9-25-00; Ord. No. 031205, § 3, 6-28-04) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-18. - Liability of city officers, employees. 
No officer, agent or employee of the city shall render himself/herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this article. Any suit brought against an officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties under this article shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Code 1960, § 8-18)  
Sec. 16-19. - Creating, keeping, maintaining, allowing the existence of dangerous buildings or hazardous lands unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real property within the city to create, keep, maintain, or allow the existence of any dangerous building or hazardous land, as defined in this article, in or on such real property. 
(Code 1960, § 8-8.1)  
Sec. 16-20. - Standard for repair, vacation, demolition, temporary board and seal, or abatement. 
The following minimum standards shall be followed in substance by the enforcing official the by the board of appeals in ordering repair, vacation, demolition, temporary board and seal, and abatement. 
(1)  The owner of a dangerous building shall be given the option, wherever possible, of either demolishing the building or repairing it so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article. 
(2)  If a dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be repaired or demolished and brought up to code. The owner must apply for a board and seal permit as described in Chapter 6 of this Code. If the permit is granted, the building must be boarded and sealed until such time as it is demolished or repaired so that it is no longer in violation of the terms of this article. If the owner does not obtain a permit and board or seal the building within one month of the order to repair or demolish, the enforcing official shall order the owner to demolish and remove the building. If the owner does not begin to repair the building within six months of the order to repair or demolish, or the owner begins to repair the building and there is a cessation of normal construction or repair of more than six months, the enforcing official shall order the owner to demolish and remove the building. 
(3)  Vacant property standards. The following are minimum vacant property standards to be adhered to when temporary board and seal is permitted. Compliance with these standards does not constitute repair of a dangerous building. 
a.  Exterior grade sheathing plywood of three-eighths of an inch thickness or greater shall be used to fully cover all windows, doors and other openings which may allow access to the interior of the building. 
b.  Plywood covers shall be nailed, screwed or bolted firmly over each opening. No splices or joints of any kind shall occur over openings. Plywood shall not project beyond the outside edges of casings around openings, or in the absence of casing, project no further than six inches beyond the openings. 
c.  Nails shall be a minimum of 8D common hot dip galvanized nails. Screws shall be a minimum of no. 10 wood screws. Bolts shall be approved by the enforcing official prior to use. 
d.  Nails or screws shall not be spaced more than 12 inches on center along edges nor more than one inch from each corner. 
e.  The exterior surfaces of all buildings shall be protected against the elements and loss of aesthetic value by the application of paint or other approved protective materials applied in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. The paint or other protective material must match the building colors. 
(3)  In any case where hazardous lands exist, the hazardous conditions existing upon the lands shall be ordered to be abated by the means least expensive and least detrimental to the owner's property and to the public environment. 
(Code 1960, § 8-8; Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 3-13-89; Ord. No. 980745, § 3, 9-25-00) 
Cross reference— Boarding and sealing of buildings, § 6-20.  
Sec. 16-21. - Duties of the fire and police departments. 
The employees of the fire and police departments shall make a report in writing to the enforcing official of all buildings, structures or lands which are, may be, or are suspected to be dangerous buildings or hazardous lands within the terms of this article. The reports must be delivered to the enforcing official within 24 hours of the discovery of dangerous buildings or hazardous land. 
(Code 1960, § 8-15)  
Sec. 16-22. - Duties of the city attorney. 
The city attorney shall: 
(1)  Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices provided for in section 16-25 and in the order provided for in section 16-23; 
(2)  Appear at all hearings before the board of appeals in regard to dangerous buildings and hazardous lands; 
(3)  Bring suit to collect all municipal liens, assessments or costs incurred in repairing or causing to be vacated, demolished or repaired, altering or demolishing or cleaning up dangerous buildings and hazardous lands; 
(4)  Take such legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1960, § 8-17)  
Sec. 16-23. - Enforcing official—Designation; powers and duties. 
The enforcing official shall be charged with the duty of administering the applicable standards and securing compliance therewith. In furtherance of this responsibility, the enforcing official shall: 
(1)  Make such inspections as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes and intent of this article and to initiate appropriate action to bring about compliance with this article, if such inspections disclose any instance of noncompliance. 
(2)  Investigate thoroughly any complaints of alleged violations of this article, and indicate clearly in writing as a public record in this office the disposition made of such complaints. Only matters or conditions pertinent to this article shall be considered or reported by the enforcing official in his/her inspection recommendations. 
(3)  Order in writing as set out below the remedy of all conditions or all violations of the article found to exist in or on any premises; state in the violation order a time limit for compliance with this article as set out in section 16-25(2)g. 
(4)  Request the city attorney to take appropriate legal action upon the failure of the responsible party to comply with the violation order at the time specified therein. 
(Code 1960, § 8-9; Ord. No. 031205, § 4, 6-28-04)  
Sec. 16-24. - Same—Authorization to inspect. 
The enforcing official or his/her agent is authorized and directed to lawfully enter and inspect all buildings and to lawfully go upon and inspect all lands within the city at reasonable times to determine their condition in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public, or upon receipt of complaints or when he/she has cause to believe a violation of this article exists. 
(Code 1960, § 8-10)  
Sec. 16-25. - Same—Violations procedure. 
Whenever the enforcing official determines that a violation of this article exists, he/she shall take action as follows: 
(1)  Give written notice of the violation to the owner. Copies of the written notice shall be transmitted to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(2)  The notice shall include: 
a.  A description of the location of the buildings and/or land involved, either by street address or by legal description. 
b.  A statement indicating the nature of the violation and reason or reasons why the notice of violation is issued. 
c.  A specification of the section or sections of this article upon which the notice of violation is based. 
d.  If repairs or alterations will bring the structure into compliance with this article, a statement of the nature and extent of the repairs or alterations necessary to comply with this article. 
e.  If the violation is of such a character that repairs or alterations cannot bring the building into compliance, a statement to this effect and an order of demolition of the building indicating fully the reason therefor. 
f.  If hazardous lands are involved, a statement of the steps necessary to abate the conditions creating the hazard and to bring the lands into compliance with this article. 
g.  If repairs, alterations or demolition of a building or structure are necessary for compliance, a specification of time for performing same shall be stated in the notice which shall not be less than ten nor more than 90 days. If the violation pertains only to hazardous lands, a specification of the time for cleaning, clearing, or abating same shall be stated in the notice which shall not be less than ten nor more than 30 days. 
h.  The name of the person upon whom the notice of violation is served as stated in subsection (1) of this section. 
i.  A statement advising that upon the owner's failure to comply with the notice, the city may perform or cause to be performed the repairs, alterations, demolition or cleaning up of the building or land involved, and that the expense of the performance by the city shall constitute a lien against the property involved. 
j.  A statement advising of the procedures available for review of the action of the enforcing official as set out in section 16-27. 
(Code 1960, § 8-11)  
Sec. 16-26. - Service of notice of violation. 
(a)  The written notice of violation referred to in section 16-23 may be served in one of the following manners: 
(1)  Be delivered to the owners by personally delivering a copy of the notice to the party to be notified, or by leaving such copy at their usual place of abode with some person residing therein, who is above 15 years of age, and informing such person of the contents thereof; 
(2)  By mail effectuated by either registered or certified United States mail, return receipt requested; or 
(3)  In the event that a notice sent by either registered or certified mail shall be returned undelivered or refused, or if the name of any such party or their place of residence or post office address cannot be ascertained after diligent search, or personal delivery of a copy of the notice is unsuccessful after a diligent search, service may be accomplished by publishing a copy of the notice one time in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. 
(b)  If either manner of service described in subsections (a)(2) or (a)(3) is used, a copy of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises. 
(c)  When any written notice of violation shall become an order either because no petition for review of the decision of the enforcing official has been taken or because such petition for review has been taken and the decision of the enforcing official has not been reversed, then such order shall be executed by the enforcing official. Immediately after execution, the enforcing official shall record a copy of the order in the public records of Alachua County. 
(d)  If the order is not complied with in the time specified in the order then the city shall make such repairs, alterations, demolition or clean-up as may be required in the order. The expense for repairs, alterations, demolition or clean-up shall be paid by the owner in accordance with section 16-29. 
(e)  The enforcing official shall place a notice on all dangerous buildings and post same on hazardous land which shall read as follows: 
"This building and/or land has been found to be dangerous or hazardous by the enforcing official. This notice is to remain on this building or land as placed thereon until the requirements of the notice which has been given the owner have been fully complied with. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such requirements have been complied with." 
(f)  Authority to grant extension of time; procedure: 
(1)  The enforcing official shall have the authority upon good cause shown therefor in writing to grant an extension of time within which an owner or occupant, may be required to comply with a notice of violation which has been issued by the enforcing official provided the written request for the extension of time is presented to the board prior to the expiration of time originally stated in the written notice of violation. 
(2)  The authority of the enforcing official in considering requests for extension of time shall be in each instance limited to either granting or denying the request for such extension, and shall not be considered as an appeal from the terms of the notice of violation, and the enforcing official shall not have authority to modify or vary the terms of the notice of violation except as to the time of performance. 
(3)  In granting or denying the request for extension of time, the enforcing official shall consider such factors as are appropriate, including the good faith effort to comply, the availability of materials and workmen necessary, and such other factors as may be deemed appropriate and consistent with the intent of this article. 
(4)  All requests for extension of time shall be decided within ten working days after the filing of the request. 
(5)  In granting or denying the request, the enforcing official shall, in each instance, state the reasons therefor and state the length of time, if it is extended, during which the acts required to be done shall be completed, which time, in no instance, may be greater than 90 days after the time period stated in the original notice of violation in the case of dangerous buildings nor 30 days in case of hazardous land. 
(Code 1960, § 8-12; Ord. No. 3527, § 2, 3-13-89; Ord. No. 971050, § 1, 5-11-98; Ord. No. 970804, § 2, 1-1-99; Ord. No. 031205, § 5, 6-28-04)  
Sec. 16-27. - Appeals board; appeals. 
(a)  Appeals board. 
(1)  Established. There is hereby established an appeals board for dangerous building, hazardous land, unsafe equipment, or absent or malfunctioning grease trap or grease interceptor violations. The board of adjustment of the city shall serve and perform the duties of the appeals board for dangerous building, hazardous land, unsafe equipment, or absent or malfunctioning grease trap or grease interceptor violations under the procedure set forth in this article. 
(2)  Meetings, minutes, records, voting. Meetings shall be at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairperson, or in his/her absence the vice-chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. The appeals board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, including a summary of the testimony of each person appearing before it; it shall keep records of its findings and decisions. The vote of each member on each question shall be recorded, or if absence or failing to vote, the circumstance shall be noted. The concurrence of not less than three members of the appeals board shall be necessary to a decision of any question which the board has the power to determine. All such records shall be public records and the same shall be filed in the office of the appeals board, which shall, for the purpose of this article, be the office of the enforcing official. 
(b)  Appeals procedure. Appeals to the appeals board for dangerous building, hazardous land, unsafe equipment, or absent or malfunctioning grease trap or grease interceptor violations may be taken by any person aggrieved by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of this article or by any officer or bureau or the governing body of the city affected by any decision of the enforcing official. The appeals shall be taken within 14 days after the notice of violation was served or action taken, by filing in the office of the enforcing official a written petition to the board of appeals for dangerous building, hazardous land, unsafe equipment, or absent or malfunctioning grease trap or grease interceptor violations setting forth the grounds therefor. Upon the receipt of the petition, the appeals board shall set a time and place for hearing the appeal, but in no case shall the hearing be less than ten days nor more than 40 days following the receipt of the petition. The enforcing official shall promptly transmit to the appeals board all papers constituting the record upon which the notice of violation was issued or action taken. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person taking the appeal at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing and public notice of the hearing shall be published at least once ten days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(c)  Power to sustain, modify or withdraw notice of violation. After public notice and public hearing, the appeals board for dangerous building, hazardous land, unsafe equipment, or absent or malfunctioning grease trap or grease interceptor violations shall have the power to sustain, modify or withdraw the notice of violation. The appeals board shall make findings in writing justifying the exercise of its authority and the same shall be a part of the permanent record of the case: 
(1)  Sustaining. If the appeals board sustains the enforcing official, it shall find: 
a.  That the facts as stated in the written notice of violation are correct and that the situation covered by the notice is in fact, a violation of the article; and 
b.  That the remedy stated by the enforcing official in the written notice of violation is the minimum remedial action which will bring the building, premises or the land cited into compliance with this article. 
(2)  Modification or withdrawal. If the appeals board shall modify or withdraw the notice of violation, it shall find the following, as may be applicable to the specific case: 
a.  That the facts as stated in the written notice of violation are not correct and that the situation as covered by the notice is not, in fact, a violation of the article, or that the procedures required of the enforcing official in this article have not been complied with; and 
b.  That the remedial action required by the enforcing official is not the minimum remedial action necessary to bring the building, structure or land into compliance with the article and that some other remedial action, to be stated by the appeals board as a part of the record of the case, is the minimum action necessary to secure compliance with this article. 
(d)  Failure of owner to comply with order. If the owner fails to comply with the order entered by the appeals board within the time therein allowed, the enforcing official shall cause the building, structure or land to be repaired, vacated, demolished or cleaned up, as the facts may warrant, and shall, with the repairs, vacation, demolition or clean-up to be paid for by suit at law or charged against the property as otherwise herein provided. 
(Code 1960, § 8-13; Ord. No. 970804, § 3, 1-11-99; Ord. No. 031205, § 6, 6-28-04)  
Sec. 16-28. - Status of appeals board action; judicial review. 
(a)  If the appeals board sustains or modifies the written notice of violation given by the enforcing official it shall be deemed an order and action shall be taken by the enforcing official to enforce the same. Any notice of violation served pursuant to this article and in conformity with its provisions shall become an order if no petition for review has been filed with the appeals board within the time limit set out in section 16-27. 
(b)  Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the city government aggrieved by any decision of the appeals board may seek review by a circuit court, in the manner provided by the laws of this state. It is the intent of this article that review of decisions of the appeals board shall be by the courts as provided by law. 
(Code 1960, § 8-14)  
Sec. 16-29. - Assessing liens. 
(a)  Billing and notice. Promptly after completion of any demolition, repairs, alterations, clearing, or clean-up done by the city under authority of this article, the enforcing official shall cause the owner to be billed for the cost of the work-including advertising costs, labor, materials, title searches and other out-of-pocket expenses. The bill shall be served upon the owner by delivery to him/her personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at his/her last known address as shown on the city tax rolls, and shall become an account receivable on the books of the city. If the bill is not paid within 90 days after the end of the month in which it is invoiced, the city manager or designee may refer the account to a collection agency. If the collection agency does not collect the amount due within 90 days of the referral, or the city manager or designee decides not to refer the account to a collection agency, the owner shall be notified by the enforcing official of the intention to record a lien against the property. The notice shall: 
(1)  Describe the premises involved either by legal description or street address; 
(2)  Describe the nature of the work done thereon and state the amount for which a lien is being made; and 
(3)  Be served on the owner of record in the manner set forth above for service of the notice of violation. If service of the notice of violation could only be achieved by publication and the enforcing official has no reason to believe that notice of the intent to record a lien can be successfully provided by any other means, publication shall be the sole method used to serve the notice of intent to record a lien. 
(b)  Recording lien. If the amount due is not paid within five days of service of the date of delivery of the notice of lien or publication in a newspaper, the lien shall be recorded in the public records of Alachua County, Florida. Such lien shall be prior to all other liens except taxes and shall be of equal dignity with special assessments made for other public purposes, and may be foreclosed as mortgages are foreclosed. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter are supplemental to and in no way shall preclude the city from engaging in enforcement activity authorized under chapter 27 of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 8-15; Ord. No. 3527, § 3, 3-13-89; Ord. No. 950204, § 1, 7-10-95; Ord. No. 990209, § 1, 9-27-99; Ord. No. 031205, § 7, 6-28-04)  
Sec. 16-30. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who shall fail to comply with an order issued under the provisions of section 16-28 shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-9. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the notice provided for in section 16-26 until the requirements thereof have been fully complied with. Any person removing the notice provided for in section 16-26 shall upon conviction therefor, be punished as provided for in section 1-9. 
(Code 1960, § 8-19)  
Secs. 16-31—16-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERILOUS LAND CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; land development code, ch. 30. 
 
Sec. 16-46. - Declaration of necessity and purpose. 
This article is declared to be remedial and essential to protect the public health, welfare and safety, and for such purposes it is intended that this article be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes stated in this article. It is the intent of this article to eliminate the existence of excessive accumulation or untended growth of weeds, undergrowth or other dead or living plant life upon any land, which, due to its condition, is inhabited or frequented by persons who endanger the public generally and the occupants of the land. 
(Code 1960, § 8-33)  
Sec. 16-47. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Enforcing official shall mean the city manager or designee. 
Perilous land shall mean the existence of excessive accumulation or untended growth of weeds, undergrowth, or other dead or living plant life (not including trees with a trunk diameter of at least six inches) upon any lot, tract or parcel of land, improved or unimproved, which, due to its condition is inhabited or frequented by criminals, fleeing felons, fugitives from justice, or persons who loiter or prowl about, and thereby threatens and endangers the public health, safety, or welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Code 1960, § 8-34) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-48. - Perilous land declared a public nuisance. 
The existence of any perilous land as defined in this article is declared a public nuisance and whoever shall own or lease such perilous land shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a public nuisance. 
(Code 1960, § 8-35)  
Sec. 16-49. - List of perilous lands. 
The enforcing official shall compile and maintain a list of such perilous lands which shall be approved by the city manager. The list may be amended from time to time with the approval of the city manager. The city manager shall inform the city commission of any additions/deletions to the list by way of a written report. 
(Code 1960, § 8-36)  
Sec. 16-50. - Abatement procedure. 
The enforcing official shall regularly inspect all lots, tracts or parcels of land within the city to determine the existence of any perilous land, as defined herein. Whenever the enforcing official finds any perilous land he/she shall institute public nuisance abatement proceedings as set forth in this section for the removal of any excessive accumulation or untended growth of weeds, undergrowth or other dead or living plant life. However, no tree with a trunk diameter of at least six (6) inches shall be removed; trees with a trunk less than six (6) inches in diameter shall be removed selectively; and foliage shall be trimmed up to six (6) feet. Any such land found by the enforcing official may be summarily abated pursuant to the following emergency procedures: 
(1)  Notice. The enforcing official shall notify the owner and resident of the perilous land by all of the following methods, where applicable: 
a.  Posting of notice adjacent to the main driveway entrance to the property or in any other conspicuous place; 
b.  Posting of notice upon the main entrance of the principal residence or business building located upon the property; 
c.  Sending notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person(s) listed on the current tax assessor's tax roll; 
d.  Sending notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the occupant of the principal residence upon the property, addressed to the street address thereof. 
(2)  Abatement by city when no protest filed. If no protest has been filed with the clerk of the commission by the owner or resident of the property within ten (10) days of the mailing of the letters and posting of the notices (excluding Saturdays and Sundays), the city or its agent may enter upon the property and abate the perilous land. The costs of abatement shall be assessed as a special assessment against the property. 
(3)  Protest. If the owner or resident files a protest within the ten-day period, the city commission shall meet at the next regular session, or in emergency session if necessary, to determine whether or not the excessive accumulation or untended growth of weeds, undergrowth or other dead or living plant life constitutes it perilous land as defined in this article. The decision of the city commission shall be final and the city may proceed with the summary abatement of the perilous land; provided, however, that the city shall first deliver written notice of its intention to proceed with abatement to any adult person found at the residence address within the city given by the owner or resident in the protest; and, further provided, that the summary abatement shall not commence until at least three (3) regular working days after the delivery of the notice. The costs of abatement shall be assessed as a special assessment against the property. 
(4)  Documentation. Before the city summarily commences any abatement under the provisions of this article, the enforcing official shall prepare and file with the clerk of the commission a detailed report setting forth the reasons for the finding of the existence of perilous land. Wherever possible, photographs and other official reports should be provided to augment the report. 
(Code 1960, § 8-36)  
Sec. 16-51. - Form of posted notice. 
The notice required to be posted on any perilous land is as follows: 
"BEWARE 
"This property has been declared to be perilous land by the City of Gainesville. If you have any interest in this property, contact the chief of police. Do not remove this notice under penalty of law." 
(Code 1960, § 8-37)  
Sec. 16-52. - Alternative procedure. 
On or before September thirtieth of each year, the owner of any real property may file written authorization with the enforcing official for the city to enter upon the property and summarily abate any perilous land during the ensuing fiscal year without the obligation of providing the property owner with further notice or opportunity to be heard. The authorization would assist and expedite the city's effort to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The cost of the abatement shall be assessed as a special assessment against the property. 
(Code 1960, § 8-38)  
Sec. 16-53. - Assessing liens. 
The procedure for assessing liens shall be as prescribed in section 16-29. 
(Code 1960, § 8-39)  
Sec. 16-54. - Unlawful actions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface, or mutilate any notice posted pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any owner or his/her agent or with any representative of the city when engaged in performing any act reasonably required for the execution of any order of abatement issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1960, § 8-40)  
Sec. 16-55. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall fail to comply with this article shall be subject to penalties provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1960, § 8-41)  
Secs. 16-56—16-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOSQUITO BREEDING GROUNDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Mosquito control districts, F.S. Ch. 388. 
 
Sec. 16-70. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adulticide means any control method or action intended to affect an adult mosquito. 
Crepuscular means becoming active at twilight or before sunrise. 
Integrated pest management means the implementation of mosquito control measures, including but not limited to the use of pesticides, biological control agents and source reduction, to control mosquito populations without an unreasonable adverse effect on the environment. 
Larvicide means any control method or action intended to affect a larval mosquito. 
Mosquito complaint means any request by the public regarding mosquito annoyance, either breeding or biting, which is determined by the mosquito control supervisor to be a documented mosquito problem. 
Mosquito control program means a program organized for the purpose of controlling mosquito populations on property other than that exempted by state law. 
Nocturnal means becoming active at night or after sunset. 
Pesticide means any substance intended for controlling, preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest. 
Service request means any request for mosquito control services by the public without the presence of either breeding or biting mosquito annoyance, or a documented mosquito problem. 
Source reduction means the physical land or water management, either manmade or natural, of mosquito breeding areas to reduce the area's suitability for mosquito breeding. 
(Ord. No. 3853, § 1, 4-5-93) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-71. - Collections of water in which mosquitoes may breed. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the corporate limits of the city, any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed, or are likely to breed, unless the collection of water is treated so as effectually to prevent such breeding. The treatment is to be prescribed by the city manager or his/her designee. Collections of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed are those contained in ditches, ponds, pools, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs, urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, new or used tires, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, or other similar water containers. 
(b)  The city finds that mosquitoes are likely to breed in piles or stacks of used or new tires which are left unprotected from the elements and not covered in such a fashion as to prevent the collection of water through natural precipitation, irrigation, sprinkler systems or other sources. Persons allowing, causing or permitting such a condition to exist shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1960, §§ 8-20, 8-21; Ord. No. 3853, § 2, 4-5-93)  
Sec. 16-72. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding. 
The presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there in that water. 
(Code 1960, § 8-22; Ord. No. 3853, § 3, 4-5-93)  
Sec. 16-73. - Treatment of collections of water required; methods of treatment. 
Collections of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed shall be treated by one or more of the following methods as shall be approved by the city manager or his/her designee: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way, or any other material which will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough drying or cleaning. 
(3)  Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the city manager or his/her designee. This includes biological larvicides such as fungi, nematodes, etc. 
(4)  Covering completely the surface of the water with approved surface films as needed. 
(5)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetation, growth and other obstructions through mechanical or chemical means. 
(6)  Filling and draining to the satisfaction of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(7)  Proper disposal, by removal or destruction, of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
(8)  Stocking areas which retain water for any period of time with Gambusia affinis (mosquito fish). 
(Code 1960, § 8-23; Ord. No. 3853, § 4, 4-5-93)  
Sec. 16-74. - Right of entry upon premises; cooperative agreements with federal and state agencies. 
(a)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the city manager or his/her designee may at all reasonable times enter in and upon any premises within the city. 
(b)  The city manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to cooperate with federal and state agencies and to enter into such cooperative agreements or commitments as the city manager may determine necessary to carry out and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1960, § 8-24; Ord. No. 3853, § 5, 4-5-93)  
Sec. 16-75. - Purpose of mosquito control program. 
(a)  It is declared to be the intent of the city to maximize the protection of human health and safety, foster the quality of life of its citizens and visitors, promote the economic development of the city, and facilitate the enjoyment of its natural attractions by reducing the number of pestiferous and disease-carrying mosquitoes. 
(b)  It is further declared to be the intent of the city to conduct mosquito control in a manner consistent with protection of the environment and ecological integrity of all lands and waters throughout the city. Mosquito control's intent will be to maximize to the fullest extent source reduction and bio-control and to implement adulticiding activities last. These procedures will be implemented using integrated pest management methodologies to maximize control efforts without an unreasonable adverse effect on the environment. 
(Ord. No. 3853, § 6, 4-5-93)  
Sec. 16-76. - Persons deemed responsible. 
For the purpose of this article the person responsible for the condition of any premises is the person using or occupying the same or, in case no person is using or occupying the premises, the person who by law is entitled to the immediate possession of the same or, in case the premises are used or occupied by two or more tenants of a common landlord or form grounds appurtenant to a house occupied by two or more tenants of a common landlord, then the landlord. Each tenant, however, is responsible for the part of the premises which he/she occupies to the exclusion of the other tenants. 
(Code 1960, § 8-25)  
Sec. 16-77. - Penalty for failure to prevent breeding; prevention of breeding by city. 
In case the person responsible for the condition of premises on which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed fails or refuses to take necessary measures to prevent their breeding within three days after written notice has been given by the city manager or his/her designee, or within such longer time after the notice as may be specified in the notice, the person responsible shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article, and for each day after the expiration of three days from the day on which the notice is given, or for each day after the expiration of the time specified in the notice, as the case may be, that the person responsible fails or refuses to take such measures, the person responsible shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation of this article, and in each such case of failure or refusal of the person responsible the city manager or his/her designee is authorized to take the necessary steps to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes, and all necessary costs incurred for that purpose shall be charged against the person responsible. 
(Code 1960, § 8-26; Ord. No. 3853, § 7, 4-5-93)  
Sec. 16-78. - Adulticiding procedures. 
It is the intent that adulticiding procedures will be subject to, but not limited by, provisions as follows: 
(1)  Adulticiding hours will vary according to the hours of sunset and sunrise. 
(2)  Normal operation procedures will target problem mosquitoes for adulticiding during crepuscular and nocturnal activities. 
(3)  Mosquito control adulticiding vehicles will stay in compliance with the city's noise ordinance. 
(4)  Mosquito complaints will be recorded and investigated based upon individual site requirements. 
(5)  Service requests will be logged, but will not be used as a measure of annoyance or as a means of determining an area's adulticiding need. 
(Ord. No. 3853, § 8, 4-5-93)  
Secs. 16-79—16-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 991015, adopted March 13, 2000, repealed §§ 16-92—16-96 of Art. V in their entirety and added §§ 16-92—16-98 to read as set forth herein. Formerly, §§ 16-92—16-96 pertained to appointment and powers of hearing officer, powers of city manager, penalty, and rules and regulations, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 3479, § 1, adopted Oct. 17, 1988. Prior to the adoption of Ord. No. 991015, Ord. No. 3479 amended the 1960 Code by the addition of Ch. 14C, §§ 14C-1—14C-6, and at the discretion of the editor said provisions were included herein as Art. V, §§ 16-91—16-96.  Ord. No. 001588, § 1, adopted Feb. 11, 2002, renumbered the former §§ 16-92—16-95 and 16-96—16-98 as §§ 16-95—16-98 and 16-99.1—16-99.3, and added new provisions as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
 
Sec. 16-91. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent of this article to promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Gainesville by creating an administrative board with authority to impose administrative fines and other non-criminal penalties to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective, and inexpensive method of abating drug, prostitution, criminal street gang and stolen property related nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 001588, § 1, 2-11-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 001588, § 1, adopted Feb. 11, 2002, repealed the former § 16-91, which pertained to declaration of public nuisance, and derived from Ord. No. 3479, § 1, adopted Oct. 17, 1988, and Ord. No. 991015, § 1, adopted March 13, 2000.  
Sec. 16-92. - Statutory authority. 
(a)  This article is enacted pursuant to F.S. § 893.138. The provisions of F.S. § 893.138, as they may be amended from time to time, and any other applicable general law shall govern the administration of the nuisance abatement board and any activities pertaining to nuisance abatement that are governed by the article. 
(b)  If any portion of this article is inconsistent with any existing or future general law, the provisions of general law shall govern and shall supersede this article to the extent of the inconsistency. 
(Ord. No. 001588, § 1, 2-11-02)  
Sec. 16-93. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Complainant shall mean the City of Gainesville. 
A complaint may be filed with the city by a resident of the city or any occupant of real property within the city who is aggrieved by an alleged nuisance. 
Controlled substance shall have the same meaning as stated in F.S. §§ 893.02 and 893.138 and any other applicable provision of general law, as may be amended from time to time. Further, as used in this section, "controlled substance" includes any substance sold in lieu of a controlled substance in violation of F.S. § 817.563 or any imitation controlled substance defined in F.S. § 817.564. 
Nuisance abatement board shall mean the City of Gainesville Nuisance Abatement Board which is also referred to herein as "board". 
Operator shall mean the person operating a place or premises subject to this article. 
Owner shall mean the owner of the place or premises that is alleged to be a public nuisance. In cases where the owner and the operator are the same person, the terms "owner" and "operator" are uses interchangeably. 
Place or premises shall mean the land and its appurtenances, structures and fixtures thereon, as such land is described or contained in a deed or instrument of conveyance and recorded in the official records of Alachua County. 
Public nuisance shall mean the conduct described in section 16-94 of this article. 
Recurring public nuisance shall mean a second or other additional occurrence of a public nuisance during the effective term of an order entered by the nuisance abatement board. 
(Ord. No. 001588, § 1, 2-11-02)  
Sec. 16-94. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
For the purpose of this article the following are declared to be public nuisances: 
Any structure or portion thereof, as defined in F.S. § 810.011, or any piece, parcel, tract, or plot of land or portion thereof, which has been used: 
(1)  On more than two occasions within a six-month period as the site of the unlawful sale, delivery, manufacture, or cultivation of any controlled substance. It shall be prima facie evidence that violations are occurring where an arrest for a violation of any of the provisions of F.S. Ch. 893, or any federal narcotics law has been made within 30 days, prior to the issuance of notice, in accordance with this article; 
(2)  On one occasion as the site of the unlawful possession of a controlled substance, where such possession constitutes a felony and that has been previously used on more than one occasion as the site of the unlawful sale, delivery, manufacture, or cultivation of any controlled substance; 
(3)  On more than two occasions within a six-month period as the site of a violation of F.S. Ch. 796, relating to prostitution and prostitution related activity. It shall be prima facie evidence that violations are occurring where an arrest for a violation of any of the unlawful activities set forth in F.S. Ch. 796, has been made within 30 days, prior to the issuance of notice, in accordance with this article; 
(4)  On more than two occasions within a six-month period by a criminal street gang for the purpose of conducting a pattern of criminal street gang activity as defined by F.S. § 874.03; and 
(5)  On more than two occasions within a six-month period as the site of a violation of F.S. § 812.019 relating to dealing in stolen property. 
(Ord. No. 001588, § 1, 2-11-02)  
Sec. 16-95. - Nuisance abatement board. 
(a)  The nuisance abatement board of the city is hereby created to serve as a quasi-judicial forum in which controversies over the existence of public nuisances may be resolved in the public interest with due process of law. Members of the board of adjustment shall serve ex officio as members of the nuisance abatement board. 
(b)  Each member of the board of adjustment shall be a member of the nuisance abatement board during his or her term of office. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  Organization; hearings; quorum; administrative staff support, board case files, documents; legal counsel. 
(1)  The members of the board shall elect a chair who shall be a voting member from among the members of the board. The member elected chair shall serve as chair for a term of one year and may be re-elected to serve an additional term or terms as chair. 
(2)  The presence of four members shall constitute a quorum of the board. The affirmative vote of at least four members shall be necessary to take action. 
(3)  The board is authorized to establish its own rules of procedure. 
(4)  The chair of the board may call hearings of the board. Hearings may also be called by written notice signed by at least four members of the board. The clerk of the board may also set hearing dates. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings and all hearings shall be open to the public. The city commission shall budget and appropriate necessary expenses that may be reasonably required by the board for the proper performance of its duties. 
(5)  The clerk of the board of adjustment shall serve as clerk of the nuisance abatement board. The clerk shall be the custodian of all board case files and documents pertaining thereto and shall have the authority to certify other documents issued by the board; the clerk shall adopt and use an official seal for this purpose; the clerk is also empowered to administer oaths to witnesses appearing before said board, and to issue subpoenas in the name of the board for service of process by any city police officer. 
(6)  The city attorney or designee shall serve as legal counsel to the board. The city manager or designee may present cases before the board or retain special counsel to present cases before the board. 
(Ord. No. 991015, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 001588, § 1, 2-11-02; Ord. No. 121103, § 1, 10-2-14) 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. V.  
Sec. 16-96. - Procedures. 
(a)  Written complaint; reports. Any police officer making an arrest or substantiating an incident or occurrence of any statutory violation(s) or violations of section(s) set forth herein or any public service aide substantiating an incident or occurrence of a breach of any section(s) set forth herein and pursuant to information or independent observation, shall submit a copy of every such report and/or offense incident report to the chief of police or designee who shall process all such reports and determine when the requisite number of occurrences or violation have taken place as set forth in section 16-94. 
(b)  Processing; review of case. 
(1)  In each case where such determination has been made in accordance with subsection (a) above, the case shall be processed through the office of the chief of police. 
(2)  The chief of police, when he or she believes that a public nuisance as defined in section 16-94 exists, shall request the clerk of the board to prepare a case folder for a complaint and request a hearing before the board. 
(c)  Hearings; hearing notices. 
(1)  The clerk of the nuisance abatement board shall schedule the hearings and issue hearing notices: (a) by sending written notice of the hearing to the owner and/or operator by certified mail, return receipt requested or (b) by hand delivering the written notice to the owner and/or operator of the premises at their last known address at least 15 calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing. If an attempt to serve notice upon the owner(s) and/or operators(s) by hand delivery or certified mail is unsuccessful, service of the notice of the hearing may be made by posting as provided in F.S. § 162.12(2)(b), such posting to take place not less than ten days before the scheduled hearing date. The owner and/or operator shall be responsible for providing notice, to any tenant, lessee or lessor, of the hearing. 
(2)  The notice of hearing shall include: 
a.  Statement of the time, place, and nature of the hearing; 
b.  Statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held; 
c.  Reference to the particular sections of the statutes and/or ordinances involved; and 
d.  Short and plain statement of facts summarizing the incidents complained. 
(Ord. No. 991015, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 001588, § 1, 2-11-02) 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. V.  
Sec. 16-97. - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)  The city manager, designee, or retained special counsel, shall present evidence before the board on behalf of the city. All parties shall have an opportunity to present evidence and argument on all issues involved, conduct cross examination, submit rebuttal evidence, and to be represented by legal counsel. 
(b)  The board may consider any evidence, including evidence of the general reputation of the place or premises. All testimony shall be given under oath and shall be recorded. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall govern the proceedings. Orders of the board shall be based upon competent and substantial evidence. 
(c)  The city shall have the burden of proving the existence of an unlawful public nuisance by the greater weight of the evidence. 
(d)  If the alleged violator(s) has been properly noticed in regard to the hearing before the board and fails to appear, the board may proceed with a hearing in absentia on the merits of the alleged violation. Any findings or orders resulting from such hearing are valid and binding upon the owner and/or operator. 
(Ord. No. 991015, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 001588, § 1, 2-11-02) 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. V.  
Sec. 16-98. - Orders. 
(a)  At the conclusion of the hearing and after considering all evidence presented at such hearing, the board is authorized to issue findings of fact based upon the evidence presented and made part of the record that a public nuisance does not exist or that an unlawful public nuisance does exist. 
(b)  Upon finding that an unlawful public nuisance does exist the board shall enter an order requiring the owner of such place or premises to adopt such procedure as may be appropriate under the circumstances to abate any such nuisance or it may enter an order immediately prohibiting: 
(1)  The maintaining of the nuisance; 
(2)  The operating or maintaining of the place or premises, including the closure of the place or premises, or any part thereof; or 
(3)  The conduct, operation, or maintenance of any business or activity which is conducive to the maintenance of such nuisance. Any city business tax receipt issued or renewed pursuant to the provisions of chapter 25 of this Code shall not operate as authority to conduct business during any period in which the conduct of any business or business activity is prohibited. 
(4)  The board may order any combination of subsections (b)(1), (2) or (3), but shall endeavor to use the least restrictive method believed necessary to abate the nuisance. 
(c)  An order entered pursuant to section 16-98 shall expire after one year or at such earlier time as stated in the order. The board may retain jurisdiction to modify the orders prior to the expiration of the orders, where just cause is found to exist. 
(d)  Before the board can order the closure of a place or premises or any part thereof, the board must make a factual finding that: 
(1)  The respondent did not abate the nuisance after being ordered by the nuisance abatement board to do so; 
(2)  The respondent did not substantially comply with an appropriate order issued by the nuisance abatement board; 
(3)  The respondent continued to maintain an ongoing nuisance; or 
(4)  Closure is the only effective option in eradicating the nuisance. Such finding is to be supported by a written order setting forth the factual bases for this determination. 
(e)  A nuisance shall be deemed to be or have been abated when the board finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the causes of the nuisance have been eliminated or suppressed to such a degree that an additional predicate violation as set forth in section 16-94 is not likely to reoccur. 
(Ord. No. 991015, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 001588, § 1, 2-11-02; Ord. No. 070022, § 5, 6-25-07) 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. V.  
Sec. 16-99. - Administrative fines; costs and liens. 
(a)  In addition to the actions provided in subsection 16-98(b) above, the board may assess fines not to exceed $250.00 per day, and for recurring public nuisances fines not to exceed $500.00 per day. The order assessing fines shall be recorded in the public records of the county and shall become a lien against the real property that is the subject of the order. The total fines imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $15,000.00. In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the nuisance abatement board shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the public nuisance; 
(2)  Any actions taken by the owner to correct the public nuisance; and 
(3)  Any previous public nuisance created, maintained or otherwise occurring in or on the premises. 
The city attorney is authorized to foreclose on the property subject to the lien and recovery of all costs, including reasonable attorney fees, associated with the recording of the order and foreclosure. No lien created pursuant to this section may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under Section 4, Article X of the State Constitution. 
(b)  In the event that the board declares a place or premises to be a nuisance and issues an order pursuant to section 16-98 above, the board shall assess against the owner of the place or premises the cost which the city has incurred in the preparation, investigation and presentation of the case, including reasonable attorney fees. These costs shall be due and payable ten days after the written order of the board has been filed. A certified copy of an order imposing costs may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists or, if the violator does not own the land, upon any other real or personal property, owned by the violator; and it may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state including levy against the personal property, but shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. After one year from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the city may foreclose or otherwise execute on the lien. Interest shall accrue on the unpaid costs at the legal rate of interest set forth in F.S. § 55.03, as may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  The board may recommend that the city file a complaint under F.S. § 60.05 seeking temporary and permanent injunctive relief against any nuisance described herein. 
(Ord. No. 001588, § 1, 2-11-02)  
Sec. 16-99.1. - Enforcement of orders. 
(a)  The city attorney is authorized to initiate proceedings in the circuit court for willful disobedience or failure to comply with any order of the board. 
(b)  The city attorney is authorized to initiate proceedings in any county, state or federal forum for the suspension or revocation of any permits, licenses, concessions or contracts held or awarded to the violator including contracts awarded under F.S. § 24.112 (lottery retailers) and including licenses for the sale of beverages issued under F.S. § 561.19, where the existence of such permits licenses, concessions or contracts is conducive to the maintenance of such nuisance. 
(c)  Orders of the nuisance abatement board issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted at the place, building, or premises where the public nuisance exists, existed or is occurring, in violation of the law and shall be sent by certified mail to the owner of record and/or operator of such place building, or premises within two business days of the posting. 
(Ord. No. 991015, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 001588, § 1, 2-11-02) 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. V.  
Sec. 16-99.2. - Appeals. 
An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final administrative order of the nuisance abatement board to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the nuisance abatement board. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the written order being appealed. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the nuisance abatement board orders the closing of a place or premises, or any part thereof, such order may be appealed to the city commission by the city manager or designee or the owners or operators of the premises within ten days of the rendition of the order by the nuisance abatement board prior to the order becoming a final administrative order of the nuisance abatement board. The appeal to the city commission shall not be a de-novo review but a review based upon the record of the board. The commission may hear oral argument upon majority vote of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 991015, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 001588, § 1, 2-11-02) 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. V.  
Sec. 16-99.3. - Article construction. 
All powers and rights conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to those conferred by any other general or special laws governing public nuisances and shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose of this article. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the City of Gainesville from abating such public nuisances by any other means. This section does not restrict the right of any person to proceed under F.S. § 60.05 against any public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 991015, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 001588, § 1, 2-11-02) 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. V.  
Chapter 17 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Conduct in cemeteries, § 7-20; noise, Ch. 15; nuisances, Ch. 16; adult performance establishment, escort services and escort licenses, § 14.5-52 et seq., prohibited activities in parks, § 18-20; panhandling, § 19-80 et seq.; police, Ch. 21; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - State misdemeanors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, within the limits of the city, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor, and the commission of such acts is hereby forbidden. 
(Code 1960, § 18-35)  
Sec. 17-2. - Advertising matter; affixing fliers to poles, waste containers, or other fixtures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to affix, or cause the affixing of, fliers or other advertising matter to and upon poles, waste containers, fixtures and ancillary utility equipment including but not limited to metering devices, transformers and traffic signal control devices, erected in the streets or rights-of-way of this city and used by any person, firm or corporation for CATV, telecommunications, traffic signalization and control, or electric light or power purposes. 
(Code 1960, § 18-1; Ord. No. 970127, § 1, 11-10-97; Ord. No. 000145, § 1, 9-25-00)  
Sec. 17-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980475, § 2, adopted May 8, 2000, repealed § 17-3 which pertained to automatic dialing telephonic alarm systems and derived from Code 1960, § 13A-1.  
Sec. 17-4. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Commission of the following acts shall constitute disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another so as to place him/her or any other person in reasonable fear of safety of his/her life, limb, or health; 
(2)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another with the result that his/her property, or that of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another for the purpose or with the intent to engage in conduct which is prohibited by the ordinances of the city or by state or federal law; 
(5)  Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal or fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(6)  Any person who shall accost or attempt to force his/her company upon any other person; 
(7)  Any person who shall use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes thereby outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(8)  Any person who shall by acts or threats of violence interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(9)  Any person, who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt or materially impair the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in a manner which threatens public safety or breach of the peace after being ordered by a police officer to move; 
(10)  Any person who shall obstruct any public street or sidewalk provided for public use by being or remaining in or on such street or sidewalk in such a manner as to block or impair movement of vehicles or pedestrians in a manner which threatens public safety or breach of the peace after being ordered by a police officer to move. 
(b)  Any person deemed guilty of disorderly conduct as above defined, and, being convicted thereof, shall be fined or imprisoned as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1960, § 18-10; Ord. No. 3638, § 1, 7-16-90; Ord. No. 020021, § 1, 7-8-02) 
State Law reference— Breach of the peace, F.S. § 877.03.  
Sec. 17-5. - Weapons, explosives, or destructive devices in city-owned and city-leased buildings. 
(a)  Prohibitions and exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry weapons, explosives, or destructive devices, as defined in F.S. § 790.001, either openly or concealed, into any building which is owned or leased by the city and which is operated for a government purpose. 
(b)  Posting of notice. The city manager is hereby directed and authorized to prepare, post and maintain proper and adequate notice signs at the entrances to those city-owned or -leased buildings which are subject to the provisions of the prohibition regarding the carrying of weapons, explosives or destructive devices into the buildings. The city manager is further directed and authorized to prepare, post and maintain proper and adequate notice signs at the entrances to those city-owned or -leased buildings which are subject to the prohibitions related to firearms contained in F.S. § 790.06(12). 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4078, § 1, 5-22-95; Ord. No. 110199, § 3, 9-15-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4078, § 1, adopted May 22, 1995, created § 17-5. Former § 17-5, pertained to vagrants and was repealed by Ord. No. 3894, § 1, adopted Aug. 2, 1993. The repealed provisions derived from § 18-37 of the 1960 Code.  
Sec. 17-6. - Synthetic drugs. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the City of Gainesville to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public by prohibiting the possession, sale, and manufacture of synthetic drugs as defined herein which, when consumed, mimic the effects of narcotics or controlled substances. Due to the dangerous medical and health effects the products prohibited by this article can have on the user of the product, each violation shall be considered a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Synthetic drug means synthetic chemical, synthetic chemical compound, synthetic cannabinoids, synthetic cathinones, and those substances meeting two or more of the factors described in subsection (c). 
(2)  Synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound refers to a chemical or chemical compound whose molecular composition is substantially similar to, or mimics any of those substances listed as controlled substances in F.S. Ch. 893, and whose intended use when introduced into the human body is to mimic the effects of a controlled substance. "Substantially similar" to a controlled substance is described as a "controlled substance analog" in F.S. § 893.0356. 
(3)  Synthetic cannabinoids means any herbal, vegetal or liquid material which has been soaked, sprayed, blended, combined or otherwise enhanced with a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound that enables the herbal, vegetal or liquid material, or the smoke or vapor emitted from its burning, or vaporization, to mimic or simulate the effects of a controlled substance, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), when inhaled, ingested, or otherwise introduced into the human body or otherwise affects the function of the human body. Any herbal, vegetal or liquid material described above shall be considered a synthetic cannabinoid regardless of the labeling posted on the packaging for the material and regardless of whether the labeling states that its contents are "not for human consumption," "not for smoking," or other similar statement. The fact that a herbal, vegetal or liquid material, packaged and advertised as a food additive, potpourri, herbal incense, etc., has been soaked, sprayed, blended, combined or otherwise enhanced with a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound which has no legitimate relation to the advertised use of the product may be considered in determining whether the product is considered a synthetic cannabinoid. This term specifically does not include any herbal, vegetal or liquid material containing synthetic chemicals or chemical compounds which: require a prescription; are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration; and are dispensed in accordance with Florida and federal law. 
(4)  Synthetic cathinones, also known as bath salts, means any granular, crystalline. powdered, pill, encapsulated, stick, or block material form of synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound that enables the material, or the smoke or vapor emitted from its burning or vaporization, to mimic or simulate the effects of a narcotic or other controlled substance when inhaled, ingested, injected or otherwise introduced into the human body or otherwise affects the function of the human body. Any material described above shall be considered a synthetic drug regardless of the labeling posted on the packaging for the material and regardless of whether the labeling states that its contents are "not for human consumption," "not for smoking," or contains some other similar statement. This term specifically does not include any legitimate, traditional materials known as bath salts or Epsom salts containing synthetic chemicals or chemical compounds which may: 
a.  Require a prescription; 
b.  Are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration; or 
c.  Are dispensed in accordance with Florida and federal law. 
(5)  Controlled substance means any substance defined or listed in Schedule I, II, III, IV or V of F.S. § 893.03, including any analogues, isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers, esters and ethers of such substances. 
(6)  Drug means an article or substance that is intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of humans as defined in F.S. § 499.003. 
(7)  Misbranded drug means a drug that violates F.S. § 499.007, including, but not limited, to drugs for which (a) the label is in any way false or misleading; (b) the label does not bear the name and place of business of the manufacturer, repackager, or distributor of the finished form of the drug; (c) the label does not bear adequate directions for use; or (d) the label does not bear adequate warnings against use. 
(8)  Drug paraphernalia means other than devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, any object used, intended for use of designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing illicit drugs or controlled substances into the human body. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court may consider any of the factors enumerated in F.S. § 893.146. 
(c)  Determination of a substance as a synthetic drug. The following factors, taken in the totality of the circumstances, may be considered in determining whether a product, substance, or other material, should be classified as a synthetic drug. For the purposes of enforcement of this article, the establishment of two or more of these factors shall constitute prima facie evidence that the product is a synthetic drug. 
(1)  Marketing. The substance is advertised to be a product for which it is rarely, if ever, suitable to be used for (such as, but not limited to, incense, potpourri, food additive, therapeutic bath crystals, plant food, insect repellant, communication device screen cleaner, jewelry cleaner, glass cleaner). 
(2)  Sales location. Products, whether displayed or not, but offered or sold in, or through, businesses such as liquor stores, smoke shops, and gas/convenience stores where such products are not typically sold. 
(3)  Labels and packaging. 
a.  Products marketed as common non-consumable products which contain warnings not normally found on such products. The warnings may be similar, but not limited to, "not for human consumption", "not for purchase by minors"; or 
b.  Products containing notices on the package not normally found on similar products such as, but not limited to, "does not contain any chemical compounds prohibited by state law," "contains no prohibited chemicals," "product is in accordance with state and federal laws," "product is in compliance with new Florida Law HB 1175," "does not contain AM2201 or any DEA banned substance," "legal herbal substance," "aromatherapy only," "legal in 50 States," "100% compliant guaranteed". 
c.  Products whose package labeling or design suggests the user will achieve a "high", euphoria, relaxation, mood enhancement, or that the product has other drug-like effects on the body or otherwise affects the function of the human body. 
d.  Products using brand names and packaging designed to make the product appear similar to illicit street drugs or commonly used street slang for illicit drugs or their effects or employs symbols, terms or effects of illegal drugs, such as marijuana leaf, blunts, red eyes or crossed-out eyes. 
e.  Packages are misleading, deceptive or misbranded, including but not limited to: 
i.  The label is in any way false or misleading; 
ii.  The label does not bear the name and place of business of the manufacturer, repackager, or distributor of the finished form of the drug; 
iii.  The label does not bear adequate directions for use; or 
iv.  The label does not bear adequate warnings against use and/or the product contains contradictory warnings/directions for the product's use, which is not consistent for the type of product advertised. (Example: "For fragrance or aromatherapy only" which requires human inhalation and/or "blueberry flavor" upon packages that also read "not for human consumption" or similar statements.) 
(4)  Price. The price of the product is incongruent with other similar products marketed for legitimate use, such as incense, potpourri, food additive, therapeutic bath crystals, plant food, insect repellant, communication device screen cleaner, jewelry cleaner, glass cleaner. 
(5)  Similarity to illicit street drugs. Products designed to make the substance appear similar to illicit street drugs (such as, but not limited to, a white powder made to resemble, in color and texture, cocaine, or dried vegetal material resembling marijuana). 
(6)  Ingredients. A product which is, or has been enhanced with, a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound that has no legitimate relation to the advertised use of the product but mimics the effects of a controlled substance when the product, or the smoke or vapor from the burned or vaporized product, is introduced into the human body. 
(7)  Verbal or written representations. Verbal or written representations made at the place of sale or display regarding the purpose, methods, use, or effect of the product on the human body. 
(8)  Co-sale. Offers or suggestions to purchase products such as cigars, pipes, cigarette papers or e-cigarettes that are used with synthetic drugs and demonstrate intent for human consumption. 
(9)  Subterfuge. Use of passwords, signs, vouching or other means to vet purchasers and hiding product from general view or offsite to evade law enforcement as to the product's presence. 
(d)  Prohibited acts. The following are prohibited within the city: 
(1)  The possession with intent to sell, sale, distribution, production, or manufacture of synthetic drugs. 
(2)  The display for sale, marketing, advertisement, or other offer for sale or trade of synthetic drugs in retail stores. 
(3)  Allowing or permitting any person under the age of 18 to enter or remain on the premises of any place of business selling or displaying drug paraphernalia, unless the minor person is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. Such premises must prominently display a sign posted at the entrance, stating that drug paraphernalia is located within the premises, and prohibiting persons under 18 from entering the establishment without their parent or guardian. 
(e)  Laboratory analysis. The city may utilize laboratory analysis or expert testimony (chemistry and/or pharmacology) to test suspected synthetic drugs. Any laboratory analysis of suspected synthetic drug shall be conducted by an ISO state certified laboratory, competent to provide expert testimony in a court of law as to the chemical contents of the product. 
(f)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Primary responsibility for the enforcement of this article shall be with any law enforcement officer. Any products found to be synthetic drugs possessed in violation of this section may be seized and held by the city as evidence to be used in any further proceeding. 
(2)  This article may be enforced administratively as a code violation pursuant to section 2-339 of this Code. This article is administratively enforceable against any person or legal entity. For the purposes of administrative enforcement, law enforcement officers are specifically authorized and designated to enforce this article within the city limits to the extent such authorization/designation is required by law. 
(3)  Each violation shall be considered a separate offense, which can be prosecuted separately. For the purposes of administrative enforcement of this article, each package containing a synthetic drug or misbranded drug shall be considered a separate code violation. In any order finding a violation of this article, the violator shall be ordered to pay, in addition to the penalty, for any laboratory analysis and expert testimony costs incurred by the city in the enforcement of this article. 
(4)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from taking such other action in law or equity as may be necessary to remedy any violation of, or refusal to comply with, any part of this article including but not limited to: 
(i)  Pursuit of injunctive and/or declaratory relief in a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(ii)  Initiating an action to recover any and all damages that may result from a violation of, or a refusal to comply with, any part of this section; or 
(iii)  Utilizing any other action or enforcement method allowable by law. 
(Ord. No. 130769 , § 1, 3-5-15) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of § 17-6 by Ord. No. 130769 , said section was repealed by Ord. No. 110199, § 4, adopted Sept. 15, 2011. The former § 17-6 pertained to shooting firearms within the city and permits therefor, and derived from § 18-38 of the 1960 Code.  
Sec. 17-7. - Items designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons as principal, clerk, agent or servant to sell any items, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs as defined by applicable state statutes without obtaining a license therefor. The license shall be in addition to any or all other licenses held by applicant. 
(b)  License application. Application to sell any item, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs shall be accompanied by affidavits by applicant and each and every employee authorized to sell the items that the person has never been convicted of a drug-related offense. 
(c)  Sale to minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful to sell or give items as described in subsection (a) in any form to any male or female child under 19 years of age. 
(d)  Records. Every licensee must keep a record of every item, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs which is sold and this record shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at any time during the hours of business. The record shall contain the name and address of the purchaser, the name and quantity of the product, the date and time of sale and the licensee or agent of the licensee's signature. The records shall be retained for not less than two years. 
(e)  Compliance with police department regulations required. The applicant shall comply with all applicable regulations of the police department. 
(Code 1960, § 16-12)  
Sec. 17-8. - Urinating or defecating. 
(a)  Prohibitions and exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in, or in view of, a public place other than one set aside and designated for that particular purpose. 
(b)  Public place defined. Any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed or could be viewed by others is a public place. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. 
(1)  Urinating. The provisions of this section, for urinating in public, may be enforced by civil citation as provided in Chapter 2, Division 6 of this Code, or as otherwise provided in section 1-9 of this Code. Any person not in compliance with this section shall be subject to the penalties designated in section 1-9 or section 2-339. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense, which can be prosecuted separately. 
(2)  Defecating. The provisions of this section, for defecating in public, shall be enforced as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(d)  Findings and intent. 
(1)  It is the intent of this section to protect and preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Gainesville by prohibiting urination and defecation in undesignated, public places as specified herein. 
(2)  Urinating or defecating in an undesignated, public place, as prohibited by this section, presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, contributing to such ill effects as vandalism, disease transmission, litter, trespassing, the destruction of public and private property, and other serious conditions. Further, the act of urinating or defecating in public as prohibited by this section is irreparable or irreversible. 
(3)  A code enforcement officer shall not be required to provide a reasonable time period to correct a violation of this section prior to issuing a citation to a person that the code enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe has violated this section. 
(Ord. No. 020480, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 060275, § 1, 3-26-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 020480, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2002, created § 17-8 pertaining to urinating or defecating. Formerly § 17-8 pertained to drunkenness and was repealed by Ord. No. 950187, § 1, adopted June 26, 1995. The repealed provisions derived from Code 1960, § 18-11.  
Sec. 17-9. - Unlawful to possess bicycles from which identification has been removed. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly buy, sell, receive, dispose of, conceal or have in his/her possession any bicycle the main or primary frame of which does not bear a clearly distinguishable manufacturer's serial number or other distinguishing alpha numeric, including a number or alpha numeric on a permanently affixed label. It is unlawful for any person to remove, deface, cover, alter or destroy such identifying number or marks for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the identity of the bicycle. 
(b)  The city manager or designee is hereby authorized to permanently affix special identification numbers to bicycles which come into the custody of or are brought to the city which have altered or obliterated identifying numbers. The city manager or designee shall be responsible for the recording of and the retrieval of the special identification numbers and the information related to the person and bicycle to which the number is issued. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, bicycles shall mean every vehicle propelled solely by human power, upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or two rear wheels. The term does not include such a vehicle with a seat height of no more than 25 inches from the ground when the seat is adjusted to its highest position or a scooter or similar device. 
(Code 1960, § 18-19) 
Cross reference— Bicycles generally, § 26-186 et seq.  
Sec. 17-10. - Trespass. 
(a)  Legislative findings. The city commission hereby finds: 
(1)  The Constitution and the laws of the United States guarantee to all persons the right to be secure in their homes and protects their right to possess property and their right to privacy. 
(2)  The Constitution and the laws of the state guarantee to all persons the right to possess and protect property, the right to be secure in their homes and their right to privacy. 
(3)  Unauthorized entry on the property of another deprives the owner thereof of his/her constitutional rights of property, security and privacy. 
(4)  Many situations exist in the city where real estate is being used without proper authorization from the owner thereof. 
(5)  Numerous situations exist in the city where the unauthorized entry of such real estate is for the purpose of violating the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(6)  These situations often result in the disturbance of the public peace, the creating of a public nuisance and an imminent threat to the public health, welfare, safety and morals of the community. 
(7)  Many of these parcels of real estate in the city are owned by absentee owners who have not posted their property, and because of their lack of proximity to the above described problems, do not specifically prohibit the nuisances and dangers to the public health, welfare, safety and morals hereinabove mentioned. 
(8)  These absentee owners should be responsible for the dangers and nuisances created on their properties and should be required to abate the same. 
(b)  Trespassing defined. A person unlawfully trespasses if he/she willfully enters any structure or conveyance of another, or if he/she willfully enters upon any real estate of another, without being specifically authorized, licensed or invited. The invitation or authorization can be either express or implied. 
(c)  Trespass creating a public nuisance: 
(1)  Whoever shall erect, establish, continue or maintain, own or lease any place where any law of the state or ordinance of the city is violated shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance. All such places shall be abated and persons enjoined as provided in F.S. § 60.05(1) or 60.06. 
(2)  In addition to the abatement and enjoining of the public nuisance under this section, a court may, in its discretion, require that the owner of the property post the property in accordance with F.S. § 810.011. 
(Code 1960, § 18-24) 
State Law reference— Burglary and trespass, F.S. Ch. 810.  
Sec. 17-11. - Striking or interfering with law enforcement animals. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings indicated: 
In the performance of its duties means a law enforcement animal is: 
(1)  On duty for the city police department; 
(2)  In an off-duty capacity, including working at an approved off duty/extra duty event for a contracted entity for law enforcement services; or 
(3)  At an approved non-pay volunteer event. 
Interfere with means any activity intended to distract the law enforcement animal from or hinder it in the performance of its duties, including but not limited to throwing or waving objects at, chasing, flashing laser pointer beams, calling, blocking or any similar activity. 
Law enforcement animal means an animal, including but not limited to a dog or horse, that is owned or leased by the city police department for the principal purpose of aiding in: 
(1)  The detection of criminal activity; 
(2)  The enforcement of laws; 
(3)  The apprehension of offenders; or 
(4)  Traffic or crowd control or such other activities directed by the chief of police. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally strike or interfere with a law enforcement animal while said law enforcement animal is in the performance of its duties. 
(c)  It shall be a defense to subsection (b) if the accused person was engaged in a training activity or discipline, for the law enforcement animal, and acted as an employee or agent of the city police department. 
(d)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a municipal ordinance violation and shall be subject to fine or imprisonment as provided by section 1-9 of this Code. 
(e)  In addition to any other penalties prescribed herein, the court may order a person convicted of striking or interfering with a law enforcement animal for reimbursement of veterinary bills, costs of retraining and temporary loss of use and replacement costs if the law enforcement animal is killed, disabled or otherwise unable to perform its duties as a result of striking or interference. 
(Ord. No. 000054, § 1, 7-24-00) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of § 17-11 by Ord. No. 000054, former § 17-11, which pertained to loitering for the purpose of possessing or selling a controlled substance, was repealed by Ord. No. 3894, § 2, adopted Aug. 2, 1993. Section 17-11 was derived from Ord. No. 3742, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 1991.  
Sec. 17-11.1. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise provided by this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1960, § 18-43; Ord. No. 3742, § 1, 10-7-91) 
Editor's note— At the editor's discretion, former § 17-30, pertaining to violations; penalty, has been redesignated as § 17-11.1.  
ARTICLE II. - NUDITY IN PUBLIC PLACES 
 
Sec. 17-12. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to protect and preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Gainesville by prohibiting a person from intentionally or recklessly appearing or being nude, or causing another person to appear or be nude, in a public place and in other places which may, reasonably be expected to be observed by the public within the city limits of Gainesville except: 
(a)  When such person appears nude in a place provided or set apart for nudity provided 
(1)  Such person is nude for the sole purpose of performing the legal function(s) that is customarily intended to be performed within such place provided or set apart for nudity; and 
(2)  Such person is not nude for the purpose of obtaining money or other financial gain for such person or for another person or entity; or 
(b)  When the conduct of being nude cannot legally be prohibited by this article 
(1)  Because it constitutes a part of a bona fide live communication, demonstration or performance by such person wherein such nudity is expressive conduct incidental to and necessary for the conveyance or communication of a genuine message or public expression and is not a guise or pretense utilized to exploit nudity for profit or commercial gain (see for instance Board of County Commissioners v. Dexterhouse, 348 So.2d 916 (Fla. 2nd DCA 1977)) and as such is protected by the United States or Florida Constitution; or 
(2)  Because it is otherwise protected by the United States or Florida Constitution. 
It is the city's further intention to accomplish those intents and purposes expressed by the city in the provisions of this article, each of which are incorporated by reference into this section. 
(Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 17-13. - Definitions. 
Terms, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages shall have the meaning as described in section 4-1 of this code. 
(b)  Breast: A portion of the human female mammary gland (commonly referred to as the female breast) including the nipple and the areola (the darker colored area of the breast, surrounding the nipple) and an outside area of such gland wherein such outside area is (i) reasonably compact and contiguous to the areola and (ii) contains at least the nipple and the areola and one-fourth of the outside surface area of such gland. 
(c)  Entity: Any proprietorship, partnership, corporations, association, business trust, joint venture, joint-stock company or other for-profit and/or not-for-profit organization. 
(d)  Establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages: Any business, commercial or other establishment (whether for profit or not for profit and whether open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by cover charge or membership requirement) including those licensed by the state for sale and/or service of alcoholic beverages, and any bottle club; hotel; motel; restaurant; night club, country club; adult cabaret; meeting facility utilized by any religious, social, fraternal or similar organization; business, commercial or other establishment; where a product or article is sold, dispensed, served or provided with the knowledge, actual or implied, that the same will be or is intended to be mixed, combined with or drunk in connection or combination with an alcoholic beverage on the premises or curtilage of said business, commercial or other establishment; or business, commercial or other establishment where the consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted. Premises, or portions thereof such as hotel rooms, used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed to be an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  Nude: Any person insufficiently clothed in any manner so that any of the following body parts are not entirely covered with a fully opaque covering: 
(1)  The male or female genitals; or 
(2)  The male or female pubic area; or 
(3)  The female breast (see the last sentence in this subsection (f) [e]); or 
(4)  The anus and natal cleavage, with material at least ¾? wide along its entire length. Attire which is sufficient to comply with this requirement includes, but is not limited to, thongs and T-backs. Attire which is insufficient to comply with this requirement includes, but is not limited to, G-Strings. 
Body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex whether wet or dried, and similar substances shall not be considered opaque covering. Each female person may determine which one-fourth of her breast surface area (see definition of breast) contiguous to and containing the nipple and the areola is to be covered. 
(f)  Person: Any live human being aged ten (10) years of age or older. 
(g)  Place provided or set apart for nudity: Shall mean enclosed single-sex public restrooms, enclosed single-sex functional shower, locker and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations, doctor's offices, portions of hospitals, and similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home and the sphere of privacy constitutionally protected therein. This term shall not be deemed to include places where a person's conduct of being nude is used for his or her profit or where being nude is used for the promotion of business or is otherwise commercially exploited. 
(h)  Public place: Any location frequented by the public or where the public is present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, forests, lakes, business and commercial establishments (whether for profit or not for profit and whether open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership requirement), bottle clubs, hotels, motels, restaurants, night clubs, country clubs, adult cabarets, and meeting facilities utilized by any religious, social, fraternal or similar organization. Premises, or portions thereof such as hotel rooms, used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed to be a public place. 
(Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 17-14. - Legislative findings. 
In addition and supplemental to the findings and determinations contained in the "Whereas" provisions of Ordinance No. 0-95-28, which are incorporated by reference into this section, it is hereby found by the city, acting in its legislative capacity for the purpose of regulating the conduct of appearing nude in public places and for the purpose of regulating nudity and other conduct in establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages, that, considering what has happened in other communities, the acts prohibited in section 17-15 encourage or create the potential for the conduct of prostitution, attempted rape, rapes, and assault in and around establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages; that actual and simulated nudity and sexual conduct, coupled with the consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places, begets and has the potential for begetting unhealthy and unlawful behavior; that sexual, lewd, lascivious, and salacious conduct among patrons and employees within establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages results in violation of law and creates dangers to the health, safety, and welfare of the public and those who engage in such conduct; and, it is the intent of section 17-15 of this article to specifically prohibit nudity, gross sexuality and the simulation thereof in establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 17-15. - Nudity, sexual conduct prohibited in establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
The following prohibitions and criteria shall apply within existing and/or newly created establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages and the curtilages thereof: 
(a)  No person shall knowingly, intentionally or recklessly appear, or cause another person to appear, nude, or, expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or any simulation thereof. 
(b)  No female person shall knowingly, intentionally or recklessly expose, or cause another female person to expose, her breasts or any simulation thereof to public view other than as permitted by Florida law (i.e. breastfeeding). 
(c)  No person or entity maintaining, owning, or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall encourage, allow or permit any person to appear nude or to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or simulation thereof. 
(d)  No person or entity maintaining, owning, or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall encourage, allow or permit any female person to expose her breasts or any simulation thereof to public view other than as permitted by Florida law. 
(e)  The prohibitions of this section 17-15 shall not apply when a person appears nude in a place provided or set apart for nudity provided 
(1)  Such person is nude for the sole purpose of performing the legal function(s) that is customarily intended to be performed within such place provided or set apart for nudity; and 
(2)  Such person is not nude for the purpose of obtaining money or other financial gain for such person or for another person or entity. 
(f)  Each female person may determine which one-fourth of her breast surface area (see definition of breast) contiguous to and containing the areola is to be covered. 
(g)  This section 17-15 shall not be deemed to address photographs, movies, video presentations, or other non live performances. 
(Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 17-16. - Nudity prohibited in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly appear, or cause another person to appear, nude in a public place or in any other place which is readily visible to the public, except as provided in section 17-17. It shall also be unlawful for any person or entity maintaining, owning, or operating any public place establishment to encourage, suffer or allow any person to appear nude in such public place, except as provided in section 17-17. 
(Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 17-17. - Exemptions. 
The prohibitions of section 17-16 of this article shall not apply: 
(a)  When a person appears nude in a place provided or set apart for nudity provided 
(1)  Such person is nude for the sole purpose of performing the legal function(s) that is customarily intended to be performed within such place provided or set apart for nudity; and 
(2)  Such person is not nude for the purpose of obtaining money or other financial gain for such person or for another person or entity; or 
(b)  When the conduct of being nude cannot legally be prohibited by this article 
(1)  Because it constitutes a part of a bona fide live communication, demonstration or performance by a person wherein such nudity is expressive conduct incidental to and necessary for the conveyance or communication of a genuine message or public expression and the performance, communication or demonstration is not a mere guise or pretense utilized to exploit the conduct of being nude for profit or commercial gain (see for instance Board of County Commissioners v. Dexterhouse, 348 So.2d 916 (Fla. 2nd DCA 1977)) and as such is protected by the United States or Florida Constitution; or 
(2)  Because it is otherwise protected by the United States or Florida Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 17-18. - Enforcement and penalties. 
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-9. Each incident or separate occurrence of an act that violates this article shall be deemed a separate offense. In lieu of the above procedure, the city may enforce this article in the manner provided by the city's Code of Ordinances or by any other means authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 17-19. - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to the procedures provided herein, entities that are not in conformity with these requirements shall be subject to appropriate civil action in the court of appropriate jurisdiction for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 5-22-95)  
Sec. 17-20. - Territory embraced. 
All territory within the legal boundaries of the City of Gainesville, as they may be changed from time to time, shall be embraced by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 5-22-95)  
Secs. 17-21—17-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS 
 
Sec. 17-30. - Short title. 
This article shall be referred to as the "City of Gainesville Sexual Offender and Sexual Predator Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 050115, § 1, 11-28-05)  
Sec. 17-31. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence, and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 050115, § 1, 11-28-05)  
Sec. 17-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Day care center means a day care center as defined in section 30-23. 
Park shall refer to the following parks: 
(1)  Alfred A. Ring Park 
(2)  Anne Park 
(3)  Citizen's Park/Martin Luther King, Jr. Recreation Complex 
(4)  Cofrin Nature Park 
(5)  Fred Cone Park/Eastside Center 
(6)  Green Acres Park 
(7)  Greentree Park 
(8)  John Mahon Nature Park 
(9)  Kiwanis Challenge Park 
(10)  N.E. 31st Avenue Park 
(11)  Clarence R. Kelly Community Center and Park 
(12)  Northeast Park 
(13)  Northside Park 
(14)  Oak Hill Park 
(15)  Phoenix Neighborhood Playground 
(16)  Porter's Community Center 
(17)  Possum Creek Park 
(18)  Roper Park 
(19)  Rosa B. Williams/Union Academy Recreation Complex 
(20)  San Felasco Park 
(21)  Smokey Bear Park 
(22)  Springhill Park 
(23)  Springtree Park 
(24)  T.B. McPherson Recreation Complex 
(25)  Tumblin Creek Park 
(26)  CF Franklin Memorial Park 
(27)  SE 8th and 9th Tot Lot 
(28)  Pleasant Park 
(29)  Tot Lot No. 4 
(30)  Tot Lot No. 5 (Barbara Higgins Park) 
(31)  Hidden Gem Park 
(32)  Mother Lucille Perkins Tot Lot 
(33)  Dolliree Bowens Tot Lot 
(34)  Albert "Ray" Massey Westside Park 
(35)  Woodlawn Park 
Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more consecutive days. 
Property owner means the owner of record of the property and, for purposes of this article, shall include any person, business or corporation with authority to let or rent the premises. 
School means a public or private elementary school, middle school, or secondary school. 
Temporary residence means a place where the person abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent address. 
(Ord. No. 050115, § 1, 11-28-05; Ord. No. 060087, § 1, 7-10-06; Ord. No. 060428, § 1, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 060608, § 1, 11-13-06; Ord. No. 100968, § 1, 7-7-11)  
Sec. 17-33. - Sexual offender and sexual predator residence prohibitions; penalties; exception. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person who has been found guilty of, or plead guilty, or no contest to, a violation of F.S. §§ 794.011, 800.04, 827.071 or 847.0145, or any equivalent violation from another jurisdiction that would be a felony if committed in this state, in which the victim of the offense was less than 16 years of age regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,500 feet of any school, day care center, or park. 
(b)  For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outer property line of a school, day care center, or park. 
(c)  Exceptions. A person who maintains a permanent or temporary residence within 2,500 feet of any school, day care center, or park, does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established continuous permanent residence prior to November 28, 2005. 
(2)  The school or day care center located within 2,500 feet of the person's permanent residence was first licensed to operate after the person established the continuous permanent residence. 
(3)  The person was a minor when the specified offense was committed and was not convicted as an adult for that offense. 
(4)  The person is a minor. 
Any person who qualifies for an exception pursuant to subsections (c)(1) or (2) above, becomes fully subject to this article upon any change of address. 
(d)  Penalties. A person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 050115, § 1, 11-28-05)  
Sec. 17-34. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to certain sexual offenders and sexual predators; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a property owner to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to section 17-33, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within 2,500 feet of any school, day care center, or park, unless the property owner can establish that, prior to rental or lease, he or she used reasonable due diligence and was unable to determine that the prospective tenant was subject to the restrictions described in section 17-33. 
(b)  A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this section and shall subject the property owner to civil citation as provided in section 2-339 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 050115, § 1, 11-28-05)  
Sec. 17-35. - Sexual offender notice of responsibilities; failure to execute. 
A sexual offender or sexual predator who resides in the city shall, upon presentment by a law enforcement officer, sign an acknowledgement that he/she has received and understands the responsibilities of a sexual offender or sexual predator as those responsibilities are stated on the form. If the sexual offender or sexual predator refuses to sign the acknowledgement, the officer presenting such document shall document that the form was given to the sexual offender or sexual predator and note the refusal to sign the acknowledgement. 
(Ord. No. 050115, § 1, 11-28-05)  
ARTICLE IV. - CONVERSION THERAPY 
 
Sec. 17-36. - Intent. 
The intent of this article is to protect the physical and psychological well-being of minors, including but not limited to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and/or questioning youth, from exposure to the serious harms and risks caused by conversion therapy or reparative therapy by licensed providers. These provisions are exercises of police power of the city for the public safety, health, and welfare; and its provisions shall be liberally construed to accomplish that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 160200 , § 1, 4-5-18)  
Sec. 17-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Conversion therapy or reparative therapy means, interchangeably, any counseling, practice or treatment performed with the goal of changing an individual's sexual orientation or gender identity, including, but not limited to, efforts to change behaviors, gender identity, or gender expression, or to eliminate or reduce sexual or romantic attractions or feelings toward individuals of the same gender or sex. Conversion therapy does not include counseling that provides support and assistance to a person undergoing gender transition or counseling that provides acceptance, support, and understanding of a person or facilitates a person's coping, social support, and development, including sexual orientation-neutral interventions to prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices, as long as such counseling does not seek to change sexual orientation or gender identity. 
Minor means any person less than 18 years of age. 
Provider means any person who is licensed by the State of Florida to provide professional counseling, or who performs counseling as part of his or her professional training under F.S. Chs. 456, 458, 459, 490 or 491, as such chapters may be amended, including but not limited to, medical practitioners, osteopathic practitioners, psychologists, psychotherapists, social workers, marriage and family therapists, and licensed counselors. A provider does not include members of the clergy who are acting in their roles as clergy or pastoral counselors and providing religious counseling to congregants, as long as they do not hold themselves out as operating pursuant to a license issued under any of the aforementioned Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 160200 , § 1, 4-5-18)  
Sec. 17-38. - Conversion therapy prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any provider to practice conversion therapy on a minor. 
(Ord. No. 160200 , § 1, 4-5-18)  
Sec. 17-39. - Enforcement; penalties, injunctive relief. 
The city may enforce this article by civil citation in accordance with chapter 2, division 6. In addition, persons who are not in conformity with these requirements shall be subject to appropriate civil action in the court of appropriate jurisdiction for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 160200 , § 1, 4-5-18)  
Chapter 18 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 23; land development code, Ch. 30; subdivisions, § 30-180 et seq. 
State Law reference— Recreation, F.S. Ch. 418. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Director of public recreation. 
(a)  Appointment; qualifications; duties. The city manager shall have the authority to employ a director of public recreation who shall be trained and properly qualified for the work and who shall conduct and supervise public playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers and other recreation facilities and activities on any of the properties owned or controlled by the city, or on other properties with the consent of the owners and authorities in control thereof. He/she shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activities that will employ the leisure time of the people in a constructive and wholesome manner. 
(b)  Reports. The director of public recreation shall make reports to the city manager as may be requested from time to time. 
(Code 1960, § 2-28) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-141 et seq.  
Sec. 18-2. - Credit for park and open space dedication; transferable development rights. 
(a)  Generally. If the owner of any lands within the city, which are shown on the land use element of the city's adopted comprehensive plan as recreation/open space/buffers or which are shown on the land use element for residential use, dedicates the land to the city for public use as parks and open spaces, and if the dedication is accepted by the city commission, the owner shall receive, at his/her option, either a credit for open space dedication or transferable development rights, as provided in this section; provided that, no such credit may be obtained for dedication of any land which has been used as required open space for developed property or which has been included on any site plan, plat, or planned development as a buffer area through a designation as open space, park, or undeveloped property. 
(b)  Credit for open space dedication: 
(1)  Credit for open space dedication shall reflect the number of acres dedicated, the property owner's name, a legal description of the land which was dedicated and the planning district (as detailed in the land use element of the comprehensive plan) in which the land is located. 
(2)  Such credits may be used, on an acre for acre basis, to satisfy the requirement for any mandatory dedication of parks or open space which may hereafter be imposed by the city as a condition of the subdivision of lands, on the following basis: 
a.  A credit will only be usable to fulfill mandatory dedication requirements in the same planning district in which the dedicated land for which the credit was issued is located. 
b.  A credit will satisfy a mandatory dedication requirement only if it was issued for land of sufficient type and quality to meet the provisions of the mandatory dedication requirement. 
(c)  Transferable development rights: 
(1)  Transferable development rights shall reflect the name of the owner of the dedicated land and the number of dwelling units which could have been built thereon pursuant to the limitations of the land use element of the comprehensive plan, up to a maximum of ten units per acre. For land shown on the land use element as recreation/open space/buffers, the credit shall be one dwelling unit per acre. 
(2)  Such transferable rights may be used to increase the permissible density of development of lands shown on the land use element for multifamily (H), multifamily (M), or multifamily (L) residential use, on the following basis: 
a.  The maximum permissible density increase for a particular property, in terms of dwelling units per acre, is limited to 35 percent of the maximum density shown for the property on the land use element or provided by the zoning category on the property, whichever is lower. 
b.  Each additional unit per acre, or fraction thereof, obtained through the use of transferable development rights shall increase the applicable maximum permissible floor area ratio (FAR) provided in the land use element or the zoning category on the property, whichever is lower, by a factor of .032. 
(d)  Transferability. A record of all open space credits and development rights acquired pursuant to this section, and transfers of same, shall be maintained by the director of the department of planning and development services or his/her designee. The open space credits and development rights are transferable, upon the execution by the owner thereof of a written assignment and the filing of the assignment with the director of the department of planning and development services or his/her designee. When open space credits or development rights are fully used, they shall be canceled by the director or designee. When partially used, they shall be canceled and new open space credit or development rights, for the unused balance, shall be issued to the owner thereof. 
(Code 1960, § 2-98) 
Cross reference— Land development code, Ch. 30.  
Sec. 18-3. - Violations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-9.  
Secs. 18-4—18-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARK REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-16. - Definition of "parks." 
"Parks" are those areas listed in this article and any other areas officially designated by the city commission as a park and posted as such. 
(Code 1960, § 18-32.1(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-17. - Authority of city manager to promulgate rules and regulations. 
The city manager is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations for the purpose of regulating the use of public buildings, parks and playgrounds, limiting the hours during which the same shall be open to the public, and providing standards of conduct for persons while using such buildings, parks and playgrounds. The city manager may establish fees for parks, recreation and cultural affairs facilities, and events if those fees are not otherwise established in Appendix A, Schedule of Fees, Rates and Charges. The city manager may establish discounted fees for early registration for youth programs. 
(Code 1960, § 2-29(a); Ord. No. 130196, § 3, 9-19-13; Ord. No. 130912, § 2, 8-21-14)  
Sec. 18-18. - Listing of city parks. 
The following are city parks to which closing hours set forth in section 18-19 apply: 
(a)  Active/recreational etc.: 
(1)  Albert "Ray" Massey Westside Park. 
(2)  Anne Park. 
(3)  Cedar Grove Park. 
(4)  CF Franklin Memorial Park. 
(5)  Citizen's Park/Martin Luther King, Jr. Recreation Complex. 
(6)  Clarence R. Kelly Community Center and Park. 
(7)  Dolliree Bowens Tot Lot. 
(8)  Fred Cone Park/Eastside Center. 
(9)  Green Acres Park. 
(10)  Greentree Park. 
(11)  Hidden Gem Park. 
(12)  Kiwanis Challenge Park. 
(13)  Kiwanis/Girl Scout Park. 
(14)  Lincoln Park. 
(15)  Mother Lucille Perkins Tot Lot. 
(16)  NE 31st Avenue Park. 
(17)  Northeast Park. 
(18)  Northside Park. 
(19)  Oak Hill Park. 
(20)  Phoenix Neighborhood Playground. 
(21)  Pleasant Park. 
(22)  Porter's Community Center. 
(23)  Possum Creek Park. 
(24)  Roper Park. 
(25)  Rosa B. Williams/Union Academy Recreation Complex. 
(26)  SE 8th and 9th Tot Lot. 
(27)  Seminary Tot Lot. 
(28)  Smokey Bear Park. 
(29)  T.B. McPherson Recreation Complex. 
(30)  Tumblin Creek Park. 
(31)  Tot Lot No. 4. 
(32)  Tot Lot No. 5 (Barbara Higgins Park). 
(33)  Wacahoota Archery Range and Park. 
(b)  Nature parks, centers and conservation areas: 
(1)  29th Road Nature Park. 
(2)  Alfred A. Ring Park. 
(3)  Bivens Arm Nature Park. 
(4)  Boulware Springs Nature Park. 
(5)  Broken Arrow Bluff Nature Park. 
(6)  Clear Lake Nature Park. 
(7)  Cofrin Nature Park. 
(8)  Colclough Pond Nature Park. 
(9)  Duval Park. 
(10)  Flatwoods Nature Park. 
(11)  Forest Nature Park. 
(12)  Gum Root Park. 
(13)  Hogtown Creek Headwaters Nature Park. 
(14)  John Mahon Nature Park. 
(15)  Loblolly Woods Nature Park (Hogtown Creek Greenway). 
(16)  Morningside Nature Center. 
(17)  Palm Point Nature Park. 
(18)  San Felasco Park. 
(19)  Split Conservation Area. 
(20)  Springtree Park. 
(21)  Sugarfoot Prairie Conservation Area. 
(22)  Terwilliger Pond Conservation Area. 
(c)  Other: 
(1)  Boulware Springs Historic Water Works. 
(2)  City Hall Plaza. 
(3)  City of Gainesville/Alachua Senior Recreation Center. 
(4)  Depot Park. 
(5)  Downtown Community Plaza. 
(6)  Ironwood Golf Course. 
(7)  Loblolly Environmental Facility. 
(8)  Lynch Park. 
(9)  Springhill Park. 
(10)  SW 5th Avenue Basin. 
(11)  Sweetwater Park. 
(12)  Thelma A. Blotin Senior Activity Center. 
(13)  Thomas Center and Grounds and Gardens. 
(14)  Wilhelmina Johnson Center and Sharmie Ffar Complex. 
(15)  Woodlawn Park. 
(Code 1960, § 18-32.1(b); Ord. No. 3792, § 1, 10-5-92; Ord. No. 041020, § 1, 10-24-05; Ord. No. 100912, § 1, 7-7-11)  
Sec. 18-19. - Park hours. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided or posted at the park facility, and except for tot lots, the parks listed in subsections 18-18(a) and 18-18(c) shall be open for public use between the hours of 6:00 a.m. until 11:30 p.m. (this includes the buildings, pools, and ball fields located within the park boundaries), the same day and shall be closed to public use from 11:30 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. of the following day. The city manager or designee reserves the right to program facilities located in any of the above listed parks, including but not limited to park grounds, centers, picnic pavilions and ball fields, during the open hours of operation notwithstanding the fact that public access to these facilities may be limited during programmed events. Tot lots shall be open during daylight hours only and shall be closed to public use from dusk until dawn. The parks listed in subsection 18-18(b) shall be open during daylight hours only and shall be closed to public use from dusk until dawn unless otherwise posted. Daylight hours are defined as those hours between dawn and dusk. 
(b)  Such closing hours shall not apply to activities being held pursuant to an approved contract for use, signed by the city manager or appropriate designee responsible for the park property. In these cases the fully executed contract for use shall state the waiver of operating hours and shall be signed by the city manager or appropriate designee. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in any of the parks and/or facilities listed herein during the hours the park and/or facility is closed to public use, except with prior written approval from the city manager or designee. Such unauthorized presence shall be grounds for immediate arrest. 
(d)  If a park is designated as such by the city commission but is not listed in section 18-18, the park hours of operation shall be posted on the grounds of the park area. 
(Code 1960, § 18-32.1(c); Ord. No. 3585, § 1, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 041020, § 1, 10-24-05; Ord. No. 041020, § 2, 10-24-05; Ord. No. 100912, § 1, 7-7-11)  
Sec. 18-20. - Prohibited activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following in any park listed in section 18-18 of this article or any other areas officially designated by the city commission as a park and posted as such unless specifically permitted by the appropriate authorization received from the city manager or designee and issued pursuant to this article, except for activities of the City of Gainesville which are undertaken within the scope of its governmental authority: 
(1)  Construct or erect any hut, shanty or other shelter. Park users may temporarily set up a sun/shade apparatus up to ten feet by ten feet in size (larger sizes may be approved by request for special events conducted in the park areas upon the issuance of a facility use agreement by the city manager or designee in charge of that park area). Such apparatus must be made of flexible material, and any support lines which extend beyond the length and width of the covering, must be flagged for visibility and cannot be within 15 feet of any game court, sport's field, or children's play equipment. No sun/shade apparatus shall remain in place overnight in any park without a special use permit or facility use agreement being issued by the city manager or designee. All parks listed under section 18-18(b) are exempt from the temporary sun/shade apparatus provision as stated in this subsection (1); 
(2)  Cook foodstuff on personal grills brought into the park area unless permitted by the appropriate authorization received from the city manager or designee. Persons may utilize only grills provided or permitted by the city for cooking in the park area. No fires or food preparation shall be allowed that pose a hazard to public property or the general public; 
(3)  Set or stoke a fire, except for city authorized prescribed burns or those fires set or stoked in designated city or permitted grills, where they are provided, and said fire shall not be allowed if it poses a hazard to public property or the general public; 
(4)  Gather firewood or other natural materials to set or stake a fire; 
(5)  Discharge or deposit human wastes, except in toilet facilities provided by the city; 
(6)  Dump or deposit yard waste; 
(7)  Disturb the natural surface of the ground in any manner unless authorized in writing by the city manager or designee and done in accordance with a city-initiated land management activity; 
(8)  Allow privately owned animals to discharge or deposit waste on park property without moving said waste. All owners or others in charge of privately owned animals shall remove their waste from the park grounds, and may deposit animal waste in park trash receptacles; 
(9)  Pick flowers, nuts, berries, or fruit; or to damage or remove plants, trees, or shrubs, from any part of the park grounds unless specifically authorized in writing by the city manager or designee or done in accordance with a city-initiated land management activity; 
(10)  Erect signs or affix signs to any tree, post, pole, fence or park facility or grounds except as provided by city ordinance, or through an approved facility use contract with the city manager or appropriate designee; 
(11)  Drive, putt or otherwise hit a golf ball or shoot an arrow, except in parks specifically designated for those purposes; 
(12)  In any way disturb, molest, or remove any wildlife, animal, bird, or egg located above, upon or below the surface of the park grounds or to allow any privately owned animal to do so unless specifically authorized in writing by the city manager or designee; 
(13)  Write on, draw on, paint on, or otherwise deface, damage, remove or destroy any park facility or any part of the park grounds; 
(14)  Carry any weapons, explosive, or destructive device, as defined in F.S. § 790.001, either openly or concealed, onto any park property; except as otherwise permitted by law or this article; 
(15)  Operate or park any motorized vehicle, as defined in F.S. Ch. 316, on park grounds except in areas designated by the city as public parking areas, driveways, or roadways. Motorists shall obey all posted speed limit and other directional signs posted within the park. Authorized city personnel or contract personnel shall be allowed to drive vehicles onto park areas during facility maintenance or renovation projects; 
(16)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code of Ordinances, purchase, sell, offer for sale, possess, or consume any alcoholic beverages, illegal drugs or intoxicating substances; 
(17)  Use public restrooms to shave and/or shower, unless shower facilities are specifically provided for public use at that park; 
(18)  Bathe or otherwise be or remain in a water or drinking fountain and/or its reservoir or to allow any privately owned animal to do so; 
(19)  Use roller skates, roller blades or skateboards, except on park facilities specifically designated for this purpose; 
(20)  Engage in the sale of any item on park property for any non-city sponsored function(s), except as allowed by a facility use agreement issued by the city manager or appropriate designee or in these ordinances; 
(21)  Use of any park property for non-city sponsored fundraising activities, except as authorized by the city manager or appropriate designee or in these ordinances; 
(22)  Engage in the destruction, removal or alteration of any city owned facility or equipment from any park property except as authorized by the city manager or designee; 
(23)  Engage in the removal, alteration or destruction of archaeological or cultural resources from any park property and water body except as authorized by the city manager or designee. For purposes of this article "archaeological or cultural resources" means any associated physical artifacts and features below the ground service indicating the past use of a location by people which may yield information on the city's history or prehistory, including but not limited to artifacts, fossils, bones, shell mounds, or primitive culture facilities or items; 
(24)  Install any gate providing access to any park, or build any trail except as authorized by an approved management plan or the city manager or designee; 
(25)  Feed any animal except as authorized by the city manager or designee; 
(26)  Engage in the removal, destruction or harassment of animals and plants from or on parklands, except for authorized research efforts, as authorized by the city manager or appropriate designee; and 
(27)  Engage in the introduction of plants or animals onto park lands unless authorized by the city manager or appropriate designee. 
(28)  Smoking outdoors, as defined and prohibited in article IV of chapter 11.5 of the City Code. Any person violating this prohibition shall be subject to civil citation as provided in chapter 2, article V, division 6 of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 18-32.1(d); Ord. No. 961060, § 1, 7-14-97; Ord. No. 041020, § 3, 10-24-05; Ord. No. 100912, § 1, 7-7-11; Ord. No. 110199, § 5, 9-15-11; Ord. No. 150406 , § 3, 3-16-17) 
Cross reference— Offenses, Ch. 17.  
Sec. 18-21. - Additional provisions. 
Unless otherwise specified herein and in addition to the restrictions stated in section 18-20, the following additional provisions shall be applicable to the parks listed in section 18-18(b): 
(1)  Nature parks, centers and conservation areas shall be open to the public; however, the activities established by the city manager or designee for each park shall be compatible with the protection of the natural resources for each individual park and shall be posted at each park. Nature parks, centers and conservation areas shall be closed to the public when, due to emergency conditions or activities undertaken by the federal, state or local government for maintenance of such areas, closure is necessary to protect such lands or to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(2)  Hiking, defined as travel by foot, is permitted in nature parks, centers and conservation areas only on designated trails, established roads and in firebreaks, and shall not occur in other areas. 
(3)  Bicycling is permitted at certain nature parks, centers and conservation areas that are specifically posted for that activity. Within a park permitting bicycling, bicycling shall be only be permitted on trails, established roads and firebreaks, and shall not occur in other areas. 
(4)  Horseback riding is permitted only from the north parking area of Boulware Springs Nature Park to the Gainesville-Hawthorne State Trail unless otherwise authorized in writing by the city manager or designee. 
(5)  Hunting or trapping is prohibited in any nature park, center or conservation area, except where specifically authorized in writing by the city manager or designee for the purposes of scientific study or the removal of nuisance species and as regulated by the state. 
(6)  Dogs are permitted in nature parks, centers and conservation areas, except where otherwise posted provided that such animals are leashed at all times. When authorized in writing by the city manager or designee, other domestic animals may be permitted at nature parks, centers and conservation areas. The owner or other person responsible for the animal shall clean up and properly dispose of the animal's waste as stated in section 18-20. 
(7)  Swimming is prohibited at all nature parks, centers and conservation areas except in areas posted for swimming. 
(8)  Fishing is permitted at Palm Point Nature Park and Colclough Pond Nature Park in compliance with the guidelines established in state law. 
(9)  The disposal of oil, gasoline or other hazardous substances is prohibited at all nature parks, centers and conservation areas. 
(10)  The use of metal detectors is prohibited in all nature parks, centers and conservation areas. 
(11)  Concessions may be allowed in certain nature parks, centers and conservations areas, if they are determined to be appropriate to that natural area and are approved in writing by the city manager or designee. Appropriate to the natural area is described as: 
a.  The concession is necessary to fulfill a need in the interest of the public and will assist the city in providing public use of nature parks, centers and conservation areas; and 
b.  The concession will be open to the public; and 
c.  The concession will be economically feasible for the city; and 
d.  The concession will be compatible with the protection of the natural resources and the management goals for that park as stated in the management plan; and 
e.  The concession will not result in an unfair advantage over existing businesses that provide similar services in the area. 
(12)  Research may be permitted in nature parks, centers and conservation areas if said research is compatible with the protection of the natural resources and the management goals for that park as stated in the management plan and when approved in writing by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 041020, § 4, 10-24-05; Ord. No. 100912, § 1, 7-7-11)  
Sec. 18-22. - Archaeological discovery. 
Any person discovering archaeological or cultural resources on any park shall immediately notify the city manager or designee of such discovery. 
(Ord. No. 041020, § 5, 10-24-05; Ord. No. 100912, § 1, 7-7-11)  
Sec. 18-23. - Park and recreation fees. 
Fees for admission to city parks, and for use of recreation and cultural affairs facilities, and for participation in recreational events are set forth in Appendix A, the Schedule of Fees, Rates and Charges, except that the city manager may discount fees for early registration for youth programs. Certain fees in Appendix A include a surcharge. The surcharge on fees, except where identified in Appendix A as exempted, is a mandatory addition to each fee and may not be waived. 
(Ord. No. 130196, § 4, 9-19-13; Ord. No. 130912, § 3, 8-21-14)  
Secs. 18-24—18-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC RECREATION AND PARKS BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-245 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-36. - Created; advisory to city commission. 
There is hereby created and established a public recreation and parks board which shall be advisory to the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 2-22; Ord. No. 050420, § 1, 1-23-06)  
Sec. 18-37. - Powers. 
The public recreation and parks board shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the proper conduct of public recreation for the city, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 2-29(b); Ord. No. 050420, § 1, 1-23-06)  
Sec. 18-38. - Composition; appointment of members; term; compensation. 
(a)  The public recreation and parks board shall consist of nine members appointed by the city commission after the initial appointments for a term of three years each, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(b)  Additionally, the public recreation and parks board will consist of two ex officio members; one appointed by the county school board and one appointed by the county commission. These members will have no voting power and cannot be used for the purpose of establishing a quorum for meetings. 
(Code 1960, § 2-23; Ord. No. 050420, § 1, 1-23-06)  
Sec. 18-39. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies in the public recreation and parks board shall be filled by the city commission for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1960, § 2-24; Ord. No. 050420, § 1, 1-23-06)  
Sec. 18-40. - Election of chairperson and other officers; meetings. 
The members of the public recreation and parks board shall elect one of their number chairperson and shall elect other officers as may be necessary. The board, with the director of public recreation, shall meet once every three months and at such other times as the board or the chairperson shall deem necessary. 
(Code 1960, § 2-25; Ord. No. 050420, § 1, 1-23-06)  
Sec. 18-41. - Recommendations as to needs of city. 
The public recreation and parks board shall advise the city commission and shall offer recommendations as to the needs of the city on all matters pertaining to recreation within the city. 
(Code 1960, § 2-26; Ord. No. 050420, § 1, 1-23-06)  
Sec. 18-42. - Gifts and donations. 
The public recreation and parks board may solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or any donation on behalf of the city commission, to be applied, principal or interest, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes, by the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 2-27; Ord. No. 050420, § 1, 1-23-06)  
Secs. 18-43—18-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NATURE CENTERS COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-245 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-56. - Created; composition; term, appointment of members; filling of vacancies. 
There is hereby created the nature centers commission to be composed of 12 persons, each of whom shall be the persons now appointed as members of the nature centers commission whose terms shall be as previously set at the date of last appointment. Each term shall be for three years and shall expire on November 1. The city commission shall make all appointments to the nature centers commission and shall fill all vacancies for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1960, § 2-111; Ord. No. 3088, § 1, 12-17-84)  
Sec. 18-57. - Officers; meetings. 
The nature centers commission shall select one of its members as chairperson and such other officers as the nature centers commission may determine. The nature centers commission shall meet at such time and place as provided in its rules, which rules or procedures will become effective after approval by the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 2-114; Ord. No. 3088, § 4, 2-17-84)  
Sec. 18-58. - Duties generally. 
The duties of the nature centers commission shall be: 
(a)  To assist the city commission through recommendations and advice in respect to developing programs, ordinances, use regulations and resource management policies as required to protect the natural systems and other values of designated nature center and nature parks and other natural areas throughout the city. 
(b)  Periodically reviewing and recommending amendments to the comprehensive plan for the designated nature centers, nature parks and other natural areas as requested by the city commission or the local planning agency. 
(c)  Supporting membership programs or other programs to enhance funding, support and continuity of approved programs and activities. 
(d)  Recommending, if needed, use fees for groups and individuals as required to ensure effective programming and operation. 
(e)  Carrying out fundraising campaigns as required to augment public funding of selected programs, exhibits, facilities and operations. 
(f)  Recommending people management policies, such as prescribed limited access areas, needed security personnel, fencing, maximum daily visitation levels, closing times and days, as required to protect the natural and other values of designated nature centers and nature parks. 
(g)  Advising the city commission concerning: 
(1)  Real property suitable for purchase by the city for preservation as open space; 
(2)  The desirability of accepting real property gifts for preservation as open space; and 
(3)  The sale or exchange of city-owned real property in order to obtain real property more suitable for preservation as open space. 
(Code 1960, § 2-112; Ord. No. 3088, § 2, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 990805, § 1, 1-24-00)  
Sec. 18-59. - Reports to city commission. 
The nature centers commission shall make a written report to the city commission at least once each year describing the activities of the commission and make such recommendations to the city commission as are deemed appropriate. 
(Code 1960, § 2-113; Ord. No. 3088, § 3, 12-17-84)  
Sec. 18-60. - Authority to seek and receive federal and state funds; acceptance of gifts, etc.; records. 
Subject to the approval of the city commission, the nature centers commission may seek and receive federal and state funds for its programs and operations and may be entitled to accept gifts, donations and appropriations, and shall keep an accurate record of all receipts and expenditures and include an accounting of same in the annual report to the city commission otherwise required in this article. 
(Code 1960, § 2-115; Ord. No. 3088, § 5, 12-17-84)  
Sec. 18-61. - Morningside Park changed to Morningside Nature Center. 
In keeping with the purpose of this article and in keeping with the special role played by the Morningside Nature Center in the total park operations of the city, the Morningside Nature Center is hereby designated as a nature center, and Bivens Arm Nature Park is hereby designated as a nature park. 
(Code 1960, § 2-116; Ord. No. 3088, § 6, 12-17-84)  
Secs. 18-62—18-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 3843, adopted Mar. 15, 1993, repealed former Ch. 18, Art. V, §§ 18-81—18-87, which pertained to the green space advisory board. Article V was derived from §§ 2-139—2-145 of the 1960 Code; Ord. No. 3067, §§ 1—4, adopted Oct. 15, 1984; and Ord. No. 3795, § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 1992. 
 
Secs. 18-81—18-100. - Reserved.  
Chapter 19 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 14.5; vendor stands as encroachments and obstructions on public property, § 23-41; occupational license tax, § 25-41 et seq.; parking to sell merchandise prohibited, § 26-48. 
State Law reference— Solicitation of Charitable Funds Act, F.S. Ch. 496; home solicitation sales, F.S. § 501.021 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Annual Spring Arts Festival. 
(a)  Applicable area. The designated area for the purposes of this section is described as follows: 
(1)  Bounded on the north by the north side of Northeast 10th Avenue; 
(2)  Bounded on the west by the west side of North Main Street; 
(3)  Bounded on the south by the south side of East University Avenue; and 
(4)  Bounded on the east by the east side of Northeast Third Street. 
(b)  Permit required. Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, no vendors, peddlers, exhibitors or the like of jewelry, pottery, mirrors, beads, trinkets, baskets, arts and crafts, paintings, drawings, sculptures, photographs, artwork or the like shall be permitted within the area specified in subsection (a) during the two days of the annual Spring Arts Festival without having obtained a valid and current special permit from the city manager or designee. 
(c)  Application for permit. All persons desiring a permit shall make written application therefor not less than 60 days before the beginning of the two-day annual Spring Arts Festival. The applications shall be examined by a committee or jury selected for such purpose by the city manager, upon the advice of Santa Fe Community College, from among those persons of recognized ability and talent in judging the quality of material to be on display during the Spring Arts Festival. 
(d)  Issuance of permits. Permits will be issued in the order of applications received, limited as to number of spaces available, and as to quality as determined by the committee or jury. 
(e)  Permit fees. Permit fees shall be in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(f)  Display of permit, name and permanent address of holder. The holder of any such permit shall have same in his/her possession at all times during the two-day Spring Arts Festival and shall immediately display same upon request. The holder of any such permit shall prominently display at the Spring Arts Festival location his/her name and permanent address. 
(g)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to permanent residents of the area described in subsection (a) hereof who only exhibit, display, sell or offer to sell artwork or handiwork of such permanent resident on the property of the permanent resident. The provisions of this section do not require a licensed merchant of the city with his/her permanent place of business within the area designated in subsection (a) of this section to secure an additional permit to authorize the display and sale of goods at the site of his/her permanent place of business. 
(Code 1960, § 19-9; Ord. No. 3095, § 9, 1-14-85; Ord. No. 3105, § 1, 1-21-85)  
Sec. 19-2. - Downtown Plaza. 
(a)  Applicable area. The designated area for the purposes of this section is described as follows: 
(1)  Bounded on the north by East University Avenue; 
(2)  Bounded on the east by the Judicial Building; 
(3)  Bounded on the south by Southeast First Avenue; and 
(4)  Bounded on the west by the Alachua County administration building. 
(b)  Conditions for sales. Vendors, peddlers, exhibitors of jewelry, pottery, mirrors, beads, trinkets, baskets, articles of clothing such as T-shirts, sweatshirts, caps and visors, arts and crafts, paintings, drawings, sculptures, photographs, artwork or the like shall be permitted within the area specified in this section generally referred to as the Downtown Plaza under the conditions stated in this section: 
(1)  Persons indicated in this section must obtain and have displayed a business tax receipt issued by the city. 
(2)  Space used by persons indicated in this section shall not exceed 50 square feet in area. 
(3)  No permanent display stand shall be permitted and display stands shall be erected and dismantled at the beginning and end of each day of operation. 
(4)  When a location has been selected on the Downtown Plaza by a person indicated in this section, the person shall remain in that same location during the remainder of that day. Locations selected shall meet the spacing requirements of section 23-41 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  Sales of food and beverages shall be subject to compliance with all applicable city, county and state requirements. 
(6)  Sales of any type shall not be conducted during times when other events are scheduled for the Downtown Plaza without permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 19-10; Ord. No. 3095, § 5, 1-14-85; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 070022, § 6, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 19-3. - Annual Artwalk. 
(a)  Applicable area. The Annual Artwalk event is recognized as an annual two-day event which will be sponsored by a locally recognized organization and which is permitted to operate within the boundaries of the following described area: 
Beginning at the intersection of N.E. 6th Avenue and N.E. 1st Street proceed south on N.E. 1st Street to N.E. 2nd Avenue, thence east on N.E. 2nd Avenue to N.E. Boulevard, thence south along the Boulevard and Sweetwater Branch to S.E. 4th Place, thence west on S.E. 4th Place to S.E. 2nd Street, thence south on S.E. 2nd Street to S.E. 5th Avenue, thence west on S.E. 5th Avenue to South Main Street, thence north on South Main Street to S.W. 4th Avenue, thence west on S.W. 4th Avenue to S.W. 5th Street, thence north on S.W. 5th Street to S.W. 2nd Avenue, thence west on S.W. 2nd Avenue to S.W. 5th Terrace, thence north on S.W. 5th Terrace to West University Avenue, thence west on West University Avenue to N.W. 6th Street, thence north on N.W. 6th Street to N.W. 2nd Avenue, thence east on N.W. 2nd Avenue to N.W. 3rd Street, thence north on N.W. 3rd Street to N.W. 3rd Avenue, thence east on N.W. 3rd Avenue to N.W. 2nd Street, thence north on N.W. 2nd Street to N.W. 6th Avenue, thence east on N.W. and N.E. 6th Avenue to the point of beginning. 
Except for the following parcels: 
(1)  Lot No. 9 and the west 170 feet of Lot No. 4 Brush Addition, DB O-218, Replat of Block 28, PB A-71, Public Records of Alachua County, Florida, also known as tax parcel Nos. 14536 and 14544 and the south 104 feet of 14537. 
(2)  Commence 138 feet east and 43 feet south of the N.W. corner of the S.E. quarter of Sec. 5, T10S, R20E, for the point of beginning and run south along the East line of S.W. 5th Terrace 581 feet more or less to its intersection with the North line of S.W. 2nd Avenue, thence run east along the North line of S.W. 2nd Avenue, 160.95 feet, thence run north 285.5 feet, thence run west 25.9 feet, thence run north 296 feet more or less to the South line of West University Avenue, thence run west 118.9 feet along the South line to the point of beginning. Lying and being in the N.W. quarter of the S.E. quarter of Sec. 5, T10S, R20E, Alachua County, Florida, also known as tax parcel Nos. 12939, 12940, 12942 and 12942-1. 
(3)  Lots 5 and 8, Block 2 (or 560/366); Lots 1 and 4, Block 2 less right-of-way; Lot 5 and South one-half (S ½) of Lot 6, Block 1, all in the Parrish and Parrish Addition to Gainesville, PB A-107, as recorded in the Public Records of Alachua County, Florida. Lying and being in the S.W. quarter of Sec. 4, T10S, R20E, Alachua County, Florida. 
(b)  Exemption from permit and business tax receipt requirements. Vendors, peddlers and exhibitors who participate in the Annual Artwalk event are exempt the permit and business tax receipt requirements provided in articles I, II and III of this chapter and article III of chapter 25 during the two-day event. 
(c)  Sales of food and beverages. Sale of food and beverages shall comply with all applicable city, county and state laws and regulations, except as expressly exempted in subsection (b) above. 
(Code 1960, § 19-11; Ord. No. 070022, § 6, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 19-4. - Violations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-9.  
Secs. 19-5—19-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-15. - Purpose, intent and findings. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to preserve public safety, human life and convenience; to secure the comfort, health, welfare and prosperity of all city inhabitants; to ensure that the use of streets in the city does not become dangerous and that the free flow of traffic thereon is not impeded; to preserve privacy and quiet to those in the home; to protect city inhabitants against crime and undue annoyance; and to protect those on the streets and at home against abusive behavior by peddlers and canvassers. 
It is also the purpose and intent of this article to address the significant public health, welfare and safety concerns and crowd control problems caused by peddling and canvassing on or near public streets which are in use by vehicular traffic. The city commission finds that such public health, welfare and safety concerns and crowd control problems arise because peddling involves the process of a peddler offering for sale goods, merchandise or wares to an occupant or operator of a vehicle which is in traffic, that vehicle occupant or operator must consider the offer, and, if the vehicle occupant or operator decides to purchase the goods, merchandise or wares, that person must reach for a wallet, search for money, or write a check, all while the peddler and vehicle are located on a public street in use by vehicular traffic. Based on the foregoing, the city commission finds that the activity of peddling from occupants or operators of vehicles located on streets in use by vehicular traffic distracts drivers from their primary duty to watch traffic and potential hazards in the road, observe all traffic signals or warnings and move through the city's streets and intersections in a lawful and safe manner and creates a potential safety hazard and poses a substantial risk to the public, and impedes the free flow of traffic on the streets within the city resulting in the delay and obstruction of the public's free flow of travel on the city's streets. The city commission further finds that the safety of peddlers, canvassers, pedestrians and operators or occupants of vehicles is at significant risk when peddlers or canvassers engage in their activities on or near public streets which are in use by vehicular traffic because the nature of these activities often entails peddlers and canvassers standing on traffic medians, bicycle paths and public streets in use by vehicular traffic, property only meant for the use and control of vehicular traffic and not peddling or canvassing activities. 
It is not the purpose and intent of this article to prohibit peddling and canvassing in public areas when such activities will not interfere with vehicular traffic and cause traffic safety and traffic flow concerns. For example, peddlers may conduct their activities on public sidewalks so long as they are not conducting transactions with operators or occupants of vehicles in traffic and are otherwise in compliance with this Code. In addition, canvassers may engage in their activities on public sidewalks so long as they are otherwise in compliance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 990695, § 1, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 061107, § 1, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 19-16. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
Bicycle path shall mean any road, path, or way that is open to the public for bicycle travel, which road, path, or way is physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or by a barrier and is located within a right-of-way. 
Canvasser shall mean any person traveling either by foot, vehicle or other conveyance, from place to place, in order to solicit opinions for a survey or solicit support for a political campaign or any other cause, belief or issue. 
Peddler shall mean any person who during the course of selling travels by foot, vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place, offering goods, wares or merchandise for sale or making sales and delivering articles purchased. 
Peddling from any operator or occupant of a vehicle that is in traffic on a public street shall mean selling goods, wares or merchandise to any operator or occupant of a vehicle, coupled with an actual exchange of money or some article of value for any goods, wares or merchandise between the peddler and any operator or occupant of a vehicle while that vehicle is on the portion of a public street currently in use by vehicular traffic. 
Person shall mean and include individuals, associations, firms, corporations, partnerships, bodies politic and corporate, and all other groups or combinations thereof. 
Public street shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
Residential areas shall mean all single-family and multi-family neighborhoods that are zoned with the residential zoning district categories referenced in the land development code, sections 30-51 through 30-55, and all residential planned developments. 
Traffic median shall mean the dividing area, either paved or landscaped, between opposing lanes of vehicular traffic. 
Vehicles shall mean any mobile item which normally uses wheels, whether motorized or not. 
(Code 1960, § 19-1; Ord. No. 3095, § 1, 1-14-85; Ord. No. 990695, § 1, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 061107, § 1, 7-23-07) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 19-17. - Restrictions and requirements. 
(a)  Peddlers and canvassers will terminate their activities in residential areas by 7:00 p.m. each day and will not resume their activities in residential areas before 9:00 a.m. the next day. 
(b)  Peddlers are prohibited from peddling from any operator or occupant of a vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, as those terms are defined in this article. 
(c)  Operators or occupants of vehicles that are in traffic on a public street are prohibited from offering money or other articles of value or buying goods, wares or merchandise from peddlers when doing so results in the actual exchange of money or some other article of value for goods, wares or merchandise between the peddler and the operator or occupant of a vehicle while that vehicle is on the portion of a public street currently in use by vehicular traffic. 
(d)  No person shall stand on a traffic median, bicycle path or public street to peddle or canvass from an operator or occupant of any vehicle when in use by vehicular traffic. 
(e)  Peddlers and canvassers are prohibited from engaging in their activities on residential premises in residential areas where a notice stating "No Solicitors" or "No Solicitation" is posted in plain view. 
(f)  No more than two peddlers or canvassers shall contact any one member of the public at any one time. 
(g)  Peddlers and canvassers will not persist in their activities after the request has been declined, and they will immediately and peaceably depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(h)  Peddlers and canvassers shall not harass persons by demanding, threatening or intimidating conduct. 
(Ord. No. 990695, § 1, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 060113, § 1, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 061107, § 1, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 19-18. - Sales of food items. 
The sale of food items shall be permitted under article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 990695, § 1, 12-11-00)  
Sec. 19-19. - Business tax receipt requirement. 
Peddlers must meet the business tax receipt requirements provided in article III of chapter 25. 
(Ord. No. 990695, § 1, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 070022, § 6, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 19-20. - Penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 990695, § 1, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 061107, § 1, 7-23-07)  
Secs. 19-21—19-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 990695, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 2000, repealed Div. 2, §§ 19-31—19-36, which pertained to permits and derived from Code 1960, §§ 19-1—19-5; Ord. No. 3095, §§ 1—3, 6, 7, adopted Jan. 14, 1985; and Ord. No. 4057, §§ 1—4, adopted Jan. 23, 1995. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 061107, § 2, adopted July 23, 2007, deleted §§ 19-51—19-58 in their entirety. Former §§ 19-51—19-55 pertained to fundraising by nonprofit organization and derived from Code 1960, §§ 19A-1—19A-3, 19A-6, and 19A-9; Ord. No. 3103, §§ 1—3, adopted Jan. 21, 1985; Ord. No. 3923, § 1, adopted Jan. 10, 1994; Ord. No. 990695, §§ 3, 4, adopted Dec. 11, 2000; Ord. No. 060113, § 2, adopted Nov. 9, 2006; Ord. No. 070022, § 6, adopted June 25, 2007. 
 
Secs. 19-31—19-78. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BEGGING, PANHANDLING AND SOLICITING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses, Ch. 17. 
 
Sec. 19-79. - Legislative findings. 
The city commission recognizes a constitutional right to beg, panhandle or solicit in a peaceful and non-threatening manner. The city commission finds, however, that an increase in aggressive begging, panhandling or soliciting throughout the city has become extremely disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses, and has contributed not only to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public places, but also to an enhanced sense of fear, intimidation and disorder. The experience of the city shows that a greater majority of the beggars, panhandlers or solicitors arrested in the year 2003 had a narcotics or assault violation in their criminal history that causes the city commission to regulate this activity to protect the citizenry in the interest of public safety. 
Aggressive begging, panhandling or soliciting usually includes approaching or following pedestrians, repetitive begging, panhandling, or soliciting despite refusals, the use of abusive or profane language, unwanted physical contact, or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The city commission further finds that the presence of persons who solicit money from other persons at or near outdoor cafes, automated teller machines, the entrance and exits of buildings, certain public events as more particularly described in this article, and payphones is especially troublesome because said persons cannot readily escape from the undesired conduct. Such activity often carries with it an implicit threat to both persons and property. The experience of the city shows that a majority of the beggars, panhandlers or solicitors arrested in the year 2003 were apprehended in and around automated teller machines, parking lots, parking garages, restaurants and business entrances. The city commission also finds that people driving or parking on city streets frequently find themselves faced with beggars, panhandlers or solicitors seeking money by offering to perform "services" such as opening car doors or locating parking spaces. 
The city commission further finds that the activity of begging, panhandling or soliciting presents significant public health, welfare and safety concerns and crowd control problems when such activities are conducted on or near public streets which are in use by vehicular traffic because these activities involve the process of a person requesting a donation from an occupant or operator of a vehicle which is in traffic, that vehicle occupant or operator must consider the request, and, if the vehicle occupant or operator decides to fulfill the request, that person must reach for a wallet, search for money, or write a check, all while that person and vehicle are located on a public street in use by vehicular traffic. Based on the foregoing, the city commission finds that the activity of begging, panhandling or soliciting from occupants or operators of vehicles located on streets in use by vehicular traffic distracts drivers from their primary duty to watch traffic and potential hazards in the road, observe all traffic signals or warnings and move through the city's streets and intersections in a lawful and safe manner and creates a potential safety hazard and poses a substantial risk to the public, and impedes the free flow of traffic on the streets within the city resulting in the delay and obstruction of the public's free flow of travel on the city's streets. The city commission further finds that the safety of beggars, panhandlers, solicitors, pedestrians and operators and occupants of vehicles is at significant risk when such activities occur because the nature of these activities often entails beggars, panhandlers or solicitors standing on traffic medians, bicycle paths and public streets in use by vehicular traffic, property only meant for the use and control of vehicular traffic and not begging, panhandling or soliciting. 
It is not the purpose and intent of this article to prohibit begging, panhandling or soliciting in public areas when such activities will not interfere with vehicular traffic and cause traffic safety and traffic flow concerns or when such activities will not otherwise cause any public health, welfare and safety concerns. For example, beggars, panhandlers or solicitors may conduct their activities on public sidewalks so long as they are not conducting transactions with operators or occupants of vehicles in traffic and are otherwise in compliance with this Code. 
This law is timely and appropriate because current city ordinances are insufficient to address the aforementioned problems. The restrictions contained herein are neither overbroad nor vague and are narrowly tailored to serve a substantial governmental interest. Moreover, this article only restricts begging, panhandling and soliciting in certain public places while preserving ample alternative areas for the valid exercise of First Amendment constitutional rights. Furthermore, in enacting this article, the city commission recognizes the availability of community service and other sentencing alternatives, which may be appropriate remedies for violations of this article. 
The law is not intended to limit any persons from exercising their constitutional right to beg, panhandle or solicit funds, picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. Its goal is instead to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of begging, panhandling or solicitation that have become an unwelcome and overwhelming presence in the city, and to prohibit aggressive begging, panhandling and solicitation and begging, panhandling and solicitation in certain public places based upon significant governmental interests. 
(Ord. No. 030584, § 1, 3-15-04; Ord. No. 061107, § 3, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 19-80. - Begging, panhandling or soliciting on public property, sidewalks and streets; certain designated places prohibited. 
(a)  Purpose. The city commission finds that any person who begs, panhandles or solicits under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity by unwanted touching, detaining, impeding or intimidation which causes fear or apprehension in another person constitutes a threat to the public health, welfare and safety of the citizenry. The city commission also finds that any person who intentionally blocks the passage of another person or a vehicle, which requires another person to take evasive action to avoid physical contact, constitutes a threat to the public health, welfare and safety of the citizenry. The city commission further finds that any person who begs, panhandles or solicits under circumstances where the person being solicited cannot readily escape from the undesired conduct constitutes a threat to the public health, welfare and safety of the citizenry. The city commission also finds that any person begging, panhandling or soliciting from occupants or operators of vehicles while such vehicles are on the portion of a public street currently in use by vehicular traffic and any person begging, panhandling or soliciting on traffic medians, bicycle paths or publics streets when such property is in use by vehicular traffic poses a threat to public safety and prevents the free flow of traffic on public streets. 
(b)  Definitions. Except where the content otherwise requires, as used in this chapter: 
(1)  Aggressively beg, panhandle or solicit means any request made in person for a donation of money or some other article of value from another person by an unwanted touching, detaining, impeding or intimidation. 
(2)  Beg, panhandle or solicit means any request made in person for a donation of money or some other article of value, either by words, bodily gestures, signs or other means, from another person. 
(3)  Beg, panhandle, or solicit from any operator or occupant of a vehicle that is in traffic on a public street means any request made in person for a donation of money or some other article of value, either by words, bodily gestures, signs or other means, from any operator or occupant of a vehicle, coupled with an actual exchange of money or some other article of value between the person begging, panhandling or soliciting and any operator or occupant of a vehicle while that vehicle is on the portion of a public street currently in use by vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic means to walk, stand, sit, lie or place an object in such a manner as to block passage of another person or a vehicle, or to require another person or driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or to legally protest, and acts authorized by permit issued pursuant to section 23-42 of this Code are not included within the definition of this term. 
(5)  Public place means an area generally visible to public view and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks and streets open to the general public, including those areas that serve food or drink or provide entertainment or other services, outdoor cafes, public restrooms, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
(6)  Beggar, panhandler or solicitor means any person traveling either by foot, vehicle or other conveyance, from place to place, requesting in person a donation of money or some other article of value, either by words, bodily gestures, signs or any other means, from another person. 
(c)  Restrictions and requirements. 
(1)  Beggars, panhandlers or solicitors are prohibited from obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic and aggressively begging, panhandling or soliciting. 
(2)  Beggars, panhandlers or solicitors are prohibited from aggressively begging, panhandling or soliciting. 
(3)  Beggars, panhandlers or solicitors are prohibited from begging, panhandling or soliciting from any operator or occupant of a vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, as those terms are defined in this article. 
(4)  Any operator or occupant of a vehicle that is in traffic on a public street is prohibited from offering money or some other article of value to a beggar, panhandler or solicitor resulting in the actual exchange of money or some other article of value between the person begging, panhandling or soliciting and the operator or occupant of a vehicle while that vehicle is on the portion of a public street currently in use by vehicular traffic. 
(5)  No person shall stand on a traffic median, bicycle path or public street to beg, panhandle or solicit when in use by vehicular traffic. 
(6)  Begging, panhandling, soliciting or aggressive begging, panhandling or soliciting are prohibited at the following places: 
a.  At an outdoor cafe; 
b.  Within 12 feet of an outdoor cafe; 
c.  In a public restroom; 
d.  At a public event that is operating by permit issued by the city at city parks as defined in section 18-18 of this Code; 
e.  At any other public event that is operating by permit issued by the city with defined boundaries; 
f.  From any person standing in line to enter a building or event; 
g.  Within 12 feet of a line to enter a building or event; 
h.  From any person entering or exiting a building; 
i.  Within 12 feet of the entrance or exit of a building; 
j.  From any person using an automated teller machine, or any electronic information processing device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit or convenience account (ATM); 
k.  Within 12 feet of an ATM; 
l.  From any person using a pay phone; 
m.  Within 12 feet of a pay phone. 
(Ord. No. 3725, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 030584, § 2, 3-15-04; Ord. No. 060113, § 3, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 061107, § 3, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 19-81. - Begging, panhandling or soliciting in private buildings and private property; prohibited. 
(a)  Legislative intent, purpose. The city commission finds that any person who begs, panhandles, or solicits, under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in public rooms of private buildings and on private property by unwanted touching, detaining, impeding or intimidation which causes fear or apprehensive in another person constitutes a threat to the public health, welfare and safety of the citizenry. The city commission further finds that any person who begs, panhandles or solicits under circumstances where the person being solicited cannot readily escape from the undesired conduct constitutes a threat to the public health, welfare and safety of the citizenry. 
(b)  Definitions. Except where the context otherwise requires, as used in this section: 
(1)  Private building shall be deemed to include, but is not limited to, retail or service establishments, such as restaurants, convenience food stores, laundromats, service stations, hotels, offices, and similar privately owned establishments open to the public. This term does not include any building owned, leased or operated by the federal or state government, political subdivisions thereof, municipalities, special districts, any public administration board or authority of the state. 
(2)  Private property or premises shall mean and include any privately-owned dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited, uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, curtilage, parking area, driveway, walk, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure and may include any other location, including any improvements on said location, within the City of Gainesville that is not publicly owned. 
(3)  Public room shall be deemed to include a basement, building entrance or doorway, lobby, hallway, stairway, mezzanine, elevator, foyer, public restroom or sitting room or any other place used in common by the public, tenants, occupants or guests situated in any private building. 
(c)  Unlawful action. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Beg, panhandle, or solicit, as those terms are defined in this chapter, in any public room in any private building, without the written permission or consent of the building's owner or managing and authorizing agent. For the purpose of enforcement of this subsection, it is presumed that if the owner, lessee, managing agent or other person in charge of a building prominently displays a sign as provided in subsection (d), then the activities declared unlawful in this section are deemed to be without the permission or consent of the building's owner, lessee, managing agent or other person. 
(2)  Beg, panhandle or solicit, as those terms are defined in this chapter, on any private property where the owner, lessee, managing agent or other person in charge of such property displays a sign as provided in subsection (d). 
(d)  Conspicuous notice. To invoke the protections afforded under this section, each owner, lessee, managing agent or person in charge of the operation of a private building or private property shall prominently display a sign on the premises, such as the lobby or entrance of the private building or private property, where it may be read by any person going in or out of the building or private developed property stating generally: "NO PANHANDLING PERMITTED SEC. 19-81, GAINESVILLE CODE OF ORDINANCES," "NO SOLICITORS" or "NO SOLICITATION." 
(Ord. No. 3726, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 061107, § 3, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 19-82. - Begging, panhandling or soliciting in public buildings and public transportation areas; prohibited. 
(a)  Legislative intent, purpose. The city commission finds that begging, panhandling or soliciting may interfere with the safe ingress and egress of human and vehicular traffic into public buildings and public transportation areas thereby constituting a threat to the public health, welfare and safety of the citizenry. In order to allow for the safe ingress and egress of human and vehicular traffic into public buildings and public transportation areas, the city manager is authorized to prohibit begging, panhandling or soliciting within public buildings or designated areas of that public building or public transportation areas upon the request of the owners, lessees, managing or authorizing agents of the public building or areas in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Definitions. Except where the context otherwise requires, as used in this section: 
(1)  Public building means any building or facility owned, leased or operated by or on behalf of the federal or state government or any political subdivision thereof, any municipality, or special district or any public administrative board or authority of the federal or state government. 
(2)  Public transportation area means a building, facility or area designated for mass transit transportation, such as, but not limited to, bus terminals, airport terminals, bus stops and taxi stands. 
(c)  Designation. The city manager is authorized to designate a public building or area of a public building or public transportation area based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The purpose and characteristic of the building, facility or area; 
(2)  The level of human and vehicular traffic in and around the building, facility or area; 
(3)  The function of the building, facility or area; 
(4)  Proximity of the building, facility or area to other buildings, transportation facilities, parking areas and sidewalks; 
(5)  The necessity to alleviate obstructions and hazards to pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic to protect public health and safety; and, 
(6)  The desires and needs of the owners and occupants of the area and immediate surroundings. 
(d)  Order. Upon determining that a public building or area of a public building or public transportation area warrants the designation to prohibit begging, panhandling or soliciting, the city manager shall issue an order which specifically identifies the building or area or public transportation area. The order shall be conspicuously posted at the designated building or area. If no appeal is filed, the order shall become final within 20 days from the date of entry of the order. 
(e)  Administrative appeal. 
(1)  The city manager's order may be appealed by any aggrieved person before a hearing officer within 20 days from the date of entry of the order. 
(2)  If an appeal is filed, the hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer. In this proceeding, the hearing officer shall find whether substantial competent evidence existed for the city manager to prohibit begging, panhandling or soliciting in a public building or area of a public building or public transportation area based upon the criteria set forth in subsection (b). The hearing officer's decision may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction by a petition for a writ of certiorari within 30 days after the rendition of the hearing officer's decision regarding the designation. 
(f)  Final order. When the order becomes final, the city manager shall cause the designation to be recorded upon an appropriate map and retained in the police department. 
(g)  Conspicuous notice. Each public building, area of the public building or public transportation area designated by the city manager in accordance with this section shall prominently display a sign on the premises, such as a lobby or entrance to a building or area, where it may be read by any person going in or out of the building or area stating generally: "NO PANHANDLING PERMITTED SEC. 19-82, GAINESVILLE CODE OF ORDINANCES," "NO SOLICITORS" or "NO SOLICITATION." 
(h)  Unlawful action. When a public building or area of a public building or public transportation area has been designated and posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to beg, panhandle or solicit within the public building, or area of the public building or public transportation area. It shall also be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or harass pedestrians or vehicles for the purpose of begging, panhandling or soliciting within the designated and posted public building, or area of the public building or public transportation area. 
(Ord. No. 3727, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 061107, § 3, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 19-83. - Penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3725, § 1, 6-17-91)  
Secs. 19-84—19-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VENDING BOOTHS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 970631, adopted June 8, 1998, repealed §§ 19-91—19-97 in their entirety and added §§ 19-91—19-98 to read as set forth herein. Formerly, §§ 19-91—19-97 pertained to mobile food carts and derived from §§ 14-31—14-36 of the 1960 Code; and Ord. No. 3435, § 1, adopted May 16, 1988. 
Section 1 of Ord. No. 990299, adopted Oct. 25, 1999, changed the title of Art. IV from "Vending Booths" to "Vending Booths and Itinerant Food Vendors". Section 2 of Ord. No. 140190 , adopted April 16, 2015, changed the title of the article from "Vending Booths and Itinerant Vendors" back to "Vending Booths". 
 
Sec. 19-91. - Definitions. 
A "vending booth" is a temporary wheeled cart-mounted food or retail establishment located on public property, or a permanent structure constructed by the city on the Gainesville Community Plaza. A vending booth cannot be propelled by an internal combustion engine, electric motor or other similar mechanical device. A vending booth, except a permanent structure constructed by the city on the Gainesville Community Plaza, must be capable of being moved from place to place, but may be stationary during the business day. Examples of vending booths are, but are not limited to, the following: coffee/cappuccino stands; stands selling muffins, bagels and other bakery items; ice cream carts; snow cone and Italian Ice carts; fast-food carts; souvenirs carts; and newsstands. 
A "game day vending booth" is a temporary retail establishment located on designated public property or city right-of-way that is only allowed to operate during University of Florida home football game days. Examples of game day vending booths are, but are not limited to, the following: stands selling food items; souvenirs carts; and newsstands. 
(Ord. No. 970631, § 1, 6-8-98; Ord. No. 990299, § 1, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 070209, § 2, 7-14-08; Ord. No. 140190 , § 2, 4-16-15; Ord. No. 130141 , § 2, 7-16-15)  
Sec. 19-92. - Annual permit. 
(a)  A vending booth permit or game day vending booth permit, is required and can be obtained from the city manager, or designee upon payment of the fee specified in Appendix A of this Code, along with submitting a completed application that includes a description of the food, beverage or retail items to be offered for sale; photographs of the vending booth; and sufficient information for city reviewing staff to determine compliance with the requirements listed in subsection (b) below, the applicable regulations listed in section 19-93 and other applicable code and safety requirements. Vending booth permits expire on September 30 of each year. Vending booth permits issued between April 1 and September 30 are subject to one-half the permit fees for the initial period (between issuance and September 30). Game day vending booth permits may be issued at any time, but are only valid on game days listed on the permit when issued, and expire immediately following the last University of Florida home football game day of the year issued. Vending booth and game day vending booth permits shall not be valid during any event declared to be a special event by the city manager or designee. A separate permit shall be required for vending at these events. 
(b)  Requirements to obtain a vending booth permit or game day vending booth permit: 
(1)  Proof of liability insurance, in amounts to annually be determined by the city manager, which shall include the city as an additional insured and which shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected and appointed officers, employees and agents, from any resultant claims which may arise from operation of the booth due to intentional or unintentional wrongdoing or negligence by the operator, or employees, contractors or agents of the operator. 
(2)  Proof of workers compensation insurance or provide a certificate of exemption. 
(3)  Select an available site from the property designated on the official vending booth site map or the game day vending booth site map on file with the city manager or designee. When more than one application is received for a designated site, that site will be made available by random drawing of all qualified applicants. Once an operator has received a space, that site will not become available again unless the operator does not renew the permit or the owner's permit is revoked under this article. 
(4)  Submission of a site drawing clearly depicting the public property site location, size of the vending booth, set up of the vending booth and any other information necessary for the city reviewing staff to determine that the vending booth will comply with all applicable city codes. The vending booth must be located a minimum of five feet from the curb or improved right-of-way and so positioned as to leave an unobstructed way for pedestrian passage on any sidewalk and shall not be positioned within five feet of any crosswalk or fire hydrant, nor block any ingress or egress from a building entrance or emergency exit. Vending booths shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from intersections and shall be located outside of the vision triangle. 
(Ord. No. 970631, § 1, 6-8-98; Ord. No. 990299, § 1, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 070209, § 2, 7-14-08; Ord. No. 140190 , § 2, 4-16-15; Ord. No. 130141 , § 2, 7-16-15)  
Sec. 19-93. - Regulations. 
Vending booths and game day vending booths operating in the city shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The county/state health department must license any vending booths and game day vending booths operations preparing and selling food items. All applicable codes of the health department shall be met. 
(2)  A trash container must be available on the vending booth or game day vending booth. 
(3)  Lighting may be used to continuously illuminate the vending booth or game day vending booth canopy and provide task lighting for night operation, provided it is in conformity with the city's lighting regulations. 
(4)  Change of ownership, booth/conveyance or location will require that the owner apply for a new vending booth or game day vending booth permit. 
(5)  All required licenses must be conspicuously displayed on the vending booth or game day vending booth. 
(6)  Vending booths and game day vending booths must be provided with at least one approved portable fire extinguisher having a minimum rating of 8 BC. 
(7)  All liquefied petroleum gas containers must be installed on the outside of the vending booth or game day vending booth, protected from physical damage and, if enclosed, vented at the lowest point of the enclosure. All liquefied petroleum gas containers must be properly secured and comply with all applicable standards. 
(8)  Signs using lettering painted on or applied to the canopy valance will be allowed. Two additional signs in conformity with the city's sign regulations will be allowed at a maximum size of six square feet each, to be mounted on the vending booth or game day vending booth. No other signs, pictures or advertisements of any kind, such as stickers, flags, balloons, inflatables or lights shall be allowed. 
(9)  The vendor must obtain a local business tax receipt from the city. 
(10)  The vendor shall keep the sidewalks, parking areas and other spaces adjacent to their vending sites or locations clean and free of paper, peelings and refuse of any kind generated from their vending operation. 
(11)  Sales shall be oriented to pedestrians. No vendor shall sell or attempt to sell any product or engage in any commercial transaction with the occupant of any motor vehicle. 
(12)  Vendors shall not conduct business in a way that will restrict or interfere with the entrance or exit of a business, create a nuisance, create a hazard to pedestrians, life or property, or obstruct vehicular circulation, pedestrian circulation, or access to emergency exits. 
(13)  Vending booth vendors operating within the Central City Zoning District (CCD), as this area is shown on the city's zoning map atlas, and the College Park Area, as delineated in the College Park-Master Plan and Regulation Plan for New Construction map in Appendix A Section 3 of the Land Development Code, shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. the following day and shall take place only at the approved location. The "vending booth" conveyance shall not be set up prior to 6:00 a.m. and must be removed by 4:00 a.m. the following day. 
(14)  Game day vending booth vendors operating within the College Park area, as delineated in the College Park - Master Plan and Regulation Plan for New Construction Map in Appendix A Section 3 of the Land Development Code, shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. on the day of the game and three hours after the end of the football game. 
(Ord. No. 970631, § 1, 6-8-98; Ord. No. 990299, § 1, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 070209, § 2, 7-14-08; Ord. No. 110283, § 1, 6-7-12; Ord. No. 140190 , § 2, 4-16-15; Ord. No. 130141 , § 2, 7-16-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 070209, § 2, adopted July 14, 2008, repealed the former §§ 19-93—19-96 which pertained to insurance requirements, public areas available by drawing, setbacks, and signage, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 970631, § 1, adopted June 8, 1998; Ord. No. 990299, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 1999; and Ord. No. 061107, § 4, adopted July 23, 2007. Section 2 of Ord. No. 070209 renumbered the former § 19-97 as § 19-93. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.  
Sec. 19-94. - Revocation of permit/license. 
Permits issued under this article may be revoked by the city manager or designee after written notice and opportunity for hearing for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit. 
(2)  Any violation of this article. 
(3)  Conviction of a felony by a court of competent jurisdiction of the operator, or any shareholder, partner or member of a business entity holding a 50 percent or greater interest in the vending booth or game day vending booth for any of the following: homicide, rape, aggravated battery, burglary, aggravated assault, kidnapping, robbery, child molestation, lewd and lascivious acts, criminal solicitation to commit any of the above, criminal attempt to commit any of the above, or possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants. 
(4)  Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(5)  With respect to a vending booth, failure to operate for more than 14 days during the period from May 1 through September 30 of each year. 
(6)  Refusal to remove the vending booth or game day vending booth from the site at the end of each business day. 
(7)  The vending booth or game day vending booth vendor has been adjudicated guilty of, been found guilty of with adjudication withheld, waived the right to contest, or pled no contest to, three or more violations of city ordinances with respect to the vending operation. 
Such revocation may be appealed directly to the city commission provided such appeal is filed with the clerk of the commission within 15 days of the time of the revocation by the city manager. The clerk shall schedule the hearing on the appeal at the next regular meeting of the city commission scheduled to be at least ten days from the date the appeal is filed. The clerk shall inform the city manager of the appeal, and the city manager shall forward the evidence used to determine the revocation, including minutes of the hearing, of any, to the clerk. No new evidence or testimony may be introduced before the city commission, which shall render its decision based upon the record. The city commission may reinstate the permit only if it finds an abuse of discretion in the decision of the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 970631, § 1, 6-8-98; Ord. No. 990299, § 1, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 070209, § 2, 7-14-08; Ord. No. 140190 , § 2, 4-16-15; Ord. No. 130141 , § 2, 7-16-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 070209, § 2, adopted July 14, 2008, renumbered the former § 19-98 as § 19-94. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. See the editor's note to § 19-93 for further information.  
Sec. 19-95. - Vendors' stands. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to display, keep or maintain any stand, article or item of personal property, whether for sale, advertising or other purpose, on any of the streets or sidewalks of the city, or within 50 feet of the main entrance to any public building in the city during normal operating hours for that building, without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. This section does not apply to a vending booth or game day vending booth properly permitted under this chapter. 
(Code 1960, § 23-17, Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 970631, § 2, 6-8-98; Ord. No. 090297, § 3, 10-15-09; Ord. No. 140190 , § 2, 4-16-15; Ord. No. 130141 , § 2, 7-16-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 090297, § 3, adopted Oct. 15, 2009, renumbered the former § 23-41 as § 19-95. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.  
Secs. 19-96—19-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 19-110—19-124. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 061107, §§ 5, 6, adopted July 23, 2007, deleted Art. V in its entirety. Former Art. V pertained to street solicitation by nonprofit agency and derived from Ord. No. 3104, § 1(19B-1—19-B5), adopted Jan. 21, 1985; Ord. No. 3155, § 1, adopted Sept. 9, 1985; Ord. No. 990695, § 5, adopted Dec. 11, 2000; and Ord. No. 060113, §§ 5, 6, adopted Oct. 9, 2006.  
ARTICLE VI. - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS 
 
Sec. 19-125. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article that, to protect the people against the nuisance and annoyance of and incident to the distribution of handbills and circulars, with the resulting detriment and danger to public health and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity require the regulation thereof. To that end the purposes of this article are specifically declared to be as follows: 
(1)  To preserve the peaceful enjoyment of the private property of local residents by protecting against trespassing by handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills; 
(2)  To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the expense incident to the littering of private property by uncontrolled distribution of handbills; 
(3)  To enhance crime prevention by removing the incidence of robberies and burglaries; and 
(4)  To preserve the people's constitutional right to receive and disseminate information. 
(Ord. No. 030785, § 1, 12-13-04)  
Sec. 19-126. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Handbill shall mean and include any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature. 
Newspaper shall mean and include any paper that is printed, published and distributed, at least once a week, which is entered or qualified to be admitted and entered as periodicals matter at a post office in Alachua County where published, which is for sale to the public generally, which is available to the public generally for the publication of official or other notices and which customarily contains information of a public character or of interest or of value to the residents or owners of property in Alachua County or which contains information of interest or of value to the general public. 
Person shall mean and include individuals, associations, firms, corporations, partnerships, bodies politic and corporate, and all other groups or combinations thereof. 
Private property or premises shall mean and include any privately-owned dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited, uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, curtilage, parking area, driveway, walk, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure and may include any other location, including any improvements on said location, within the City of Gainesville that is not publicly owned. 
Public premises shall mean and include any and all public parks, public parking garages, public parking lots and public grounds and buildings. 
(Ord. No. 030785, § 2, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 061107, § 7, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 19-127. - Throwing or distributing handbills prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private or public premises within the city where a notice stating "No Handbills" is posted on the premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to direct, encourage or allow another person, employee or independent contractor to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private or public premises within the city where a notice stating "No Handbills" is posted on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 030785, § 3, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 061107, § 7, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 19-128. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States Postal Service or any commercial parcel service or carrier, such as Federal Express or United Parcel Service. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the distribution of newspapers. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply where the property owner or occupant has requested the handbill be distributed at his/her residence or where the property owner or occupant has consented to delivery of said handbill. 
(d)  Except where a notice stating "No Handbills" is posted as provided in this article, it shall not be unlawful for any person to distribute or hand deliver, without charge, any handbill to any person willing to accept said handbill. 
(e)  A handbill shall not include printed or written material which is distributed by a public agency for the sole purpose of alerting persons of an immediate danger or risk to the public health, safety or welfare of a community or to prevent danger or risk to the public health, safety or welfare of a community. 
(Ord. No. 030785, § 3, 12-13-04)  
Sec. 19-129. - Penalty. 
The provisions of this article may be enforced by civil citation or by municipal ordinance prosecution. Following two convictions under section 2-339, civil citation, within a six-month period, for any one person as defined herein, subsequent violations shall be prosecuted as provided in section 1-9 of the Code. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense, which can be prosecuted separately. 
(Ord. No. 030785, § 3, 12-13-04)  
Chapter 21 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; consolidated police officers and firefighters retirement plan, § 2-596 et seq.; offenses, Ch. 17; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Chief of police; powers and duties generally. 
The chief of police shall preserve the peace of the city, command and direct the police force under the instructions of the city manager, and see that the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city are strictly enforced. It is hereby made his/her duty to make complaint against all persons violating any of the provisions of this Code and other ordinances, and to take into custody all persons undergoing imprisonment or other punishment for violation of the provisions of this Code or other city ordinances. 
(Code 1960, § 21-1) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-141 et seq.  
Sec. 21-2. - Assessment of court costs for criminal justice education and training expenditures. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed by the city, in compliance with F.S. § 943.25(13), an additional two dollars ($2.00) as court costs against every person convicted for a violation of a state penal or criminal statute or convicted of a municipal or county ordinance, where the offense occurred within the corporate limits of the city. However, no such assessment shall be made against any person convicted for violation of any state statute, municipal ordinance, or county ordinance relating to the parking of vehicles. 
(b)  All such assessments shall be collected by the appropriate court and shall be remitted to the city to be used by the city to fund criminal justice education and training expenditures for city law enforcement officers, auxiliary officers and support personnel in conformance with F.S. § 943.14. 
(Code 1960, § 21-3.5)  
Sec. 21-3. - Chief of police—Moneys to be paid to director of finance. 
Moneys received by the chief of police each day shall be remitted to the director of finance only and at the end of each month. 
(Code 1960, § 21-3)  
Sec. 21-4. - Same—Duty as to city property. 
The chief of police shall have charge of the police cars, motorcycles and other city property assigned to his/her department and shall be responsible for the care and protection of same, and shall report from time to time to the city manager their condition. 
(Code 1960, § 21-4)  
Sec. 21-5. - Same—Duty to prevent streets and sidewalks from becoming obstructed. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep the streets cleared of all obstructions, to see that the sidewalks are free and open to pedestrians. The chief of police shall not allow crowds of people to congregate on the sidewalks or streets so as to impede the public travel. 
(Code 1960, § 21-5)  
Sec. 21-6. - Same—Feeding of prisoners. 
When any offender is in custody of the chief of police, such person shall be fed at the expense of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 21-6)  
Sec. 21-7. - Purchase by police officers of property sold by city prohibited. 
The chief of police or any of his/her officers or employees of the police department are prohibited from purchasing or being in any way interested in the purchase of property sold by the city at public auction. 
(Code 1960, § 21-7)  
Sec. 21-8. - Presence of police at fires. 
There shall be a sufficient number of the members of the police department of the city present at all fires to ensure order and prevent theft or other crime. 
(Code 1960, § 21-8)  
Sec. 21-9. - Arrest of prisoners from other cities or counties; authority of police to collect for services. 
(a)  The police department of the city is permitted and hereby instructed to render invoices to other cities or counties for services rendered and expenses incurred in the arrest of prisoners from other cities or counties. 
(b)  The amount so charged for such services shall be the same amount as now allowed by law to the sheriffs of various counties in the state. 
(c)  Such money shall be collected by the police department and turned over to the director of finance. 
(Code 1960, § 21-9)  
Secs. 21-10—21-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 050228, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2005, repealed § 21-10. Former § 21-10 pertained to use of television surveillance equipment in investigation and detection of crime and derived from Code 1960, § 18-36.1.  
ARTICLE II. - DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR ABANDONED ARTICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Seized, abandoned, wrecked or derelict property, F.S. Ch. 705; Florida Contraband Forfeiture Act, F.S. § 932.701 et seq. 
 
Sec. 21-21. - To be held by police for 90 days. 
It shall be the duty of any person upon finding or coming into the possession of any personal property, to return the same to the owner if possible, otherwise to deliver the same to the city police department. All unclaimed or abandoned articles coming into the possession of the chief of police or any police officer or other employee of the city, the disposition of which is not otherwise provided for by law, shall be held by the chief of police for a period of 90 days. 
(Code 1960, § 21-10)  
Sec. 21-22. - Bicycles; sale at public auction of unclaimed articles. 
At the expiration of the ninety-day period mentioned in the preceding section, the chief of police may retain any unclaimed or abandoned bicycles for use by the city. Bicycles not so retained and any other abandoned or unclaimed articles shall be sold at public auction, retaining out of the proceeds of the sale an amount sufficient to defray the costs of the sales. 
(Code 1960, § 21-11) 
Cross reference— Bicycles, § 26-186 et seq.  
Sec. 21-23. - Notification of owner of sale; publication of notice in newspaper. 
No sale of unclaimed or abandoned articles shall be made until notice of the time and place of the sale shall have been mailed to the owner of any article to be offered for sale at least 30 days prior to the date thereof, when the address of such owner can be ascertained by the chief of police, nor shall the sale be made until notice of the time and place of the sale shall have been advertised in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city, once a week for two weeks, two publications being sufficient. The notice shall contain a description of the articles to be sold and the time and place of sale. 
(Code 1960, § 21-12)  
Sec. 21-24. - Records; disposition of proceeds. 
The chief of police shall keep a record of unclaimed or abandoned articles received by him/her, the date same were received, the amount received at the sale for each article sold thereat, and the balance, if any, remaining after the expenses of the sale have been paid. The chief of police shall immediately after the sale pay to the director of finance the balance remaining after the sale. 
(Code 1960, § 21-13)  
Sec. 21-25. - Refund to rightful owner. 
The director of finance shall at any time within one year after the sale of abandoned or unclaimed articles refund any balance so retained to any person furnishing satisfactory proof of ownership of any article sold at the sale. 
(Code 1960, § 21-14)  
Sec. 21-26. - Balance to be paid into general revenue fund after one year. 
In the event that the balance remaining after the sale of any abandoned or unclaimed article shall not be claimed by the rightful owner thereof within one year after the sale, then the director of finance shall pay the unclaimed balance into the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 21-15)  
Secs. 21-27—21-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGISTRATION OF PERSONS CONVICTED OF CRIMES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Registration of convicted felons by county sheriff, F.S. § 775.13. 
 
Sec. 21-41. - Information to be shown; fingerprinting. 
(a)  Every person who has been convicted in any federal court or the court of any state within ten years prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived, of any crime which, under the laws of the state would constitute a felony, who comes into the city from any point outside of the city shall, immediately upon his/her arrival within the boundaries of the city, register with the chief of police; and shall furnish to the chief of police in a written statement signed by the person the true name of the person and each other name or alias by which the person is or has been known, a full and complete description of himself/herself, the name of each crime of which he/she shall have been convicted, together with the name of the place where each crime was committed, the name under which he/she was convicted, and the date of the conviction thereof, the name, if any, and location of each prison, reformatory or other penal institution in which he/she shall have been confined as punishment therefor, together with the location or address of his/her residence, stopping place, or living quarters in the city, and each one thereof, if any, or the address or location of his/her intended residence, stopping place or living quarters therein, and each one thereof, with a description of the character of each place, whether hotel, an apartment house a dwelling house or otherwise, giving the street number thereof, if any, or such description of the address or location thereof as will so identify the same as to make it possible for location and the length of time for which he/she expects or intends to reside within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(b)  At the time of furnishing the information, the person shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the chief of police, and the photograph and fingerprints shall be made a part of the permanent record as provided by section 21-44. 
(Code 1960, § 21-16)  
Sec. 21-42. - Change of address. 
If any person specified in this article shall change any place of residence, stopping place or living quarters to any new or different place within the city other than any place last shown in the report to the chief of police, he/she shall immediately after the making of the change, notify the chief of police in a written and signed statement, of the change of address and shall furnish in the written statement to the chief of police his/her new address, and each one thereof. 
(Code 1960, § 21-17)  
Sec. 21-43. - False address or misleading information. 
It shall be unlawful for any person required by any provision of this article to furnish any report, to furnish in the report any false or fictitious address, or any address other than a true address or intended address, or to furnish in making any report any false, untrue or misleading information or statement relating to any information required by any provisions of this article to be made or furnished. 
(Code 1960, § 21-18)  
Sec. 21-44. - Records to be kept by chief of police; inspection by peace officers. 
The chief of police shall cause to be made a permanent record of all information, photographs and fingerprints required by the provisions of this article to be furnished to or by him/her. The records, photographs and fingerprints shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of any peace officer having jurisdiction within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 21-19)  
Sec. 21-45. - Failure to furnish report, information, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person required by any provisions of this article to furnish any report or information, to fail, neglect or refuse to make the report or to furnish the information, photographs or fingerprints or to fail, neglect or refuse to render or furnish the same within the time prescribed in this article, or to fail, neglect or refuse to furnish to the chief of police within such time any information, photograph or fingerprints required to be furnished by any provisions of this article, or to furnish any false, untrue or misleading information or statement relating to any information required by any provision of this article to be made or furnished. 
(Code 1960, § 21-20)  
Secs. 21-46—21-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FALSE BURGLAR AND ROBBERY ALARMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980475, § 1, adopted May 8, 2000, repealed Art. IV, §§ 21-61—21-69, which pertained to burglar alarm systems and derived from Ord. No. 3058, § 1(13B-1—13B-9), adopted Sept. 24, 1984. Section 3 of Ord. No. 980475 enacted a new Art. IV to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 21-50. - Short title. 
This article shall be referred to as the "City of Gainesville False Alarm Ordinance."  
Sec. 21-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the city manager to administer, control and review alarm applications, permits and false alarm reduction efforts. 
Alarm monitoring company means a person or entity performing the service of monitoring as defined in F.S. § 489.505, for burglar or robbery alarms, and having customers within the City of Gainesville. 
Alarm operator means any owner, tenant or other person or entity that uses or is in control of an alarm system. 
Alarm operator awareness class means a class conducted by the designated authority for the purpose of educating alarm users about responsible use and operation of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. 
Alarm review authority means the city manager or designee. 
Alarm site means the individual location of each alarm system. 
Alarm system means any device that emits, transmits or relays a signal intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon, law enforcement services to the alarm site. Alarm system does not include: 
(1)  A device installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is permanently located on the site; or 
(2)  A device designed to alert only the inhabitants of the device site, and that is not audible or visible from the exterior of the structure; or 
(3)  A device designed for a purpose other than to alert for intrusion, burglary or robbery. 
Alarm system contractor means a person licensed under F.S. ch. 489, as an electrical or alarm system contractor who installs, maintains, repairs, alters, services or monitors alarm systems for compensation. 
Automated dialing device means an alarm system which automatically sends, via telephone, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation. 
Cancellation of alarm response means the process by which an alarm company providing monitoring services verifies with the alarm operator or responsible party that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring law enforcement response and request law enforcement to cancel the dispatch when such request occurs prior to law enforcement's arrival on scene. 
Commercial premises means any structure or area not otherwise defined in this section as governmental or residential premises. 
Conversion means a transaction or process by which one alarm company begins monitoring and/or servicing a previously unmonitored alarm system, or an alarm system previously monitored and/or serviced by another alarm company. 
Deactivated alarm means an alarm system that has the primary and secondary power and the phone line disconnected at the alarm control panel. 
False alarm means an alarm dispatch or other response by the Gainesville Police when the responding officer(s) finds no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after having completed an investigation of the site. Excluded from this definition are: 
(1)  Alarms occurring as a result of lightning, wind, or other meteorological event, where there is clear evidence of physical damage to the alarm system; or 
(2)  Disruption of the telephone circuit beyond the control of the alarm operator or its agents, verified by written communication from the telephone company; or 
(3)  An electrical power disruption or failure in excess of four hours. 
Governmental premises means a structure or area owned and operated by a government entity. 
Holdup alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
Local alarm system means an alarm system that emits a signal at a fixed alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of the alarmed structure. 
One plus panic alarm means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering at a keypad a code that adds one (or more) to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code. (Normal code = 1234, one plus duress code = 1235. 
Panic alarm means an audible or silent alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response. 
Permit year means the period starting from the date of issuance of a permit and ending one year from that date. At the discretion of the city manager or designee, the permit year, for the initial registration may be not less than 12 months nor more than 24 months. 
Residential premises means any structure serving as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one person or by two or more persons who maintain a common household. 
Takeover means a transaction or process by which an alarm operator takes over control of an existing alarm system previously controlled by another alarm operator. 
Verify means an attempt by the alarm monitoring company or its representative, to contact the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, to determine the validity of the alarm before requesting law enforcement dispatch.  
Sec. 21-52. - Alarm permit and fee. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided under the definition of "permit year", every alarm operator shall annually apply to the alarm administrator for a nontransferable alarm permit. The permit shall be valid for one permit year and then expire. 
(b)  In accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A, a fee shall accompany each application or renewal for alarms on residential, commercial or governmental premises. The fee shall be proportionately adjusted for those permits that have an initial period greater than one year. 
(c)  The owner or manager of any residential or commercial premises which are rented to others and which have alarm systems provided by the owner or manager, shall: 
(1)  Explain the operation of the alarm system to the alarm user; 
(2)  Explain the alarm user's financial responsibilities for false alarms; 
(3)  Obtain the alarm user's signature on a form in which the alarm user acknowledges having received and understood the information provided in subsection (1) and subsection (2) above; 
(4)  Furnish a blank alarm permit application to the tenant. The alarm administrator shall provide the owner or manager with forms upon request. 
(d)  No permit shall be required for a deactivated alarm system. 
(e)  The alarm operator shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant(s); 
(2)  The address of the alarm site; 
(3)  The classification of the alarm site as residential, commercial, governmental; 
(4)  The type of system(s), such as burglary, robbery, or panic; 
(5)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of two persons who have access to the premises, the ability to reset the alarm, and who, upon request of the city police department, will respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes of notification; 
(6)  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm monitoring company, if any; 
(7)  The name, address, and telephone number of the installer and date of installation, if known; 
(8)  The name, address and telephone number of the commercial entity that last performed maintenance on the alarm system, if known; 
(9)  Any dangerous conditions present at the alarm site; 
(f)  No permit will be issued when a fine is outstanding, when a reason for a previous revocation has not been corrected, or if the applicant provides false information. 
(g)  The alarm operator shall submit interim updated application information within 15 days of when the on-file information has changed. A permit may be revoked if it is found to contain inaccuracies. 
(Ord. No. 030480, § 2, 11-24-03)  
Sec. 21-53. - False alarm fees and fines. 
(a)  Responsibility for false alarms shall be borne by the alarm operator. 
(b)  In accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A, fees shall be assessed or fines shall be levied for each false alarm per alarm site within one permit year. An additional fine shall be levied for false alarms from a non-permitted alarm system, or from an alarm system with a suspended or revoked permit, as established in Appendix A. Such fine will be reduced if an application for an alarm system is filed within ten days of the false alarm and the permit is issued within ten days thereafter. 
(c)  The alarm administrator will offer an alarm awareness class to alarm operators. Alarm operators may attend the class in lieu of paying one fine per permit year. 
(d)  After responding to an alarm, the city police department shall leave written notice at the alarm site that the police department has responded to an alarm. The notice shall include the identity of the officer, time of event, and the officer's determination as to whether the alarm was false. 
(Ord. No. 030480, § 3, 11-24-03)  
Sec. 21-54. - Suspension, revocation, or reinstatement of alarm permit. 
(a)  In addition to the assessment of fees or levy of fines as provided for in this article, the eighth false alarm response in a permit year shall result in a suspension of the alarm permit. 
(b)  A fee or fine that remains unpaid in excess of 30 days shall result in a suspension of the alarm permit. 
(c)  A suspension shall remain in effect until such time as: 
(1)  The alarm operator has taken action to remedy the causes of the false alarms; and 
(2)  The alarm administrator has reinstated the permit. 
(d)  The alarm administrator may revoke an alarm permit if it is determined that: 
(1)  There is a false statement of a material matter in the permit application; or 
(2)  Ten or more false alarms have occurred from the alarm site within a permit year. 
(e)  A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may be issued a new permit if that person: 
(1)  Submits documentation from the company that services the alarm system that it is operating properly, or that the alarm operator has received training in the use of the system or both if applicable; and 
(2)  Pays all fees or fines issued to the person under this article; and 
(3)  Submits a new application, and pays a reinstatement fee in accordance with the fee schedule established in Appendix A. 
(f)  The alarm administrator shall give written notification to the alarm operator of a suspension, revocation, or reinstatement. 
(Ord. No. 030480, § 4, 11-24-03)  
Sec. 21-55. - Appeals of fees, suspensions, and revocations. 
(a)  An alarm operator may appeal the assessment of a fee, permit suspension, or permit revocation under this article. The alarm operator shall notify the alarm administrator in writing within ten days of receipt of notice of fine, suspension or revocation. Proper notification shall stay the imposition of a fee, suspension or revocation, until a decision is made by the alarm review authority. 
(b)  The alarm review authority shall conduct a hearing and consider evidence presented by the alarm operator and by other interested persons. The alarm review authority shall make a decision based on the preponderance of the evidence standard. The decision of the alarm review authority is the final administrative remedy for the city.  
Sec. 21-56. - Response to alarm. 
The alarm operator or a responder listed on the alarm permit shall respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes from the time of notification by the city police department of the activation of the alarm, whether false or not. The failure to respond, when requested by the city police department, shall be deemed a violation by the alarm operator, and a fee shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule established in Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 030480, § 5, 11-24-03)  
Sec. 21-57. - Deactivation of audible alarms. 
The alarm operator shall deactivate the alarm within 15 minutes of activation or adjust the alarm to automatically deactivate within 15 minutes of activation. Alarm systems not currently programmed to deactivate within 15 minutes shall be so programmed during the next service call. In accordance with the fee schedule established in Appendix A, a fee shall be assessed for failure to comply with this section. 
(Ord. No. 030480, § 6, 11-24-03) 
State Law reference— Audible alarms, F.S. § 489.530.  
Sec. 21-58. - Alarm monitoring companies. 
(a)  All alarm monitoring companies shall register annually with the alarm administrator. Each alarm monitoring company shall pay a fee in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A unless it is regulated by the department of business and professional regulation and has paid a local business tax for the current year to the county or municipality in the state where it's permanent business location or branch office is maintained. Each registration shall be valid for 12 months. The alarm monitoring company shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name, street address and telephone number of the monitoring company; 
(2)  The names, street addresses, and telephone numbers of all alarm operators contracted with within the territorial jurisdiction of this article; 
(3)  The procedure used to verify the legitimacy of an alarm prior to notification to the city police department; 
(4)  The name, street address and telephone number of the qualifying agent. 
(b)  Upon registration, the alarm monitoring company shall be provided with a telephone number for use when reporting an alarm. 
(c)  Alarm monitoring companies shall maintain records relating to alarm notification for a period of at least one year, and shall provide such records to the alarm administrator upon request or a fine, in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A shall be levied. 
(Ord. No. 030480, § 7, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 040570, § 1, 11-22-04; Ord. No. 070022, § 7, 6-25-07) 
State Law reference— Business organizations, F.S. § 489.521.  
Sec. 21-59. - Alarm verification calls required. 
All burglary or intrusion alarm systems that have central monitoring shall have a central monitoring verification call made to the alarm site, prior to alarm monitor personnel contacting a law enforcement agency for alarm dispatch, or a fine shall be levied in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. However, if the alarm has properly operating visual or auditory sensors that enable the monitoring company to verify the alarm signal, verification calling is not required. 
(Ord. No. 030480, § 8, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 040570, § 1, 11-22-04) 
State Law reference— Alarm verification, F.S. § 489.529.  
Sec. 21-60. - Alarm system contractors. 
(a)  All alarm system contractors shall register annually with the alarm administrator. Each alarm system contractor shall pay a fee in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A unless it is regulated by the department of business and professional regulation and has paid a local business tax for the current year to the county or municipality in the state where it's permanent business location or branch office is maintained. A fine shall be levied in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A for failure to register. Each registration shall be valid for 12 months. 
(b)  No person shall install, maintain, repair, alter, service or monitor alarm systems for compensation without being an alarm system contractor, or a fine shall be levied as established in Appendix A. 
(c)  All alarm system contractors shall furnish each of its agents with identification cards in accordance with F.S. § 489.518, or a fine shall be levied for each violation, in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. 
(d)  Alarm system contractors shall not install systems or equipment or use methods of installation that do not meet or exceed minimum Underwriters Laboratories or American National Standards Institute requirements for the appropriate installation or that do not use control panels tested for conformance to the Security Industry Association's Control Panel Standard, or a fine shall be levied for each violation, in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. 
(e)  Alarm system contractors shall not activate or service an alarm system unless it is permitted, or a fine shall be levied, in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. 
(f)  Alarm system contractors shall not cause a false alarm during the servicing, repairing, testing or inspection of an alarm system, or a fine shall be levied in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. The alarm operator shall not be charged for such false alarms. 
(g)  Alarm system contractors shall provide all alarm operators with a blank alarm permit application, whenever installing, maintaining, repairing, altering or servicing an alarm system, unless the alarm system contractor reasonably believes that the system is permitted, or a fine shall be levied in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 030480, § 9, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 040570, § 1, 11-22-04; Ord. No. 070022, § 7, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 21-61. - Prohibited alarm devices. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to operate an alarm system equipped with an automatic dialing device programmed to connect directly to the city police department or public safety combined communications center. All automatic dialing systems shall communicate alarm notifications to a person who has accepted the responsibility of relaying the alarm or, to a business licensed by the State of Florida to engage in the relaying of alarm notifications. A fine shall be levied in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A for violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a person to use an alarm system that is programmed to send a "One Plus Panic Alarm". Alarm companies may continue to report alarms received from alarm systems programmed with the "One Plus Panic Alarm" feature prior to enactment of this article. After enactment of this article, any takeover or conversion as defined herein, or any inspection or modification of the alarm system, shall require the alarm company to remove the "One Plus Panic Alarm" program. A fine in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A shall be levied against the alarm system contractor for violations of this section. 
(c)  It is unlawful to use or install a single-action type holdup or panic alarm switch for activation. A holdup or panic alarm requires that a dual-action type switch be installed and used for activation. Alarm companies may continue to report alarms received from alarm systems equipped with single-action switch prior to enactment of this article. After enactment of this article, any takeover or conversion as defined herein, or any inspection or modification of alarm system, shall require the alarm company to remove the all single-action type, non-recessed button/switches used for activation. A fine in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A shall be levied against the alarm system contractor for violations of this section. 
(Ord. No. 030480, § 10, 11-24-03)  
Sec. 21-62. - Auxiliary power supply. 
An alarm operator shall not operate an alarm system which does not have a minimum four-hour auxiliary power supply, or a fine in accordance with the fee schedule established at Appendix A shall be levied for noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 030480, § 11, 11-24-03)  
Sec. 21-63. - No special public duty. 
The permitting of an alarm system is not intended to, nor will it create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By registering the alarm system, the alarm operator acknowledges that law enforcement response may be based on factors such as availability of law enforcement units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions and staffing levels.  
Sec. 21-64. - Civil citation; collection of fees. 
(a)  The police officers and code enforcement officers may issue a civil citation for violations of sections 21-53(b)(6); 21-58(a) and (c); 21-59; 21-60(a) through (g); 21-61 and 21-62 of this article. The citation shall be issued in accordance with Chapter 2, Article V, Division 6, Civil Citations, of the City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances and F.S. § 162.21. 
(b)  In addition to other available remedies, any fee assessed or fines levied pursuant to this article that remains unpaid may be collected in accordance with the city policies regarding delinquent accounts.  
Sec. 21-65. - Disposition of fees and fines. 
Fees and fines collected by the alarm review authority pursuant to this article shall first be applied to the administration of this article.  
Sec. 21-66. - Records. 
All information received by the city pursuant to this article is confidential and exempt from F.S. §§ 119.07(01) and 286.011 and other laws and rules requiring public access to records. 
State Law reference— F.S. § 281.301.  
Secs. 21-67—21-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - COMBAT AUTOMOBILE THEFT 
 
Sec. 21-70. - Combat Automobile Theft Program. 
The Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law authorizes counties and municipalities to enact ordinances to establish "combat automobile theft: (CAT) programs whereby vehicle owners may enroll their vehicles giving advance written consent to law enforcement officers to stop their vehicles if they are being operated between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided the CAT decal is properly displayed in the lower left corner of the vehicle's rear window. 
(Ord. No. 960103, § 1, 8-26-96)  
Sec. 21-71. - Administering of program. 
A "combat automobile theft" (CAT) program, as authorized under the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law is hereby established in Gainesville, Florida. The program shall include: 
(1)  Consent forms to be executed by motor vehicle owners who enroll vehicles in the program. 
(2)  CAT program decals which conform to the specifications, colors and design of the uniform CAT decal established by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement for use throughout the state. 
(3)  All other provisions of the "combat automobile theft" program as provided for in the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law. 
Administration of the program shall be conducted by the Chief of Police of Gainesville, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 960103, § 1, 8-26-96)  
Sec. 21-72. - Cost of administering program. 
Charging a fee for administration of the program is optional. At this time, upon the recommendation of the city manager, the city commission elects not to charge a fee for the citizens during the implementation phase of this program. However, the city commission may adopt a resolution levying a fee at any time in the future to offset the costs of this program as permitted by F.S. § 316.008 upon the recommendation of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 960103, § 1, 8-26-96)  
Chapter 22 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 14.5; junkyards and salvage yards, § 30-96. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00053, § 1, adopted Aug. 28, 2000, repealed § 22-1 which pertained to junk dealers and derived from Code 1960, § 16-8.  
Sec. 22-2. - Pawnbrokers. 
Pawnbrokers shall adhere to all requirements of F.S. ch. 539. 
(Code 1960, § 16-8; Ord. No. 00053, § 1, 8-28-00)  
Sec. 22-3. - Violation; penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9. The police officers may issue a civil citation for violations of any provision of this chapter. The citation shall be issued in accordance with Chapter 2, Article V, Division 6, Civil Citations, of this Code and F.S. § 162.21. 
(Code 1960, § 17-3; Ord. No. 00053, § 1, 8-28-00)  
Secs. 22-4—22-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND DEALERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00053, § 1, adopted Aug. 28, 2000, changed the title of Art. II from "Secondhand Dealers in Jewelry, Metals and Coins" to "Secondhand Dealers." 
State Law reference— Precious metal dealers, F.S. § 538.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-16. - Definition. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the term: 
Consignment shop means a shop engaging in the business of accepting for sale, on consignment, secondhand goods which, having once been used or transferred from the manufacturer to the dealer, are then received into the possession of a third party. 
Department means the Gainesville Police Department. 
Pledge means pawn or buy-sell agreement. 
Precious metals means any item containing any gold, silver, or platinum, or any combination thereof, excluding: 
(1)  Any chemical or any automotive, photographic, electrical, medical, or dental materials or electronic parts. 
(2)  Any coin with an intrinsic value less than its numismatic value. 
(3)  Any gold bullion coin. 
(4)  Any gold, silver, or platinum bullion that has been assayed and is properly marked as to its weight and fineness. 
(5)  Any coin which is mounted in a jewelry setting. 
Precious metals dealer means a secondhand dealer who normally or regularly engages in the business of buying used precious metals for resale. The term does not include those persons involved in the bulk sale of precious metals from one secondhand or precious metals dealer to another. 
Secondhand dealer means any person, corporation, or other business organization or entity which is not a secondary metals recycler as defined in F.S. § 538.18(8), and which is engaged in the business of purchasing, or consigning. However, secondhand dealers are not limited to dealing only in items defined as secondhand goods in this section. Except as provided in subsection (b), the term means jewelers, precious metals dealers, garage sale operators, secondhand stores, and consignment shops. 
Secondhand goods means personal property previously owned or used, which is not regulated metals property regulated under F.S. ch. 538, pt. II, and which is purchased, consigned, or pawned as used property. Such secondhand goods shall be limited to watches; diamonds, gems, and other precious stones; fishing rods, reels, and tackle; audio and video electronic equipment, including television sets, compact disc players, DVD players, radios, amplifiers, receivers, turntables, tape recorders; video tape recorders; speakers and citizens' band radios; computer equipment; radar detectors; depth finders; trolling motors; outboard motors; sterling silver flatware and serving pieces; photographic equipment, including cameras, video and film cameras, lenses, electronic flashes, tripods, and developing equipment; microwave ovens; animal fur coats; marine equipment; video games and cartridges; commercially produced audio and video tapes; commercially produced compact discs; commercially produced DVD discs; power lawn and landscape equipment; office equipment such as copiers, fax machines, and postage machines but excluding furniture; sports equipment; golf clubs; weapons, including knives, swords, and air guns; telephones, including cellular and portable; firearms; tools; calculators; musical instruments, excluding pianos and organs; lawnmowers; bicycles; typewriters; motor vehicles; gold, silver, platinum, and other precious metals excluding coins; and jewelry, excluding costume jewelry. 
Secondhand store means the place or premises at which a secondhand dealer is registered to conduct business as a secondhand dealer, or conducts business. 
Transaction means any title loan, purchase, consignment of secondhand goods by a secondhand dealer. 
(b)  This chapter does not apply to: 
(1)  Any secondhand goods transaction involving an organization or entity registered with the state as a nonprofit, religious, or charitable organization or any school-sponsored association or organization. 
(2)  A law enforcement officer acting in an official capacity. 
(3)  A trustee in bankruptcy, executor, administrator, or receiver who has presented proof of such status to the secondhand dealer. 
(4)  Any public official acting under judicial process or authority who has presented proof of such status to the secondhand dealer. 
(5)  A sale on the execution, or by virtue of any process issued by a court, if proof thereof has been presented to the secondhand dealer. 
(6)  Any garage sale operator who holds garage sales less than ten weekends per year. 
(7)  Any person at antique, coin, or collectible shows or sales. 
(8)  Any person who sells household personal property as an agent for the property owner or their representative pursuant to a written agreement at that person's residence. 
(9)  The purchase or consignment of secondhand goods from one secondhand dealer to another secondhand dealer when the selling secondhand dealer has complied with the requirements of this chapter. 
(10)  Any person accepting a secondhand good as a trade-in for a similar item of greater value. 
(11)  Any auction business. 
(12)  Any business that is registered with the Florida Department of Revenue for sales tax purposes as an antique dealer pursuant to F.S. ch. 212, and that purchases secondhand goods from the property owner or her or his representative at the property owner's residence pursuant to a written agreement that states the name, address, and telephone number of the property owner and the type of property purchased. 
(13)  Any person purchasing or consigning secondhand goods ordered by mail, computer-assisted shopping, media-assisted, media-facilitated, or media-solicited shopping or shopping by other means of media communication, including, but not limited to, direct mail advertising, unsolicited distribution of catalogs, television, radio, or other electronic media, telephone, magazine, or newspaper advertising, so long as such person is in this state at the time of the order. 
(14)  A motor vehicle dealer as defined in F.S. § 320.27. 
(c)  This part does not apply to secondary metals recyclers or businesses that deal in ferrous metals. 
(Code 1960, § 17-1(a); Ord. No. 00053, § 1, 8-28-00) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-17. - Requirements are in addition to other Code requirements. 
The requirements of this article are in addition to any other requirements of the Gainesville Code of Ordinances, such as but not limited to zoning and business tax receipt requirements. 
(Code 1960, § 17-2; Ord. No. 070022, § 8, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 22-18. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall engage in, manage, conduct or carry on the business of a secondhand dealer without obtaining a written permit from the police department and the payment of a fee in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(b)  Contents. The permit shall contain the name and home address of the permittee and the address of the business being permitted and shall be signed by the police chief or his/her designee. 
(c)  Expiration, renewal. All permits shall expire on the thirtieth day of September and shall be renewed before the first day of October. The permit shall be renewed at the police department and requires the payment of a renewal fee in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(Code 1960, § 17-1(b))  
Sec. 22-19. - Change of location. 
A change of location may be endorsed on a permit by the police department upon written application by the permittee accompanied by a change of location fee in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(Code 1960, § 17-1(c))  
Sec. 22-20. - Records. 
(a)  Secondhand dealers shall maintain records of all transactions of secondhand goods on the premises. Within 24 hours of the acquisition of any secondhand goods by purchase, a secondhand dealer shall deliver to the police department a record of the transaction on a form approved by the police department. Such record shall contain: 
(1)  The time, date, and place of the transaction. 
(2)  A complete and accurate description of the goods acquired, including any serial numbers, manufacturer's numbers, or other identifying marks or characteristics and the title of any book, or commercially produced video or audio product including, but not limited to, compact disk (CDs), DVDs, video and audio cassettes and video game cartridges. 
(3)  A description of the person from whom the goods were acquired, including: 
a.  Full name, address, workplace, and home and work phone numbers. 
b.  Height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair color, eye color, and any other identifying marks. 
(4)  Any other information required by the form approved by the Department of Law Enforcement. 
(b)  The right thumbprint of the seller. In the event the seller can not submit the right thumbprint another digit may be used. 
(c)  The secondhand dealer shall require verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued photographic identification card such as a driver's license or military identification card. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon. 
(d)  The seller shall sign a statement verifying that the seller is the rightful owner of the goods or is entitled to sell or pledge the goods. 
(Code 1960, § 17-1(d), (e); Ord. No. 00053, § 1, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 030479, § 1, 11-10-03) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 538.011.  
Sec. 22-21. - Holding period; exception. 
Property acquired in the course of a permittee's business shall be held for a 15-day period. Such holding periods are not applicable when the person known by the secondhand dealer to be the person from whom the goods were acquired desires to redeem, repurchase, or recover the goods, provided the dealer can produce the record of the original transaction with verification that the customer is the person from whom the goods were originally acquired. 
(Code 1960, § 17-1(e); Ord. No. 00053, § 1, 8-28-00)  
Sec. 22-22. - Hold orders issued by police. 
If a police officer has reasonable grounds to believe that an item acquired by a permittee under this article in the course of his/her business is the subject of a criminal investigation, the police officer may place a hold-order upon the property for a period of 90 days and upon release of the property, may require the permittee to keep a record of the disposition of the property. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any property contrary to any hold order issued by a police officer. 
(Code 1960, § 17-1(f); Ord. No. 00053, § 1, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 070025, § 1, 7-9-07)  
Sec. 22-23. - Alterations, repair, etc., of items during holding periods prohibited. 
No permittee shall clean, alter, repair or otherwise change the appearance, melt, destroy, sell, export, or otherwise dispose of any item described in section 22-16 obtained in the course of his/her business until the 15-day period described in section 22-21 or the 60-day period described in section 22-22 have expired. 
(Code 1960, § 17-1(g); Ord. No. 00053, § 1, 8-28-00)  
Sec. 22-24. - Inspection of records and premises. 
The premises and required records of each secondhand dealer can be inspected during regular business hours by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 00053, § 1, 8-28-00) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 538.016.  
Sec. 22-25. - Purchase from minors. 
No secondhand dealer may purchase any precious metal from any person under 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 00053, § 1, 8-28-00) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 538.014.  
Sec. 22-26. - Exceptions to article. 
The provisions of sections 22-21 and 22-23 shall not apply to transactions by and between secondhand dealers where the seller before the sale to another dealer has complied with all of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1960, § 17-1(h))  
Chapter 23 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 2-376 et seq.; consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in public places, § 4-4; art in public places, Ch. 5.5; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; cemeteries, Ch. 7; housing, Ch. 13; parks and recreation, Ch. 18; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 26; utilities, Ch. 27; vehicles for hire, Ch. 28; land development code, Ch. 30; subdivisions and street vacation, § 30-180 et seq.; signs, § 30-315 et seq. 
State Law reference— Supplemental and alternative method of making local municipal improvements, F.S. Ch. 170; municipal public works, F.S. Ch. 180; state highway system, F.S. Ch. 335. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Violations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-9.  
Secs. 23-2—23-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREET DESIGNATION AND BUILDING ADDRESS NUMBERING PLAN  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 23-16. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms when used in this article have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Block shall mean a space usually rectangular in shape enclosed by streets and usually occupied by or intended for buildings. 
Main Street shall mean that thoroughfare presently designated as State Road 329 and Alachua County Road 329 which runs north and south in the city. 
Principal street shall mean any thoroughfare which crosses either Main Street or University Avenue, or any thoroughfare which does not cross either Main Street or University Avenue but is in alignment with another thoroughfare elsewhere in the city, or any thoroughfare which is at least two (2) blocks in length. This meaning shall be used only for the purpose of street naming. 
Secondary street shall mean any thoroughfare which does not cross Main Street or University Avenue and which is not in alignment with any other thoroughfare elsewhere in the city. This meaning shall be used only for the purpose of street naming. 
Street shall mean any thoroughfare in the city, whether publicly or privately owned. 
University Avenue shall mean that thoroughfare designated as State Road 26 from the east city limits to W. 38th Street and the thoroughfare projection of State Road 26 west of W. 38th Street. 
(Code 1960, § 23-2; Ord. No. 150162 , § 1, 3-17-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 23-17. - Map of streets within the city adopted. 
(a)  The map dated March 10, 2014, showing the streets within the city as designated under the quadrant system, is hereby adopted and declared to be the official street map of the city. 
(b)  A copy of the map shall be kept at all times on file in the department of planning and development services. 
(c)  The city manager, or designee, shall, from time to time as new streets are dedicated and opened to the use of the public, amend the map to show the location and designation of the streets. 
(d)  The city manager, or designee, shall designate all streets in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1960, § 23-1; Ord. No. 970756, § 1, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 150162 , § 2, 3-17-16)  
Sec. 23-18. - Lanes and places designations. 
Secondary streets running east and west and lying between two (2) numbered avenues shall be designated as lanes and places and numbered the same as the first avenue lying between the lane or place and University Avenue. 
(Code 1960, § 23-6)  
Sec. 23-19. - Roads and boulevards designations. 
Streets which meander and do not run generally in a north-south or an east-west direction shall be designated as roads and boulevards. 
(Code 1960, § 23-7)  
Sec. 23-20. - Building address numbers designations. 
(a)  Buildings in the blocks fronting on streets, drives and terraces shall be numbered in hundreds as determined by the number of avenues lying between the buildings and University Avenue, except in those areas where the avenues are not projected through, in which cases numbering shall provide for the future projection of the avenue. 
(b)  Buildings in blocks fronting on avenues, places and lanes shall be numbered in hundreds as determined by the number of streets lying between the buildings and Main Street, except in those areas where the streets are not projected through, in which cases numbering shall provide for the future projection of the streets. 
(Code 1960, § 23-8)  
Sec. 23-21. - Address number curb markings. 
(a)  Prohibitions. Except for those markings and painting made and placed on street curbs by the city or some other duly authorized governmental agency, it shall be unlawful to place any marking or painting on a street curb unless done as specifically permitted in this section. Any other street curb marking or painting is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  Specifications. Address number markings may be placed on the street curb provided the same is done in strict compliance with these specifications: 
(1)  The marking shall be for the sole purpose of identifying the address of the premises adjacent to the street curb. 
(2)  Only one (1) such marking shall be permitted for each lot, residence or place of business. 
(3)  The markings shall be on a black enamel background of fifteen (15) inches in length and six (6) inches in height, with only numbers centered thereon indicating the correct address, which numbers shall be in white traffic paint four (4) inches in height. 
(4)  No further marking of any kind shall be permitted except as herein expressly stated. 
(Code 1960, § 23-8.1)  
Sec. 23-22. - Division of city—Street designations. 
All principal streets running parallel or generally so with Main Street shall be designated as streets: 
(1)  All principal streets running parallel or generally so with Main Street or the projection of Main Street north from N. 16th Avenue which lie east of Main Street and north of University Avenue shall be designated as northeast streets and numbered consecutively from Main Street eastward. 
(2)  All principal streets running parallel or generally so with Main Street or the projection of Main Street north from N. 16th Avenue and north of University Avenue shall be designated as northwest streets and numbered consecutively from Main Street westward. 
(3)  All principal streets running parallel or generally so with Main Street which lie east of Main Street or the projection of Main Street south from Depot Avenue and south of University Avenue shall be designated as southeast streets and numbered consecutively from Main Street eastward. 
(4)  All principal streets running parallel or generally so with Main Street which lie west of Main Street or the projection of Main Street south from Depot Avenue and south of University Avenue shall be designated as southwest streets and numbered consecutively from Main Street westward. 
(Code 1960, § 23-3)  
Sec. 23-23. - Same—Avenue designations. 
All principal streets running parallel or generally so with University Avenue shall be designated as avenues: 
(1)  All principal streets running parallel or generally so with University Avenue which lie north of University Avenue and east of Main Street or the projection of Main Street north from N. 16th Avenue shall be designated as northeast avenues and numbered consecutively from University Avenue northward. 
(2)  All principal streets running parallel or generally so with University Avenue which lie north of University Avenue and west of Main Street or the projection of Main Street north from N. 16th Avenue shall be designated as northwest avenues and numbered consecutively from University Avenue northward. 
(3)  All principal streets running parallel or generally so with University Avenue which lie south of University Avenue and east of Main Street or the projection of Main Street south from Depot Avenue shall be designated as southeast avenues and numbered consecutively from University Avenue southward. 
(4)  All principal streets running parallel or generally so with University Avenue which lie south of University Avenue and west of Main Street or the projection of Main Street south from Depot Avenue shall be designated as southwest avenues and numbered consecutively from University Avenue southward. 
(Code 1960, § 23-4)  
Sec. 23-24. - Same—Drive and terrace designations. 
Secondary streets running north and south and lying between two (2) numbered streets shall be designated as drives and as terraces and numbered the same as the first street lying between the drive or terrace and Main Street. 
(Code 1960, § 23-5)  
Sec. 23-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - UNIFORM PROPERTY NUMBERING SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3572, § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 1989, adding §§ 23-8.2—23-8.8 to the 1960 Code, has been included as Div. 2, §§ 23-26—23-32 hereof at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 23-26. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Accessory building shall mean a building which is clearly incidental or subordinate to and customarily utilized in connection with a principal building located on the same lot. 
Building front shall mean that area of a building which faces the public or private way pursuant to which the building is numbered. 
Grid system shall mean a series of designed north/south parallel lines intersecting a second set of east/west parallel lines within a one-square-mile area, i.e., "section," as indicated on the official zoning maps of the City of Gainesville. 
Numbering system shall mean a uniform method of assigning and coordinating the addresses of buildings and properties based on a designated grid system contained in the official zoning maps of the City of Gainesville. 
Owner shall mean any and all persons, firms, entities, partnerships, trusts, corporations, associations, or other organizations owning the fee title to, or having an undivided interest in, any building or property which is subject to the provisions of this section. 
Principal building shall mean any structure which is designed, built, or used for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons or property of any kind for any residential, commercial, or industrial purpose. 
Private way shall mean any officially named thoroughfare used for vehicular traffic which is not included in the definition of "public way" and which is not maintained by the City of Gainesville. This term shall include, but is not limited to, roadways or driveways in apartment, condominium, commercial, or industrial complexes, which have been named and in which signs have been placed in accordance with the Gainesville Code of Ordinances and Section 316.077, Florida Statutes, the state Uniform Traffic Law. 
Public way shall mean that area of an officially named public road or right-of-way, either paved or unpaved, which is intended for vehicular traffic, excluding service entrances or driveways. 
(Ord. No. 3572, § 1, 10-2-89) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.  
Sec. 23-27. - Buildings, property numbering established; incorporation of map. 
A uniform system of numbering buildings, as shown on the official street maps of the City of Gainesville as maintained on file with the city manager or his/her designee, is hereby adopted for use in the incorporated area of Gainesville. These maps and all explanatory matter thereon and related thereto are hereby adopted, incorporated herein by reference, and made a part of this division. 
(Ord. No. 3572, § 1, 10-2-89)  
Sec. 23-28. - Administration and assignment of numbers. 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for coordinating and maintaining the number system established by this division. The city manager or his/her designee shall issue building numbers in conformity with the uniform numbering system established in the preceding section. 
(b)  The city manager or his/her designee shall, upon request and without charge, assign a number to each unnumbered building located in the incorporated area of Gainesville if the building has not been assigned a number pursuant to the uniform numbering system. 
(c)  The assignment by the city manager or his/her designee and posting by the owner of the assigned number shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit for any such building. 
(d)  The city manager or his/her designee shall duly record and keep records of all numbers assigned under this section. 
(Ord. No. 3572, § 1, 10-2-89)  
Sec. 23-29. - Notification of conflicting numbers. 
Should an existing building have, exhibit or be addressed by a number in conflict with the uniform numbering system, the city manager or his/her designee shall give notice to those owners whose building number is in conflict with the uniform numbering system. The notice shall be delivered to the owner (1) by certified mail, return receipt requested; (2) by posting the same in a conspicuous place on the building; or (3) by hand delivery. The notice shall include a notification of a change of address and shall contain the new building number(s) assigned to the building. 
(Ord. No. 3572, § 1, 10-2-89)  
Sec. 23-30. - Posting of numbers. 
New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property, whether or not mail is delivered to such building or property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. It shall be the duty of the owners of each building in the incorporated area to post the assigned building number on the property in the following manner: 
(1)  The building (address) number shall be affixed to the front of the building, or to a separate structure in front of the building (such as mailbox, post, wall, fence, etc.), in such a manner so as to be clearly visible and legible from the public or private way on which the building fronts. 
(2)  Numerals shall be Arabic and shall not be less than three inches in height and one-half inch in stroke width for residential buildings, structures, or portions thereof, and at least six inches in height for all other buildings, structures, or portions thereof. Where address identification is required by the fire official on other elevations of buildings, structures, or portions thereof, such numerals shall be not less than three inches in height for residential and at least six inches in height for all other buildings, structures, or portions thereof. Existing numbers may be exempt if approved by the city fire inspector. 
(3)  The numerals shall be of a contrasting color with the immediate background of the building or structure on which such numerals are affixed. 
(4)  Any address numbering done pursuant to section 23-21 of this Code shall be in addition to the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 3572, § 1, 10-2-89; Ord. No. 002568, § 1, 6-10-02)  
Sec. 23-31. - Annexation. 
Whenever a parcel of land, a subdivision, or any part thereof becomes a part of the incorporated area of Gainesville, by annexation or otherwise, it shall be the responsibility of the city manager or his/her designee to review the building (i.e., address) numbers of such property and determine whether such numbers, their posting, and the method of numbering for such annexed portion conform with the designated grid system and the uniform numbering system established by this division. If the number, posting or method of numbering does not conform with the designated grid system and the uniform numbering system, the city manager or his/her designee shall give notice of such nonconformance to the owners of the affected building or property. Nonconformance includes, but is not limited to, a number out of sequence, odd or even number on the wrong side of the street, and rural box numbers. The notice shall be delivered (1) by certified mail, return receipt requested; (2) by posting said notice in a conspicuous place on the building; or (3) by hand delivery. The notice shall include a notification of a change of address and shall contain the new building number(s) assigned to the building. 
(Ord. No. 3572, § 1, 10-2-89)  
Sec. 23-32. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, entity, partnership, trust, corporation, association, or other organization failing to comply with the provisions of this division shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 3572, § 1, 10-2-89)  
Secs. 23-33—23-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 170786 , § 1, adopted March 1, 2018, repealed article III, §§ 23-36—23-44, which pertained to encroachments and obstructions. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. Section 3 of such ordinance renumbered Article IV as Article III. 
Cross reference— Access management, § 30-336 et seq. 
 
Sec. 23-56. - Compliance with article required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, construct or contract for the construction of laying of any sidewalks, curb and gutter or valley gutter in the city where such work is to be done by or through the authority of the owner or occupant of the property fronting or abutting thereon, unless the person doing the work or contracting to do the same, shall comply with and conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1960, § 23-20)  
Sec. 23-57. - Bonding of contractors. 
Each contractor engaged in the laying of sidewalks, curb or gutter or valley gutter provided for in this article, shall be required to enter into a bond payable to the city in the sum of $500.00 to be approved by the city manager and filed with him/her. The bond shall be furnished by the contractor prior to obtaining his/her business tax receipt each year. The conditions of the bond shall be that all sidewalks, curb and gutter or valley gutter, constructed by the contractor upon any of the streets of the city shall comply with the requirements of this article and conform to the lines and grades furnished by the city engineer and that the contractor will, upon written notice from the city engineer remove and replace within 30 days after the date of the notice, at the expense of the contractor, all sidewalks, curb and gutter or valley gutter not constructed in accordance therewith or which for any reason is found by the city engineer to be defective. The contractor will guarantee his/her work free from defects for a period of one year after the completion thereof. The bond shall be for the benefit of the city or any person employing the contractor in the construction of work provided for in this article. 
(Code 1960, § 23-35; Ord. No. 070022, § 9, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 23-58. - Defective work. 
If any defects develop in the sidewalk, curb and gutter or valley gutter during the work, those sections which are defective shall be taken up and relaid by the contractor with new materials, in accordance with this article at the expense of the contractor. 
(Code 1960, § 23-36)  
Sec. 23-59. - Lines and grades; supervision and inspection; injuring trees. 
(a)  All sidewalks, curb and gutter or valley gutter shall be put down to the lines and grades furnished by the city engineer and all sidewalks shall be laid the width directed by him/her. No work shall be done until the lines and grades have been furnished by the city engineer either to the owner or occupant of the premises abutting thereon or to the contractor employed to do the work. 
(b)  All work shall be done under the supervision of the city engineer or his/her inspector who will pass on the quality of the materials and of the finished work. The contractor doing the work shall be responsible for the preservation of lines and grades given by the city engineer until the completion of the work. 
(c)  There shall be no tree cut or otherwise injured except by written permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 23-21)  
Sec. 23-60. - Fills. 
Should the grades furnished by the city engineer be such that a fill must be made before laying the sidewalks, the fill shall be thoroughly compacted by wetting, and if directed by the city engineer, by tamping with a metal or wooden tamp weighing not less than three-eighths of a pound per square inch of tamping surface. 
(Code 1960, § 23-22)  
Sec. 23-61. - Forms; drainage. 
Forms shall be of metal or of dressed lumber of two-inch thickness. Forms which are to be used more than once shall be thoroughly cleaned of all mortar or cement materials after each use. Forms shall be securely staked to line and grade and so set for sidewalks that the walk when finished shall have a cross slope of one-fourth inch per foot of width draining toward the street. 
(Code 1960, § 23-23)  
Sec. 23-62. - Quality of materials. 
(a)  Cement for concrete shall be a standard brand of portland cement of American manufacture. 
(b)  Sand shall be coarse and sharp, free from dust, clay, loam or any injurious organic matter. 
(c)  Stone shall be hard, free from dust, earth, clay or screenings. Stone of sandy texture will not be acceptable. The grading of stone shall fall within the following limits: 
(1)  Passing a 2½-inch screen ..... 100% 
(2)  Passing a 1-inch screen ..... 30—60% 
(3)  Passing a ½-inch screen ..... 15—40% 
(4)  Retained on a ¼-inch screen ..... 95% 
(d)  City water shall be used for mixing. 
(Code 1960, § 23-24)  
Sec. 23-63. - Mixing of concrete and mortar; pouring temperature. 
(a)  The cement concrete and mortar shall be mixed in an approved batch mixer for not less than 1½ minutes or for 24 revolutions of the drum for each batch. The cement, sand and stone shall be measured in a batch box or by some other method which will ensure the proper quantity of each ingredient in each batch. Only enough water to make the concrete workable shall be used. 
(b)  Hand mixing of cement concrete or mortar shall not be done on any job without first obtaining the consent of the city engineer. The mixing shall be done as directed by the city engineer. 
(c)  No concrete shall be poured when the temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1960, § 23-25)  
Sec. 23-64. - Substitution of lime rock for hard rock; bond required. 
At the option of the property owner, lime rock which shall be according to the specifications of the Florida Department of Transportation for hard road work, may be substituted for hard rock when placed six inches thick, having the same graduation requirement as hard rock and mixed as specified in this article in the proportion of one part of portland cement to five parts of lime rock by volume using no more than seven gallons of water to one sack of cement; provided, that in case this option is exercised by the property owner the contractor shall execute a surety bond payable to the city in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every separate piece or parcel of sidewalk laid. The bond shall be approved by the city manager and filed with the city manager, such bond being conditioned upon the work being free from defects of materials or workmanship for a period of five (5) years from the date of the completion and acceptance of work, and being further conditioned as provided for in section 23-57. 
(Code 1960, § 23-26)  
Sec. 23-65. - Two-course sidewalks, materials. 
Two-course sidewalk shall be made with a base course three and one-fourth (3¼) inches thick of cement concrete proportioned, by volume, of one (1) part portland cement, two and one-half (2½) parts of sand and five (5) parts stone. The surface course shall be three-fourths of an inch in thickness composed of cement mortar in the proportion of one (1) part portland cement and two (2) parts sand. 
(Code 1960, § 23-27)  
Sec. 23-66. - Two-course curbs and gutters and valley gutters, materials. 
Two-course curb and gutter and valley gutter shall be constructed, using as a base, cement concrete proportioned by volume of one (1) part portland cement, two (2) parts sand and four (4) parts stone. The surface or finished course shall be three-fourths of an inch in thickness, composed of cement mortar proportioned by volume of one (1) part of portland cement and two (2) parts sand. 
(Code 1960, § 23-28)  
Sec. 23-67. - Time for applying surface course of two-course sidewalks, curbs and gutters, valley gutters. 
The surface or finished course of mortar for sidewalks, curbs and gutters and valley gutter shall be applied to the base course while it is still green and before it has taken its final set. In no case shall more than two (2) hours elapse between the time any portion of the base is placed and the time it is covered with the mortar course. 
(Code 1960, § 23-29)  
Sec. 23-68. - Distributing, tamping and smoothing of two-course sidewalks, curbs and gutters, valley gutters. 
When placed in the forms the concrete shall be distributed to the proper thickness for the base and then thoroughly compacted by tamping with a cast iron or wooden tamp, weighing not less than three-eighths pound per square inch of tamping surface. The top or surface course shall be spread directly upon the wet base and struck off with a straight edge to the proper thickness and shape. As soon as it has set sufficiently it shall be finished with a metal trowel to a true and smooth surface. 
(Code 1960, § 23-30)  
Sec. 23-69. - One-course sidewalks. 
One-course sidewalk may be laid at the option of the owner or contractor, or shall be laid if so specified by the city engineer. One-course sidewalk shall be constructed of cement concrete proportioned by volume of one (1) part portland cement, two (2) parts sand and four (4) parts stone. When deposited in the forms it shall be thoroughly tamped to flush the mortar to the surface. It shall be finished in the same manner as two-course sidewalks using the mortar flushed to the surface by tamping. 
(Code 1960, § 23-31)  
Sec. 23-70. - One-course curbs and gutters or valley gutters. 
One-course curb and gutter or valley gutter may be constructed at the option of the owner or contractor or shall be constructed if so specified by the city engineer. It shall be constructed of cement concrete proportioned by volume of one (1) part portland cement, two (2) parts sand and four (4) parts stone. Where the forms permit, mortar shall be flushed to the surface by tamping immediately after the concrete has been deposited. Forms shall be removed from the faces to be exposed before the concrete has fully set and the work finished to true lines and a smooth surface using a wood float and brush. 
(Code 1960, § 23-32)  
Sec. 23-71. - Expansion joints. 
(a)  Expansion joints in sidewalks shall be left at intervals of not less than twenty-five (25) feet nor more than fifty (50) feet. The expansion joint shall extend entirely through the sidewalk, vertically, and shall be the equivalent of one-half inch in width for every twenty-five (25) linear feet of sidewalk. 
(b)  The joint shall be filled with an asphaltic expansion joint material that meets the approval of the city engineer. Expansion joints in curb and gutter or valley gutter shall be at eight- or ten-foot intervals, the opening being one-fourth inch at each joint, except that driveways may be laid continuously with an expansion joint at each side, in which case the expansion joints shall be proportional to the length of valley gutter section. At least every third joint in curb and gutter or valley gutter shall be filled with one-half inch thickness of asphaltic expansion joint material which meets the approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 1960, § 23-33)  
Sec. 23-72. - Keeping finished work wet; removal of excavated earth. 
(a)  The finished work shall be kept wet for three (3) days after it has taken its final set and if so ordered by the city engineer shall be covered with a layer of clean sand, which shall also be kept wet. 
(b)  All excavated earth, roots or other debris shall be removed from the site of the work as soon as it has been completed. 
(Code 1960, § 23-34)  
Secs. 23-73—23-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION AND REMOVAL OF DRIVEWAYS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 170786 , § 3, adopted March 1, 2018, renumbered article V as article IV. 
Cross reference— Off-street parking and loading regulations, § 30-238 et seq.; access management, § 30-336 et seq. 
 
Sec. 23-86. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply: 
Apron shall mean the paved area between the back edge of the sidewalk and the back of the curb. 
Buffer strip (D) shall mean the distance measured between the parking curb and the right-of-way or property line. 
Corner clearance (Z) shall mean the distance measured along the street right-of-way line from the intersection of the street right-of-way lines to the nearest edge of the driveway. 
Curb transition (T) shall mean the sloped area of drop curb design. 
Driveway shall mean the improved area between a public street and private property intended to provide ingress and/or egress of vehicular traffic from the public street or thoroughfare to a definite area of private property. 
Driveway angle (Y) shall mean the angle between the driveway center line and the edge of the street or highway. 
Driveway, commercial shall mean a driveway providing vehicular ingress and/or egress for property used for commercial purposes. 
Driveway, industrial or other zone shall mean a driveway providing vehicular ingress and/or egress for property used for industrial or other zoned purposes. 
Driveway, ramp type shall mean a driveway constructed with drop curb transition (T). 
Driveway, residential shall mean a driveway providing vehicular ingress and/or egress for property used for residences other than single family residences. 
Driveway, service station shall mean a driveway providing vehicular ingress and egress for property used for service stations for the retail sale of motor fuels. 
Driveway, single family residential shall mean a driveway providing vehicular ingress and/or egress for property used for single family residences. 
Driveway, street type shall mean a driveway constructed as a street with radius returns (R). 
Driveway width (W) shall mean the narrowest width of the driveway measured parallel with the edge of the street or roadway at the street right-of-way line. 
Edge clearance (E) shall mean the distance measured along the street right-of-way line from the property line to the nearest edge of the driveway. 
Radius return (R) shall mean the curved arc between intersecting street pavements. 
Right-of-way (R.O.W.) shall mean lands conveyed or dedicated to the public to be used for a street, alley, walkway, drainage facility, or other public purpose. 
Sidewalk shall mean an area on public or private property where pedestrians walk or stand, generally parallel to edge of street, roadway, or curb. 
Street shall include avenue, boulevard, expressway, parkway, court, highway, lane, roadway, terrace, place and causeway. 
Street right-of-way line shall mean the line which abounds the right-of-way set aside for use as a street. 
(Code 1960, § 23-38) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 23-87. - Compliance with article required. 
All driveways constructed or removed within the city limits of the city shall be constructed or removed as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1960, § 23-37)  
Sec. 23-88. - Unauthorized construction, curb cutting, etc., declared unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, cut, break out or remove any curb along a street or alley except as authorized by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1960, § 23-39)  
Sec. 23-89. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall remove, alter or construct any curb, driveway, gutter, pavement, or perform any other improvement on any public street or designated street right-of-way without obtaining a permit authorizing the improvement from the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Fees. Fees for permits shall be according to the schedule set out in Appendix A and shall be paid to the city by the person to whom the permit is issued at the time it is issued. 
(c)  Posting at site. The driveway permit shall be posted at the construction site. 
(Code 1960, § 23-42)  
Sec. 23-90. - Submission of plans; information required. 
(a)  No driveway permit shall be issued until there is filed with the city traffic engineer and the city engineer two (2) copies of the plans showing the location and dimensions of all proposed improvements. Plans are not required for single-family residential zoned property. 
(b)  Additional plans may be required for driveways on Florida Department of Transportation and Alachua County maintained streets within the corporate limits. 
(c)  Information required on plans submitted shall include: 
(1)  A complete plot plan showing all proposed buildings and parking layouts including north arrow and date; 
(2)  Existing and proposed driveway locations and widths; 
(3)  Street pavement types and widths and right-of-way widths; 
(4)  Proposed location of off-street loading and unloading facilities, interior parking arrangements, and traffic circulating patterns; 
(5)  Retaining walls, drainage, utility poles, trees and other physical features which affect the driveway location; 
(6)  Driveways on adjacent properties and/or on opposite side of the street. 
(Code 1960, § 23-40)  
Sec. 23-91. - Design considerations. 
(a)  The choice of the proper location for access facilities (driveways) must involve consideration of the amount of conflict which can be expected both within the parking area and on the abutting streets. One (1) primary concept which shall be followed is to reduce the number of connections to a practical minimum, thus providing fewer locations where conflicts may occur. 
(b)  The area to which the driveway provides access shall be of sufficient size to allow all necessary functions for loading, unloading, and parking maneuvers to be carried out on private property and completely off the street right-of way. 
(c)  Driveways shall be constructed to conform to the existing paved street grade or grade approved by city engineer for nonpaved streets. 
(d)  Parking area shall be so designed and marked as to provide for orderly and safe movement and storage of vehicles: 
(1)  Back-out parking on a public street and/or highway still not be permitted. 
(2)  The minimum distance from the street right-of-way line at any ingress or egress driveway to any interior service drive or parking space with direct access to the driveway shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  The minimum distance from the street right-of-way line on any major ingress or egress driveway to any interior service drive or parking space having direct access to such driveway shall be one hundred (100) feet. A major driveway is defined as the main ingress or egress point to a public street or highway from a site of a major development such as a shopping center, multiple family development, industrial park, etc. 
(4)  Six (6) inch standard curb or similar barrier shall be installed along the driveway from the street right-of-way line to the first interior service drive or to and including the first interior parking space described in subsections (d)(2) and (3) above. Material other than concrete or asphalt curb may be used if approved by the city engineer and chief code enforcement officer or building official. 
(Code 1960, § 23-41)  
Sec. 23-92. - Specifications generally; costs. 
(a)  All driveways shall be hard surfaced in conformance with the standards and specifications adopted by the city commission by resolution and on file in the office of the city engineer. 
(b)  Driveways shall cross the sidewalk area at the sidewalk grade established by the city engineer. 
(c)  Driveways shall be constructed as nearly to a right angle to the street or roadway as possible. 
(d)  Where special pedestrians and vehicular hazards may be encountered, driveways may be restricted to a one-way operation. Proper signs giving notice to the restricted use of driveways shall be erected and maintained by the person having control over the driveways. Failure to erect such signs and failure to use such driveways in accordance with the proper signs shall be a violation of this article. 
(e)  All costs of any change proposed in any physical improvements originally installed by the city and all costs of the installation of any driveway or necessary signing shall be borne by the property owner. 
(f)  All costs and responsibilities for maintenance and/or repair of any driveway or related signing shall be borne by the property owner. 
(Code 1960, § 23-43)  
Sec. 23-93. - Number and location. 
In order to provide ease and convenience in ingress and egress to property, but more importantly to provide the maximum safety with the least interference to the traffic flow on public streets, the number and location of driveways shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  One (1) driveway shall be permitted for ingress and egress to a "lot," as such term is defined in chapter 30, Land Development Code of the City of Gainesville, except: 
a.  As approved in subsections (2) and (3) below; or 
b.  Joint-use driveways as approved by the plan board under site plan review in accordance with article VII, chapter 30, Land Development Code; or 
c.  Property zoned and in use for a detached single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling abutting local streets as defined in chapter 30, Land Development Code. 
(2)  Two driveways shall be permitted for ingress and egress from a lot provided: (i) all other requirements of this article are met; and (ii) the minimum distance between the two driveways equals or exceeds 20 feet; and where the applicant demonstrates need. Factors to be considered in considering two driveways are: 
a.  Necessity of emergency or service vehicle access; 
b.  One-way drives upon recommendation of the city traffic engineer; 
c.  Recommendation by the city traffic engineer that public safety will be enhanced; 
d.  Other physical features unique to the site. 
(3)  More than two driveways shall be permitted for ingress and egress to a lot when: 
a.  The applicant clearly demonstrates by objective evidence to the city traffic engineer, or to the plan board where site plan review is required, that exceptional circumstances exist affecting the public safety which cannot be mitigated without the additional driveways; or 
b.  Where the lot meets the following thresholds: 
1.  The lot exceeds ten acres in total land area; and 
2.  The lot has more than 1,000 automobile parking spaces; and 
3.  The minimum distance between driveways meets or exceeds 300 meet. 
(Code 1960, § 23-44; Ord. No. 3372, §§ 1, 2, 9-21-87)  
Sec. 23-94. - Types. 
All driveways shall be the standard ramp-type driveway construction except that street-type entrances may be permitted from major thoroughfares into the major entrances of planned shopping centers, large industrial developments, apartment complexes and drive-in theaters that have parking areas for 300 or more vehicles. 
(Code 1960, § 23-45)  
Sec. 23-95. - Width. 
(a)  Ramp-type driveways: 
(1)  The width of a ramp-type driveway shall be within the minimum and maximum limits as specified below: 
Location 	Minimum (feet) 	Maximum (feet) 
Single family residential 	10 	24 
Residential 	12 	30 
All other uses: 		
One-way 	15 	24 
Two-way 	24 	40 
 
(2)  All driveway widths shall be measured at the street right-of-way line. 
(3)  For single family residential driveways, the width of the curb opening shall not be less than 16 feet measured from the outside edge to outside edge of the curb transition (T). 
(4)  For all other ramp-type driveways the width of curb opening shall not exceed the driveway width by more than three feet on each side. 
(b)  Street-type driveways: 
(1)  The width of street type driveways shall be within the minimum and maximum limits as specified below: 
Location 	Minimum 
(feet) 	Maximum 
(feet) 
Planned shopping centers, industrial developments, apartment complexes (with parking for 300 or more vehicles) 	24 	60 
 
(Code 1960, § 23-46)  
Sec. 23-96. - Areas of limited street improvements. 
(a)  No driveway shall be constructed in the radius return of an intersection. 
(b)  No driveway shall be constructed nearer than 25 feet from the intersection of street right-of-way lines. 
(c)  All driveways shall be constructed with a minimum setback distance of five feet from any interior property line, and with a two-foot minimum offset from the property line at the roadway connection. These offsets may be reduced for single-family residences at the recommendation of the city traffic engineer. 
(d)  To prevent vehicle overhang on private property in the vicinity of the driveway, parking areas, and loading areas, a six-inch raised curb and/or parking stops shall be constructed a minimum distance of three feet inside the street right-of-way line or property line. 
(e)  No driveway shall be permitted to include any municipal facility such as traffic signal standards, catch basins, fire hydrants, utility poles, fire alarm supports or other similar type structures. 
(f)  To prevent parked vehicles from intruding or overhanging landscaped areas, sidewalks or critical drainage retention areas, the city engineer and/or city traffic engineer may require the construction of a six-inch raised curb and/or similar barrier to protect such areas. 
(Code 1960, § 23-47)  
Sec. 23-97. - Work to be performed by bonded contractors; requirements of bond. 
All work of removing any curb and building of any driveway shall be done by a contractor having in force a current contractor's bond in an amount equal to or greater than three times the estimated cost of the proposed work. This bond shall be for a period of three years and shall be renewed each year at the time the contractor obtains his/her business tax receipt. 
(Code 1960, § 23-48; Ord. No. 070022, § 9, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 23-98. - Curbs to be provided. 
No curb shall be cut unless a concrete driveway is constructed the full width of the opening with adequate curb on each end and the construction extends from the gutter to the sidewalk. Where there is no existing sidewalk, this construction shall extend a sufficient distance from the gutter so that the rise of the drive will be at least six inches above the level of the gutter at the extreme end. 
(Code 1960, § 23-49)  
Sec. 23-99. - Minimum thickness of, specifications for concrete. 
Concrete for the construction of driveways shall meet the American Society for Testing Materials specifications for concrete of 2,500 pounds compressive strength. Driveways shall be constructed with 2,500 PSI concrete either four inches thick with steel reinforcing matting or six inches thick without steel reinforcing matting. All driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications on file in the office of the city engineer. 
(Code 1960, § 23-50)  
Sec. 23-100. - Existing driveways, unnecessary driveways. 
(a)  Existing driveways shall not be relocated, altered or reconstructed without a permit approving the relocation, alterations or reconstructions and the driveways shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  When the use of any driveway is changed, making any portion or all of a driveway unnecessary, the owner of the abutting property shall, at his/her expense, replace all necessary curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and grass areas. 
(Code 1960, § 23-51)  
Sec. 23-101. - Review and approval. 
All driveways hereinafter constructed in the city on street rights-of-way shall be reviewed and approved by the appropriate city department prior to the issuance of any building permit for the erection, construction, reconstruction or change in the use of the building, structure or land. This provision shall not apply to single-family residential zoned property. 
(Code 1960, § 23-39)  
Sec. 23-102. - Variances. 
(a)  Definition. A variance is hereby defined as a relaxation of the terms of this article where the variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property, and not the result of the actions of the applicant, or his/her predecessors, a literal enforcement of this article would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As further defined for the purpose of this article, a variance is authorized only for driveway widths, street line corner clearances, and property line edge clearances. 
(b)  Authorization. The board of adjustment created by section 30-354(a) is hereby authorized to grant variances from the provisions of this article only under the provisions of this section. The variance may be granted only when the granting of same will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to specific conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article relating to driveways would result in unnecessary hardship, not created by the applicant or his/her predecessor in title, use, or possession. 
(c)  Procedures. A variance as authorized by this section shall not be granted unless and until a written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating that: 
(1)  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the physical or topographical features of the land or structures or buildings which are not applicable to other lands or structures within the city; 
(2)  Literal enforcement of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this article; 
(3)  The special conditions and circumstances in subsection (c)(2) above do not result from the action of the applicant or his/her predecessors; 
(4)  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this section to other lands or structures or buildings in the city. 
(d)  Public hearings; notices. Public hearings and notices thereof shall be as required by subsections 30-354(f), (i)—(l), and at the public hearing any party may appear in person or by his/her duly authorized agent or attorney. 
(e)  Findings of board of adjustment. Before granting a variance as authorized by this section, the board of adjustment shall make the following findings: 
(1)  That the requirements of subsection 30-354(d)(3)c.1. have been met by the applicant; 
(2)  That the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure; 
(3)  That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this article, will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(f)  Conditions. In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this article. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the chapter 30, Land Development Code and punishable under section 30-362. 
(g)  Prohibitions. Under no circumstances shall the board of adjustment grant a variance under this article that would permit back-out parking on a public street, a driveway in a street radius, reduced driveway width to permit two or more nonstandard driveways, reduce the number of parking spaces required in the zoning requirements or variances which would affect the safety of a public street, sidewalk or bike route. 
(Code 1960, § 23-51.1)  
Sec. 23-103. - Protecting public from injury. 
Whenever any person shall do or undertake to do any of the things set forth in this article, it shall be the duty of the person to protect from harm and damage all persons who may be using any street or sidewalk or other public place where such activity is in progress and to that end the person shall erect and maintain suitable barricades, sign, lights, flares, and other appropriate warning devices at the proper locations where the work is in progress in accordance with the current policy and regulations for street construction and maintenance. 
(Code 1960, § 23-52)  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY OBSTRUCTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 170786 , § 2, adopted March 1, 2018, repealed §§ 23-104—23-116, which pertained to communications service facilities and wireless support structures in the public right-of-way. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. Section 4 of such ordinance added a new article V to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 23-104. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Obstruct means to impede, block, hinder, stifle, retard, restrain, interfere, repair, dig, excavate, or intermeddle with movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
Right-of-way means public ways, public highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, thoroughfares, medians, or walkways of which the city has jurisdiction. 
Site plan means a graphic depiction of the work location and proposed project. The level of detail required shall be commensurate with the nature and extent of the work, subject to acceptance by the public works director or designee. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-105. - Applicability. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to obstruct any right-of-way in the City of Gainesville, including temporarily obstructing the general movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and including any digging or excavation in the public rights-of-way, without first obtaining a permit from the public works department. All obstructions within any public right-of-way not permitted in accordance with this article are hereby declared to be nuisances and shall be abated and removed in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-106. - Exemptions. 
The requirements of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Any person or entity that obstructs a right-of-way pursuant to another city permit that authorizes the obstruction within the right-of-way, including but not limited to parades, filming, news racks, sidewalk cafes, or special events. 
(b)  Right-of-way obstructions anticipated to last for less than one hour. 
(c)  Right-of-way obstructions made by any person or entity in response to a natural disaster, man-made disaster, or similar emergency. 
(d)  Right-of-way obstructions made by any utility use of the right-of-way, which shall be regulated and permitted under chapter 23, article VI of the Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Right-of-way obstructions made by the city, its agents, or contractors performing work on behalf of the city, unless the public works department notifies the city's agent or contractor that a written permit is required due to past performance. The public works department shall be notified in the event of a disruption of pavement, sidewalks, hardscape, or planted landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-107. - Review procedures and criteria. 
Applications for a permit under this article shall be submitted in a form approved by the public works department, and shall be submitted together with any applicable application fees. The public works department shall approve and issue permits for right-of-way obstructions no later than 15 calendar days after receiving a complete application, provided the application meets all of the requirements and conditions provided in this section. The public works director or designee may issue permits under this article for a total duration or applicable hours that, in the public works director or designee's sole discretion, is most appropriate for the particular situation and is most protective of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(a)  Site plan and MOT plan. The applicant shall submit a site plan and maintenance-of-traffic (MOT) plan in compliance with the requirements of the Federal Highway Administration and the Florida Department of Transportation. The site plan shall indicate the exact location of the right-of-way to be obstructed, the estimated duration of the obstruction, the safety measures that will be used to protect the public health and safety, and the reason for the obstruction. 
(b)  Emergency contact. The applicant must provide the phone number for an emergency contact who will be available 24 hours a day, if the work is anticipated to last longer than one day. 
(c)  Police/fire rescue. Before issuing a permit, the public works director or designee shall inform the city's police department and fire rescue department of the proposed obstruction. The public works director or designee shall deny the permit if either of those agencies determines the obstruction will be a danger to public health or safety. 
(d)  Metered parking. If metered parking spaces will be obstructed, than the applicant shall pay a fee at the time of application in an amount that the public works director or designee determines will compensate the city for the lost parking revenue, unless the city is otherwise prohibited by law from levying such a fee. This requirement does not apply to public agencies. 
(e)  Waste. Large tree limbs, tree butts, stumps, logs, plaster, earth, construction debris, industrial waste or other matter in bulk shall not be classified as trash and no person shall place or cause the same to be placed in the streets of the city or along the parkways adjacent to the street. 
(f)  Cranes and mechanical equipment. The use of cranes, hoists, and other mechanical apparatus within the right-of-way are subject to the following additional conditions and restrictions: 
(1)  The maximum duration for such apparatus to operate or be maintained in a right-of-way shall be 15 calendar days, unless extended by the public works director or designee for good cause shown. 
(2)  Full-tracked vehicles, including but not limited to bulldozers and skidsteers, shall not be off-loaded, on-loaded, walked, or operated in a paved city right-of-way. 
(3)  Fixed-tower cranes may only be permitted in the right-of-way if the public works director or designee finds that both of the following conditions are met: 
a.  No suitable alternative exists; and 
b.  Submission of sufficient plans and specifications to ensure that both the crane and its foundation are adequate, and that such use will not endanger the public health and safety. 
(g)  Restoration of public rights-of-way. Permittees shall immediately after right-of-way obstructions restore the public rights-of-way to as good a condition as existed immediately prior to commencement of the permitted obstruction. Restoration shall be completed in accordance with applicable city standards. If such restoration is not performed in a reasonable and satisfactory manner within 30 calendar days after the completion of the obstruction, the city may after written notice to the permittee cause the restoration to be made with the total cost being charged to and paid for by the permittee upon demand, and the city may charge the costs against any security the permittee provided in accordance with this article. For one year following completion of any work permitted under this section, the permittee shall guarantee its restoration work and shall correct at its sole expense any restoration work that does not satisfy the requirements of this article. Where excavations or repairs are made in any hard-surfaced or brick-paved streets, all excavations may be done by the city at its discretion, at the sole cost and expense of the applicant. 
(h)  Indemnification. Any person or entity receiving a permit under this article shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city and its officers, employees, and agents from all liabilities, damages, losses, claims, suits, causes of action, and costs or expenses of any kind or nature, including but not limited to reasonable attorneys' fees, for personal injury, death, property damage, or any other losses that arise from or are in any way connected with the right-of-way obstruction, whether any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this article or any permit issued hereunder, except to the extent that such claims are caused by the sole negligence of the city. 
(1)  The permittee shall undertake, at its sole expense, the defense of any such claims, even if the claim is groundless, false, or fraudulent, and the permittee shall assume and defend not only itself but also the city, provided the city shall retain the right to participate by its own counsel and to select counsel of its own choosing. 
(2)  This indemnification obligation is not limited in any way by a limitation of the amount or type of damages or compensation payable by or for the permittee under workers' compensation, disability, or other employee benefit acts, or the acceptance of insurance certificates required under this article, or the terms, applicability, or limitations of any insurance held by the permittee. The city does not waive any rights against the permittee that it may have by reason of this indemnification because of the city's acceptance of permittee's insurance policies required under this article, and this indemnification shall apply to all damages and claims for damages of any kind suffered regardless of whether such insurance policies shall have been determined to be applicable to any such damages or claims for damages. 
(3)  Nothing contained in this provision shall be interpreted as a waiver of the city's sovereign immunity as provided in F.S. § 768.28, or as denying the city or permittee any remedy or defense available at law. 
(4)  These indemnification requirements shall survive and be in full force and effect after any termination or cancellation of any permit. 
(i)  Insurance. Permittees shall provide, pay for, and maintain satisfactory to the city the types of insurance policies and coverage limits described here. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business in the State of Florida and shall have an A.M. Best, latest edition, financial strength rating of at least A+ and financial size category of at least VIII. All policies shall name the city as an additional insured with respect to all activities under this article. At least 30 calendar days' advance written notice shall be given to the city of any cancellation, intent not to renew, or reduction in the policy coverage, which notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail. The city's risk management director may reasonably raise or lower the amount of insurance required, and may allow a permittee to be self-insured for one or more lines of insurance coverage. 
(1)  Comprehensive general liability. Commercial general liability insurance including premises/operations; independent contractors; contractual liability; products/completed operations; XCU coverage; and personal injury and property damage coverage for limits of no less than $1,000,000 per occurrence combined single limit and $2,000,000 in the aggregate. 
(2)  Commercial automobile liability. Commercial automobile liability coverage for all owned, non-owned, and hired vehicles for limits of no less than $1,000,000 per occurrence combined single limit. 
(3)  Worker's compensation and employer's liability. Worker's compensation in an amount not less than the statutory limit and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000. 
(4)  Commercial excess or umbrella liability. Commercial excess or umbrella liability coverage may be used in combination with primary coverage to achieve the required limits of liability. 
(j)  Security. If any excavation is made within a public right-of-way, or if there is any risk of damage or detriment to the premises of a public right-of-way, then the applicant shall provide security to the city to ensure that the right-of-way is restored to the same or better condition than existed when the permit was issued and to ensure payment for any damage to public property or trash and debris removal as a result of such permit issuance. Applicants shall provide security enforceable by and payable to the city, in any combination of the types provided below, in an amount reasonably corresponding to the nature and extent of the work to be performed within the right-of-way as determined by the public works director or designee. An applicant who intends to apply for multiple permits in a calendar year may provide the city with security in an amount acceptable to the public works director or designee sufficient to adequately cover the estimated obstructions and excavations to be performed during that calendar year. The deposit shall be used by the city only in the event that the applicant fails to repair damage or remove trash and debris resulting from the activity. The city shall return any cash deposit no later than 15 calendar days after notice to the city of right-of-way obstruction completion unless there is damage to city property or other costs incurred by the city, including but not limited to relining the right-of-way to the same or better condition that existed when the permit was issued. This requirement does not apply to public agencies. 
(1)  Surety bond. A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Florida with a minimum rating of A-VII as rated by A.M. Best Company, Inc. The surety bond shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and legality, and shall provide the following: "This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until 60 calendar days after receipt by the City of Gainesville, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(2)  Letter of credit. An irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit issued by a Florida bank, in a form and by a financial institution acceptable to the city attorney. 
(3)  Cash deposit. A cash deposit with the city, held in an account where interest earned on the cash deposit shall be for the account and to the credit of the person making such deposit. 
(k)  Due care. Permittees shall exercise due care and follow all safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry practices when operating in accordance with a permit issued under this article, including the use of suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices as are required by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (FDOT) or any requirements of the city to protect the public. 
(l)  Hazardous conditions. If the city at any time reasonably determines that a permittee has caused a condition that is hazardous or harmful to the public health, safety, or welfare, the permittee, at its own expense and without liability to or recourse against the city, shall remedy all such conditions after being provided reasonable notice. If the city at any time reasonably determines that an emergency situation exists and the permittee is not immediately available or is unable to immediately provide the necessary remedy, then the city shall have the right to remedy the situation with the total cost being charged to and paid for by the permittee upon demand, and the city may charge the costs against any security the permittee provided in accordance with this article. 
(m)  Compliance with law. Permittees shall at all times be in full compliance with and abide by all applicable provisions of federal, state, or local laws, codes, and regulations, including but not limited to F.S. Ch. 556, as may be amended from time to time. 
(n)  Right of inspection. The city shall have the right to inspect any work as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this article or any applicable law or regulation. 
(o)  Police powers. Any permit issued under this article shall be subject to the city's lawful exercise of its police power, and applicants and permittees shall comply with any requirements or policies that the city finds reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and the public works director or designee may establish reasonable conditions in the permit to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(p)  Permit inactivity. The permit may be revoked by the city if there is no activity performed by the applicant at the location specified in the site plan for 15 consecutive calendar days after the city provided the applicant with written notice of such inactivity. 
(q)  Violations. Upon providing written notice to any person or entity receiving a permit under this article of a violation of any of the requirements or conditions of the permit, the permit shall be revoked and become null and void if the permittee fails to cure the violation within the reasonable cure period provided in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-108. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9 of this Code of Ordinances. The city may seek any legal remedies available in law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE BY UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 23-109. - Definitions. 
Throughout this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated unless the text in which used clearly indicates otherwise. Any word or phrase used in this article that is not defined in this article shall have: 1) the meaning provided in F.S. Chs. 202 or 337, as amended; or 2) if not provided in F.S. Chs. 202 or 337, the common dictionary meaning most appropriate to the context in which such word or phrase is used. 
Abandonment or abandoned means the cessation of all uses of a utility or facility for a period of 180 or more consecutive calendar days. However, this term shall not include the cessation of use of a communications facility located within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used for some purpose or use accessory to the communications facility. By way of example, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used for some purpose or use accessory to the communications facility, shall not constitute abandonment of a communications facility. A wireless infrastructure provider's failure to have a wireless service provider provide service through a small wireless facility collocated on a utility pole within nine months after the application is approved in accordance with F.S. § 337.401(7), shall constitute abandonment. The terms abandonment or abandoned are not intended to include a dropped line from a potential or existing customer in the event the providers reasonably anticipate future use of the dropped line. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing wireless service. 
Applicable codes means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes enacted solely to address threats of destruction of property or injury to persons, or local codes or ordinances adopted to implement F.S. § 337.401(7). 
Applicant means any person who submits an application to the city for any permit provided for in this article. 
As-built plans means a set of drawings in a format as specified by the city submitted by the applicant upon completion of a project, which drawings reflect all changes to original plans made during the construction process and show the exact dimensions, geometry, and location of all elements of the work completed under the permit. 
City means as indicated by the context used, either Gainesville, Florida, as a geographic location, or Gainesville, Florida, a Florida municipal corporation, as a legal entity. 
City utility pole means a utility pole, as that term is defined in this article, owned by the city that is located within a public right-of-way; however, the term does not include: 1) utility poles owned, operated, maintained, or repaired by Gainesville Regional Utilities (GRU); 2) utility poles used to support GRU electric distribution facilities, including but not limited to any transmission lines or GRU street light poles; or 3) private utility poles. For illustration purposes only, city utility poles may include city-owned traffic poles or street signs. 
Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace one or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. The term does not include the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure in the public rights-of-way. 
Communications facility means any facility or tangible thing that may be used to provide communications services. Multiple cables, conduits, strands, or fibers located within the same conduit shall be considered one communications facility. 
Communications services means the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals, including video services, to a point, or between or among points, by or through any electronic, radio, satellite, cable, optical, microwave, or other medium or method now in existence of hereafter devised, regardless of the protocol used for such transmission or conveyance. The term includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code, or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance, or routing without regard to whether such service is referred to a voice-over-internet-protocol services or is classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value-added. Notwithstanding the forgoing, the term does not include: 
A.  Information services. 
B.  Installation or maintenance of wiring or equipment on a customer's premises. 
C.  The sale or rental of tangible personal property. 
D.  The sale of advertising, including, but no limited to, directory advertising. 
E.  Bad check charges. 
F.  Late payment charges. 
G.  Billing and collection services. 
H.  Internet access service, as defined in Section 1105(5) of the Internet Tax Freedom Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 151 note, as amended by Pub. L. No. 110-108, electronic mail service, electronic bulletin board service, or similar online computer services. 
Communications services provider means any person providing communications services through the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way, including wireline telecommunication providers and wireless service providers. 
Communications services tax means the local tax authorized to be levied and collected by counties and municipalities upon communications services providers for communications services, pursuant to F.S. § 202.19, as amended. 
Consolidated permit application means a single permit application that would otherwise require individual permit applications for the collocation of between two and 30 small wireless facilities within the public rights-of-way in accordance with this article. 
County means, as indicated by the context, either Alachua County, Florida, as a geographic location, or Alachua County, Florida, a charter county and political subdivision of the State of Florida, as a legal entity. 
Day(s) means, for purposes of computing any period of time expressed in day(s) in this article, a period of time that: 1) does not include the day of the act, event, or default from which the designated period of time begins to run; and 2) does include the last day of the period so computed, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
Florida Building Code means the Florida Building Code promulgated under F.S. Ch. 553, and includes any city amendments thereto as both may be amended from time to time. 
Graffiti means any inscriptions, word, figure, painting, or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any utility or communications facility, whether or not authorized by the owner or permittee. A wrap shall not be considered graffiti. 
Law means any local, state or federal legislative, judicial or administrative order, certificate, decision, statute, constitution, ordinance, resolution, regulation, rule, tariff, guideline or other requirements, as amended, now in effect or subsequently enacted or issued including, but not limited to, the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC 151 et seq. as amended, all orders, rules, tariffs, guidelines and regulations issued by the Federal Communications Commission or the governing state authority pursuant thereto, F.S. § 337.401, as amended, and all state statutes and regulations issued by state agencies pursuant thereto. 
Micro wireless facility means a small wireless facility having dimensions no larger than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
Pass-through provider means any person who places or maintains a communications facility in the public rights-of-way and who does not remit communication service taxes imposed by the city pursuant to F.S. Ch. 202, as amended. A pass-through provider can also be a wireless infrastructure provider. 
Permittee means any applicant that has received a permit under this article and thereby lawfully owns, operates, or maintains a utility in the public rights-of-way. 
Person means any natural person, corporation, business association, or other business entity, including but not limited to a partnership, sole proprietorship, political subdivision, public or private agency of any kind, utility, successor, or assign of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
Place or maintain or placement or maintenance or placing or maintaining means to erect, construct, install, maintain, place, repair, extend, expand, remove, occupy, locate, relocate, or alter a utility. A person who owns or exercises physical control to maintain or repair is included within the definition of the above terms. The following is not included within the definition of the above terms: 1) a person providing service only through resale or only through use of a third party's utility; and 2) the transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of the public rights-of-way. 
Public rights-of-way or rights-of-way means land devoted to or required for use as a transportation facility in which the city owns in fee or has a right-of-way easement, and which the city has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access pursuant to applicable law, and includes the space above, at, or below the surface of such right-of-way. For the purposes of this definition, transportation facility means any means for the transportation of people or property from place to place which is constructed, operated, or maintained in whole or in part from public funds. The terms public rights-of-way or rights-of-way shall not include: 
(a)  County, state, or federal rights-of-way, unless the city has been properly delegated authority to issue permits for structures within those rights-of-way. 
(b)  Utility easements or other forms of real property interest that are not part of dedicated public rights-of-way. 
(c)  Property owned by any person other than the city, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(d)  Service entrances or driveways leading from the road or street onto adjacent property. 
(e)  Except as described above, any real or personal property of the city, including city parks, buildings, fixtures, poles, conduits, facilities, or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
Shroud means a covering or enclosure of equipment associated with a small wireless facility, other than the antenna. 
Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets the following qualifications: 
(a)  Each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of antennas that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume; and 
(b)  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters; concealment elements; telecommunications demarcation boxes; ground-based enclosures; grounding equipment; power transfer switches; cutoff switches; vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services; and utility poles or other support structures. 
State means, as indicated by the context used, either Florida, as a geographic location, or the State of Florida, as a legal entity. 
Utility or utilities means any facilities, structures, or equipment used for any transmission of voice, telegraph, data, or other communications services lines or wireless facilities, pole lines, poles, ditches, drainage, stormwater, sewers, electric, water, heat, gas, steam, or pipelines. 
Utility pole means a pole or similar structure with a height of greater than 15 feet and that is used in whole or in part to provide communications services or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or similar function. The term includes the vertical support structure for traffic lights but does not include a horizontal structure to which signal lights or other traffic control devices are attached. 
Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location which enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including radio transceivers, antennas, wires, coaxial, or fiber-optic cable or other cables, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration, and equipment associated with wireless communications. This term includes small wireless facilities. This term does not include: 
(a)  The structure or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to the structure on which the equipment is collocated; 
(b)  Wireline backhaul facilities; or 
(c)  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna. 
Wireless infrastructure provider means a person who has been certified by state or federal law to provide telecommunications services in the state and who builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless support structures but is not a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services means any services provided using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using wireless facilities. 
Wireless services provider means a person who provides wireless services. A wireless services provider is a type of communications services provider. 
Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole or self-supporting tower, or another existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. The term does not include a utility pole. 
Wireline facilities means a wireline aerial or below-grade facility used to provide communications services. The term includes backhaul facilities associated with a wireless facility and coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna of a wireless facility. 
Wrap means an aesthetic covering approved by the city depicting art or scenic imagery. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-110. - Purpose. 
The city recognizes that the public rights-of-way are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper and thoughtful management to maximize safety, aesthetics, and economic vitality for the public, and these factors must be reasonably balanced in any decision to use or manage the public rights-of-way. The intent of this article is to accommodate the demand for utility infrastructure and communications facilities, while also protecting the safety, aesthetics, and economic vitality inherent in the public rights-of-way, by providing reasonable regulations for the placement and maintenance of utility infrastructure and communication facilities within the public rights-of-way in accordance with applicable law, including F.S. § 337.401, as amended, the provisions of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, and other applicable federal and state law. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-111. - Applicability. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, install, locate, relocate, construct, maintain, repair, operate, or remove any utilities under, on, over, across, or within the public rights-of-way without: 1) first obtaining a written permit from the city in accordance with this article, unless exempted from this requirement by section 23-116; and 2) maintaining compliance with this article for the entire duration that any permitted utility remains under, on, over, across, or within a public rights-of-way. 
This article shall apply to all utilities existing in the public rights-of-way prior to the effective date of this article, and the owners or agents of such utilities shall have one year from the effective date of this article to comply with the terms of this article or be in violation thereof, with the exception of any provision of this article regarding the location or design of the utility. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this article shall not apply to the City of Gainesville or Gainesville Regional Utilities (GRU), except to the extent that the city or GRU is acting as a communications services provider. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-112. - Authority to implement article. 
The city manager is authorized to implement this article and is authorized to develop, if deemed necessary by the city manager, a public rights-of-way use manual that provides implementing regulations, including engineering requirements, policies, or procedures that shall be followed in applying for and issuing permits under this article. The public rights-of-way use manual shall be adopted by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-113. - Registration. 
Any person that owns, operates, or maintains a utility under, on, over, across, or within a public rights-of-way, or that must submit an application for a permit under this article to place, install, locate, relocate, construct, maintain, repair, operate, or remove any utilities under, on, over, across, or within the public rights-of-way shall register with the city by submitting all of the following information on a form provided by the city. Such persons shall at all times maintain current and valid information with the city and shall provide any updated information to the city within 30 calendar days of any change. Registration shall establish neither a right to place or maintain nor a priority to place or maintain any utilities or associated structures or facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
(a)  The name under which the registrant transacts business in the city and, if different, in the State of Florida. 
(b)  The address and telephone number of the registrant's principle place of business in the State of Florida and any branch office located in the city or, if none, the name, address, and telephone number of the registrant's national headquarters and its registered agent in the State of Florida. 
(c)  The name, address, electronic mail address, and telephone number of the registrant's primary contact person and, if different, the person to contact in case of an emergency. 
(d)  Plans and maps describing all utilities and associated structures or facilities that are owned or used by the registrant and that are existing in the public rights-of-way at the time of registration, not including any information that has previously been provided to the city. Information shall include the location of such utilities, facilities, or structures with maps and geographical information systems or global positioning system (GPS) coordinates, and shall be provided in digitized format showing the two-dimensional location of the facilities based on the city's geographical database data or other format acceptable to the city. 
(e)  A copy of the registrant's current certificate of authorization, public convenience and necessity, or other applicable certifications or licenses issued by the Florida Public Service Commission, the Florida Department of State, the Federal Communications Commission, or other federal authority. 
(f)  Evidence that the registrant complies with all applicable conditions, including but not limited to the insurance coverage required under this article and all conditions provided in section 23-114. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-114. - General conditions. 
The following general conditions shall apply to all persons who receive a permit under this article, and such persons shall comply with the conditions of this section for the entire duration that a permitted utility remains under, on, over, across, or within a public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Registration. Current and valid registration information shall be provided and maintained in accordance with section 23-113, and updated information shall be provided to the city within 30 calendar days of any change. 
(b)  As-built plans. No later than 60 calendar days after completion of any work permitted under this article, the permittee shall at no cost to the city provide complete as-built plans, including but not limited to horizontal and typical vertical profiles. In addition, the permittee shall provide any other information the city manager or designee deems reasonably necessary, including information showing the location of utilities, facilities or structures such as maps, geographical information systems or global positioning system (GPS) coordinates, plats, construction documents, and drawings. Such plans shall be provided in digitized format showing the two-dimensional location of the utilities based on the city's geographical database data or other format acceptable to the city. 
(c)  Restoration of public rights-of-way. Immediately after the completion of any permitted work or phase thereof, permittees shall at its own expense restore the public rights-of-way to as good a condition as existed immediately prior to commencement of work. Restoration shall be completed in accordance with applicable city standards. If such restoration is not performed in a reasonable and satisfactory manner within 30 calendar days after the completion of work, the city may after written notice to the permittee cause the restoration to be made with the total cost being charged to and paid for by the permittee upon demand, and the city may charge the costs against any security the permittee provided in accordance with this article. For one year following completion of any work permitted under this section, the permittee shall guarantee its restoration work and shall correct at its sole expense any restoration work that does not satisfy the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Damage to property or public road. Permittees shall not in any way displace, damage, or destroy any utilities, facilities, or other property within the public rights-of-way, and shall be liable for the costs of such damage. In addition, permittees shall be responsible for any damage resulting from the issuance of the permit, including damage to any public road in accordance with F.S. § 337.402. After sufficient written notice and opportunity to cure and in accordance with applicable law, the city may cause any necessary work to be done to remedy the damage with the total cost being charged to and paid for by the permittee upon demand, and the city may charge the costs against any security the permittee provided in accordance with this article. 
(e)  Interference caused by utility. Permittees shall, at no cost to the city and in accordance with F.S. §§ 337.403 and 337.404, move or remove any utility at the request of the city if the city finds that the utility interferes with any work the city performs within, on, over, or under any public right-of-way or interferes in any way with the convenient, safe, or continuous use or maintenance of same. After sufficient written notice and opportunity to cure and in accordance with applicable law, the city may cause any necessary work to be done to remedy the interference with the total cost being charged to and paid for by the permittee upon demand, and the city may charge the costs against any security the permittee provided in accordance with this article. 
(f)  Temporary relocations of facilities for other users of public rights-of-way. No later than 30 calendar days after receiving written notice from any other permittee that has received a permit from the city to use the public rights-of-way, permittees shall temporarily move or relocate its utilities to allow for the permitted use. Any expense shall be paid by the permittee requesting the temporary relocation, and the permittee receiving the request shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. 
(g)  Conversion from aboveground to underground. If the city has adopted an undergrounding requirement that prohibits aboveground utilities or structures in public rights-of-way or requires the conversion of such utilities or facilities to underground, any permittees of aboveground utilities or structures shall, at its sole expense, convert to underground or relocate as may be allowable and permitted under this article. 
(h)  Due care. Permittees shall exercise due care and follow all safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry practices in performing work in or occupying the public rights-of-way, including the use of suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices as are required by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (FDOT) or any requirements of the city to protect the public. Permittees shall not endanger the life or property of other persons, or place or maintain its utilities in any manner that interferes with, displaces, damages, destroys, or prohibits access to any other utilities. 
(i)  Maintenance. Permittees shall maintain any utility permitted under this article in a safe, neat, and clean condition, including but not limited to a condition reasonably free of grease, rust, corrosion, excessive dirt, faded or damaged paint, or graffiti. 
(j)  Hazardous conditions. If the city at any time reasonably determines that a utility has caused a condition that is hazardous or harmful to the public health, safety, or welfare, the permittee of such utility, at its own expense and without liability to or recourse against the city, shall remedy all such conditions after being provided reasonable notice. If the city at any time reasonably determines that an emergency situation exists and the permittee is not immediately available or is unable to immediately provide the necessary remedy, then the city shall have the right to remedy the situation with the total cost being charged to and paid for by the permittee upon demand, and the city may charge the costs against any security the permittee provided in accordance with this article. 
(k)  Compliance with law. Permittees shall at all times be in full compliance with and abide by all applicable provisions of federal, state, or local laws, codes, and regulations, including but not limited to F.S. Ch. 333, and all federal regulations pertaining to airport airspace protections, as well as all applicable historic preservation zoning regulations. 
(l)  Right of inspection. The city shall have the right to inspect any work or utilities as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this article or any applicable law or regulation. 
(m)  Police powers. Any public rights-of-way use by utilities and any permit issued under this article shall be subject to the city's lawful exercise of its police power, and applicants and permittees shall comply with any requirements or policies adopted by the city manager, including but not limited to any provisions included in a public rights-of-way use manual referenced in this article and any other conditions that the city manager or designee finds reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(n)  No property right. Permits issued under this article do not create any property right or other vested interest, or in any way limit the city's authority to otherwise manage or vacate any portion of the public rights-of-way. In addition, the city reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained, any utility, facility, or improvement that the city deems necessary or proper in any public rights-of-way. 
(o)  Indemnification. Permittees shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city and its officers, employees, and agents from all liabilities, damages, losses, claims, suits, causes of action, and costs or expenses of any kind or nature, including but not limited to reasonable attorneys' fees, for personal injury, death, property damage, or any other losses that arise from or are in any way connected with the construction, maintenance, occupation, placement, repair, relocation, removal, or operation of the permittee's utilities or facilities, whether any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this article or any permit issued hereunder, except to the extent that such claims are caused by the sole negligence of the city. 
1.  The permittee shall undertake, at its sole expense, the defense of any such claims, even if the claim is groundless, false, or fraudulent, and the permittee shall assume and defend not only itself but also the city, provided the city shall retain the right to participate by its own counsel and to select counsel of its own choosing. 
2.  This indemnification obligation is not limited in any way by a limitation of the amount or type of damages or compensation payable by or for the permittee under workers' compensation, disability, or other employee benefit acts, or the acceptance of insurance certificates required under this article, or the terms, applicability, or limitations of any insurance held by the permittee. The city does not waive any rights against the permittee that it may have by reason of this indemnification because of the city's acceptance of permittee's insurance policies required under this article, and this indemnification shall apply to all damages and claims for damages of any kind suffered regardless of whether such insurance policies shall have been determined to be applicable to any such damages or claims for damages. 
3.  Nothing contained in this provision shall be interpreted as a waiver of the city's sovereign immunity as provided in F.S. § 768.28, or as denying the city or permittee any remedy or defense available at law. 
4.  These indemnification requirements shall survive and be in full force and effect after any termination or cancellation of any registration or permit. 
(p)  Insurance. Permittees shall provide, pay for, and maintain satisfactory to the city the types of insurance policies and coverage limits described here. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business in the State of Florida and shall have an A.M. Best, latest edition, financial strength rating of at least A+ and financial size category of at least VIII. All policies shall name the city as an additional insured with respect to all activities under this article. The required coverage must be evidenced by properly executed certificates of insurance, which shall be manually signed by the authorized representative of the insurance company and provided to the city at least annually. At least 30 calendar days' advance written notice shall be given to the city of any cancellation, intent not to renew, or reduction in the policy coverage, which notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail. The city may, in its sole discretion and only under extraordinary circumstances, allow a permittee to be self-insured for one or more lines of insurance coverage. A permittee's insurance coverage and limits shall include at least the following, and the city reserves the right to reasonably increase or decrease the following policy limits upon providing each permittee with at least 30 calendar days' written notice: 
1.  Comprehensive general liability. Commercial general liability insurance including premises/operations; independent contractors; contractual liability; products/completed operations; XCU coverage; and personal injury and property damage coverage for limits of no less than $3,000,000 per occurrence combined single limit and $5,000,000 in the aggregate. 
2.  Commercial automobile liability. Commercial automobile liability coverage for all owned, non-owned, and hired vehicles for limits of no less than $1,000,000 per occurrence combined single limit. 
3.  Worker's compensation and employer's liability. Worker's compensation in an amount not less than the statutory limit and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000. 
4.  Commercial excess or umbrella liability. Commercial excess or umbrella liability coverage may be used in combination with primary coverage to achieve the required limits of liability. 
(q)  Security for performance and compliance. Permittees shall provide security enforceable by and payable to the city, in any combination of the types provided below, to secure performance and compliance with all the requirements, duties, and obligations imposed by this article. Security shall be provided in an amount established by the city manager or designee that is reasonably proportional to both the linear mileage and number of utilities and facilities, but shall in no case be less than $10,000.00 or more than $50,000.00. Security shall be maintained at all times during the use or occupancy of the public rights-of-way and at least until the later of: 1) the effective date of transfer, sale, or assignment by the permittee of all of its utilities and facilities in the public rights-of-way and provided the successor or assign has provided the city with equivalent security; or 2) 12 months after the permittee's removal or abandonment of all of its utilities and facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
In the event a permittee fails to perform any requirement, duty, or obligation imposed by this article, the city may recover from the security, jointly and severally, any damages or loss suffered by the city a result, including but not limited to the full amount of any compensation or costs related to the construction or restoration of the public rights-of-way, the removal, relocation, or abandonment of any utilities or facilities in the public rights-of-way, and any damages arising from issuance of a permit under this article including reasonable attorneys' fees. Should the city draw upon the security, the permittee shall within 30 calendar days of written notice from the city restore the security to full required amount. 
1.  Surety bond. A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Florida with a minimum rating of A-VII as rated by A.M. Best Company, Inc. The surety bond shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and legality, and shall provide the following: "This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until 60 calendar days after receipt by the City of Gainesville, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
2.  Letter of credit. An irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit issued by a Florida bank, in a form and by a financial institution acceptable to the City Attorney. 
3.  Cash deposit. A cash deposit with the city, held in an account where interest earned on the cash deposit shall be for the account and to the credit of the person making such deposit. 
(r)  Transfers. If a permittee transfers or assigns its registration or permit incident to a sale or other transfer of assets, the transferee or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the terms of this article. Written notice of any transfer, sale, or assignment shall be provided to the city within 30 calendar days of the effective closing date of the transfer, sale, or assignment. For the transfer of registration and permitting to be effective, the transferee or assignee shall comply with all requirements under this article. 
(s)  Abandonment. Upon abandonment of a utility within the public rights-of-way, the permittee or owner of the utility shall notify the city within 90 calendar days. In addition, the city may provide notice of abandonment of a utility in the public rights-of-way to the permittee or owner via certified mail at the address provided on the registration. If, within 30 calendar days after the date the city provided notice, the permittee or owner does not respond to such notice and provide information to demonstrate that the utility is not abandoned, the utility shall be deemed abandoned. The city may require that the permittee or owner of an abandoned utility remove all or any portion of the same, or the city may determine that such non-removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare. If the permittee fails to remove all or any portion of an abandoned utility as directed by the city within a reasonable time period as may be required by the city, the city may perform such removal and charge the costs against any security provided in accordance with this article. In the event that the city does not direct the removal of the abandoned utility by the permittee or owner, then such permittee or owner shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the utility as directed by the city or to the transfer of ownership of the abandoned utility to the city, without further obligation on the part of the city. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-115. - Compensation. 
(a)  Permit fees. Permit applications shall include any applicable permit fees adopted by the city commission. However, the city has elected not to require permit fees from communications services providers that remit communications services taxes pursuant to F.S. Ch. 202, for communications services provided within the city. 
(b)  Small wireless facility collocation. The rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a city utility pole shall be $150.00 per pole annually. 
(c)  Pass-through providers. Pass-through providers shall annually pay to the city $500.00 per linear mile or portion thereof of any communications facility that is placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way. Such payment shall be made prior to the city issuing permits and annually thereafter. The amounts charged pursuant to this section shall be based on the linear miles of public rights-of-way where a communications facility is placed, not based on a summation of the lengths of individual cables, conduits, strands, or fibers. The city shall discontinue charging such amounts to a person that has ceased to be a pass-through provider, and any annual amounts charged shall be reduced for a prorated portion of any 12-month period during which the person remits communication services taxes imposed by the city pursuant to F.S. Ch. 202. 
(d)  General use charges. The city shall require the maximum compensation allowed under applicable law for use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way, which shall be in addition to any compensation or fees for attaching or collocating small wireless facilities on city utility poles or otherwise using infrastructure or property owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-116. - Permit application and review procedure. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, install, locate, relocate, construct, maintain, repair, operate, or remove any utilities under, on, over, across, or within the public rights-of-way without first obtaining a written permit from the city in accordance with this article, with certain exemptions as described below in this subsection. Permits issued shall: 1) apply only to the areas of the public rights-of-way specifically identified in the permit; 2) include and be subject to all conditions provided in section 23-114; and 3) remain effective for at least one year, but may be extended by the city manager or designee for good cause or if the permittee remains in compliance with this article. 
(1)  Emergency conditions. In the case of an emergency condition that affects the public health, safety, or welfare, including an unplanned service interruption, an owner or agent of a utility existing in the public rights-of-way may take immediate action to remedy the emergency and shall, as soon as practicable, provide notice and information to the city and submit any permit application required by this article for the work performed. 
(2)  Routine maintenance. A person shall be allowed to perform routine maintenance on a utility existing in the public rights-of-way without a new permit for such work, provided the work does not involve any excavation, closure of a sidewalk, or closure of a vehicle lane. However, such person shall provide to the city reasonable advance written notice identifying the areas where the maintenance will occur, scope of work, and the dates and duration of the work to be performed. 
(3)  Facility replacement. A person shall be allowed to replace a facility existing in the public rights-of-way without a new permit for such work, provided: 1) the replacement facility is substantially similar or of the same or smaller size; and 2) the work does not involve any excavation, closure of a sidewalk, or closure of a vehicle lane. However, such person shall provide to the city reasonable advance written notice identifying the areas where the work will occur, scope of work, and the dates and duration of the work to be performed. 
(4)  Micro wireless facilities. A communications services provider that has been permitted under this article to occupy the public rights-of-way and that is remitting communications service taxes imposed by the city pursuant to F.S. Ch. 202, may without a new permit for such work install, place, maintain, or replace a micro wireless facility that is suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with this article. 
(b)  Voluntary pre-submittal conference. Prior to submitting a permit application, the applicant is encouraged to schedule a pre-submittal conference with the city to coordinate submittal and compliance with this article. This provision is not mandatory. 
(c)  Permit application. Applicants shall submit a complete permit application or complete consolidated permit application on forms or in a format as may be required by the city. A consolidated permit application is a single permit application for the collocation of up to 30 small wireless facilities within the public rights-of-way in accordance with this article. Applications shall include the following: 
(1)  Registration. Current and valid registration information shall be provided and maintained in accordance with section 23-113, and updated information shall be provided to the city within 30 calendar days of any change. 
(2)  Communications services statement. A statement describing whether the applicant provides or intends to provide communications services within the city; whether the applicant is a pass-through provider or intends to have its communications facilities pass through the city; and whether the applicant leases or intends to lease its facilities to others who will be providing communications services within the city. 
(3)  Collocation agreement. Applications for small wireless facility collocations on a city utility pole shall include an executed collocation agreement, on a form provided by the city. Applications for small wireless facility collocations on any utility pole other than a city utility pole shall include a copy of a valid agreement for such collocation. In lieu of the entire agreement, the applicant may provide the first page and the signature page of such agreement or a notarized letter of authorization from the owner of the utility pole, providing adequate identifying information and indicating the applicant is authorized to collocate. 
(4)  Compensation. Applications shall include all applicable compensation as provided in section 23-115. 
(5)  Engineering and construction plans. Applications shall include the following: 
a.  The proposed dates, times, and locations for utility installation or work, including a description of the type, size, and number of proposed utilities or facilities. 
b.  A description of the manner in which the utility will be installed or modified, including anticipated construction methods or techniques, and an engineering plan with drawings, photographs, and cross-section schematics prepared by a licensed engineer or person exempt from licensing under F.S. § 471.003, that is consistent with the city's Engineering Design Manual and Public Rights-of-Way Use Manual, and that includes: 1) the type and location of proposed utilities, including the approximate size and linear mileage of utilities, facilities and equipment; 2) the type of installation or work proposed for the subject utilities; 3) maps showing the routing of new construction or any work that involves any alteration to the public right-of-way; 4) maps showing the locations of any known utilities located above, on, or below the subject public rights-of-way; 5) maps showing the subject utility with distances in relation to utilities, facilities, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, ramps, trees, or other structures located within 25 feet of all work proposed in the public rights-of-way; and 6) engineering certification attesting that the proposed location of the utility work is structurally sufficient and otherwise appropriate for the proposed work. The city, at its sole discretion, may require the applicant to have the engineering and construction plans certified by an independent licensed engineer or person exempt from licensing under F.S. § 471.003, as selected by the city. 
c.  Any trees or landscaping that may be impacted by the work proposed, which shall be regulated under applicable provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
d.  Maintenance of traffic or temporary sidewalk closure plan for any disruption of the public rights-of-way. 
e.  A restoration plan and good faith estimate of the cost to restore the public rights-of-way to the condition it was in prior to proposed work. 
(6)  Compliance with review criteria. Applications shall include evidence demonstrating compliance with the review criteria provided in section 23-117, which may include information the city manager or designee finds reasonably necessary to demonstrate the application's compliance with such review criteria, including but not limited to a survey showing that the area is within the public rights-of-way and that the city has the appropriate authority to issue a permit under this article. 
(d)  Permit review procedure. An application for a permit shall be reviewed as follows. The city manager or designee may separately address small wireless facility collocation requests that were submitted under a consolidated permit application for which incomplete information has been received or which are denied. 
(1)  Notice of application deficiency. Within 14 calendar days after the date of filing an application, unless mutually extended by the city and applicant, the city manager or designee shall determine whether the application is complete. If an application is deemed incomplete, the city manager or designee shall notify the applicant by electronic mail and specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the city manager or designee fails to notify the applicant otherwise within 14 calendar days after the date of filing an application. 
(2)  Small wireless facilities—Request for alternative location. Within 14 calendar days after the date of filing an application to collocate a small wireless facility on a city utility pole, the city manager or designee may request that the proposed location of the small wireless facility be moved to another location and be placed on an alternative city utility pole. The city and applicant may negotiate the alternative location for 30 calendar days after the date of the request. At the conclusion of this negotiation period, if the alternative location is accepted by the applicant, the applicant shall notify the city of such acceptance and the application shall be deemed granted as it relates to any new location for which there is agreement and all other locations in the application. If an agreement is not reached, the applicant shall notify the city of such non-agreement and the city must grant or deny the original application within 90 calendar days after the date the application was filed. All notices shall be in writing provided by electronic mail. 
(3)  Application review period. Within 60 calendar days after the date of filing an application, unless mutually extended by the city and the applicant, the city manager or designee shall approve or deny the application, and a complete application is deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application within this timeframe. 
(4)  Notice of approval or denial. The city manager or designee shall approve an application unless it is incomplete or it does not comply with the requirements of this article, and notice of approval shall be provided to the applicant by electronic mail. If an application is denied, the city manager or designee shall notify the applicant by electronic mail on the day the application is denied with specification as to the basis of denial, including the specific code provisions on which the denial is based. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified and resubmit the application within 30 calendar days after notice of the denial is sent to the applicant. The city manager or designee shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 calendar days after receipt or the application is deemed approved. Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-117. - Review criteria. 
The city manager or designee shall approve an application for a permit under this article unless the application is incomplete or does not meet the criteria of this section. To minimize disruptions and disturbance in the public rights-of-way, the city manager or designee may require an applicant to alter the proposed work schedule and coordinate any proposed work with other work, construction, installation, or repairs in the subject public rights-of-way that may be occurring or scheduled to occur within a reasonable amount of time. 
(a)  General provisions. All applications shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Shall not materially interfere with the safe operation of traffic control equipment. 
(2)  Shall not materially interfere with sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes, as provided in the city's public works design manual. 
(3)  Shall not materially interfere with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement. 
(4)  Shall not materially fail to comply with the 2010 edition of the Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual. 
(5)  Shall comply with applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code. 
(6)  Shall comply with applicable federal, state, and city regulations pertaining to airport airspace protections. 
(7)  Shall comply with applicable historic preservation zoning regulations. 
(8)  Shall comply with the requirements and conditions of this article, including but not limited to: 1) the registration requirements under section 23-113; and 2) documentation agreeing to and providing the general permit conditions in section 23-114, including indemnity, insurance, and security for performance and compliance. 
(9)  Power to restrict area. With the exception of small wireless facility collocation as provided in this section and to the extent consistent with applicable law, the city manager or designee shall have the power to limit or prohibit the placement of new or additional utilities within the public rights-of-way in order to safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare, including but not limited to each of the following situations: 
a.  When there is insufficient space to accommodate a request. 
b.  To protect existing utilities in the public rights-of-way. 
c.  To allow for city plans for public improvements or development projects determined by the city to be in the public interest. 
(b)  Undergrounding. All installations of new utilities or facilities permitted under this article shall be installed underground in accordance with the criteria in this subsection. However, this subsection shall not apply to small wireless facility collocation as provided in this section or to the addition of wireline facilities on aboveground utility infrastructure that at the time of application already exists in the public rights-of-way. 
(1)  All work shall be in accordance with applicable city policies and engineering standards, including the public works design manual, any city public rights-of-way use manual, and any city dig-once policy. 
(2)  Utilities shall be collocated underground in exiting conduit when applicable or, if unavailable, space shall be made available in any new conduit for other applicants consistent with federal requirements. 
(3)  All work shall be in accordance with all applicable standards and requirements of the following: 
a.  The Florida Department of Transportation Utilities Accommodation Guide. 
b.  The State of Florida Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways. 
c.  The Trench Safety Act, F.S. Ch. 553. 
d.  The Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act, F.S. Ch. 556. 
e.  The National Electrical Code or the ANSI National Electric Safety Code. 
f.  The "Safety Rules for the Installation and Maintenance of Electrical Supply and Communication Lines" established by the Department of Commerce, Bureau of Standards of the United States. 
g.  Appropriate participation in the applicable notification system for subsurface installations, such as Sunshine State One-Call or any successor alert and warning system. 
(c)  Small wireless facility collocation. Small wireless facilities shall be allowed to collocate on city utility poles, as that term is defined in this article, or city wireless support structures that at the time of application already exist in the public rights-of-way, provided the application meets the criteria in this subsection. In addition, small wireless facilities may be collocated on existing utility poles that are not city utility poles, such as utility poles owned by Gainesville Regional Utilities (GRU) or privately-owned utility poles, provided that such collocation is at the sole discretion of and has the permission of the owner of the non-city utility pole and provided that the application meets the criteria in this subsection. Any utility pole that requires pole replacement to support collocation under the make-ready provisions of this subsection shall be considered an existing utility pole for purposes of this subsection. 
(1)  Design standards. Small wireless facilities shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Collocation shall only be allowed on utility poles with a height of greater than 15 feet, and shall not be allowed on any horizontal structure to which signal lights or other traffic control devices are attached. 
b.  Small wireless facilities and all associated equipment shall not be installed at ground level but shall be installed either underground or at least eight feet above the ground-level of the supporting pole or structure. 
c.  A small wireless facility, including any attached antennas, shall not extend in height greater than ten feet above the utility pole or structure upon which it is to be collocated. 
d.  A slim design shall be used wherein the top mounted antenna does not exceed the diameter of the supporting pole or structure at the level of the antenna attachment by more than three inches on any edge, and any side-mounted enclosures do not extend more than 30 inches beyond the exterior dimensions of the supporting pole or structure measured from the edge of the pole or structure to the outermost surface of the side-mounted enclosure. 
e.  Small wireless facilities and all associated equipment shall be: 1) located within the utility pole or wireless support structure; or 2) covered with a shroud that conforms to the pole or structure's design, texture, and color. 
f.  No signage may be located on small wireless facilities unless provided for in the sign regulations in the city's Land Development Code, which allows for public safety-based information such as emergency contact information. 
g.  Small wireless facilities shall have no lights or illumination, unless required by federal, state, or local law. This provision shall not apply to lights that are otherwise associated with a supporting utility pole and that exist separately from the small wireless facility, including street lights. 
(2)  Make-ready work. 
a.  For a city utility pole, the city shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation, including necessary pole replacement, within 60 calendar days after receipt of a complete application. Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall be completed within 60 calendar days after written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the applicant. Alternatively, the city may require the applicant to provide a make-ready estimate at the applicant's expense for the work necessary to support the small wireless facility, including pole replacement, and perform the make-ready work. The city shall not condition or restrict the manner in which the applicant obtains, develops, or provides the estimate or conducts the make-ready work subject to usual construction restoration standards for work in the public right-of-way. 
b.  If pole replacement is required to support collocation, the scope of the make-ready estimate shall be limited to the design, fabrication, and installation of a utility pole that is substantially similar in color and composition. Any replacement pole required shall be no taller than the tallest existing utility pole located in the same public right-of-way within 500 feet of the replaced pole; if there are no existing utility poles located within 500 feet, then the replacement pole shall be no taller than 50 feet. If the original utility pole was the property of the city, then the replaced or altered utility pole shall remain the property of the city. 
c.  All make-ready work shall be in accordance with applicable city policies and engineering standards, including the public works design manual, any city public rights-of-way use manual, and any city one-touch make-ready policy or dig-once policy, as permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-118. - Appeals. 
(a)  Final decisions of the city manager or designee denying, revoking, or suspending any permit under this article may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal, together with the applicable fee established by the city commission, within 25 calendar days of the date of the city manager or designee's written decision. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the city manager, with a copy to the city attorney, and shall state the decision that is being appealed, the grounds for appeal, and a brief summary of the relief that is sought. Any appeal not timely filed shall be waived. 
(b)  The city and the appellant shall mutually agree on a mediator. The matter shall be set for a public hearing within 45 calendar days of the date of the notice of appeal, unless extended by mutual agreement of the parties. The city manager or designee shall notify any party who has filed a written request for such notification of the date when the matter will be presented to the mediator. 
(c)  The parties shall provide the mediator with any materials considered relevant to the city manager or designee's decision, and the mediator may seek additional relevant information. The mediator shall make a decision using the appeal criteria for administrative decisions provided in section 30-3.57 of the City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances. The decision of the mediator shall be rendered in writing no later than 20 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing, and shall be an order recommending that the city manager or designee's decision be affirmed, reversed, or modified. 
(d)  The city manager or designee shall consider the decision of the mediator and shall make a final decision in writing no later than ten calendar days after the date of the written order of the mediator. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final and may be subject to judicial review as provided in law. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 23-119. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Permit revocation. 
(1)  The city manager may revoke a permit issued under this article and the right to own, operate, or maintain a utility under, on, over, across, or within a public rights-of-way, for the following reasons: 
a.  A federal or state authority denies or revokes a permittee's applicable certification or license, including a certificate of authorization, public convenience and necessity, or other applicable certifications or licenses issued by the Florida Public Service Commission, the Florida Department of State, the Federal Communications Commission, or other federal authority. 
b.  The permittee's utility has caused a condition that is hazardous or harmful to the public health, safety, or welfare and the permittee has failed to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written notice. 
c.  Substantive and material violations of any of the provisions of this article, including but not limited to: 
i.  An evasion or attempt to evade any provision of this article, an attempt at any fraud or deceit upon the city, or any material misrepresentation of fact. 
ii.  The repeated failure to provide any updated registration information to the city. 
iii.  The failure to maintain the required indemnification, insurance, or security. 
iv.  The failure to properly restore the public rights-of-way. 
v.  The failure to properly remedy damage or interference, or the failure to relocate or remove utilities pursuant to this article and applicable law. 
vi.  Conducting work in the public rights-of-way without a permit. 
(2)  Prior to permit revocation, the city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation, which shall state that the continued violation may be cause for permit revocation. The city manager or designee may place additional or revised conditions on the permittee. 
(3)  Within 30 calendar days of the city's written notification, the permittee shall remedy the violation or submit to the city manager or designee a plan for correction. The permittee's failure to remedy the violation or to submit a correction plan acceptable to the city manager or designee or to implement an approved plan shall be cause for permit revocation. A final determination to revoke a permit may be appealed in accordance with this article. 
(4)  If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall: 1) reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and administrative costs; and 2) in accordance with this article and as otherwise may be provided in state law, notify the city of the assumption or anticipated assumption by another permittee of ownership of the permittee's utilities in the public rights-of-way, or provide the city with an acceptable plan for disposition of its utilities in the public rights-of-way. If a permittee fails to comply with this subsection, the utilities shall be deemed abandoned and the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has under this article or at law. 
(c)  Force majeure. In the event a person's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this article is prevented by a cause or event not within the person's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that such person uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this article, causes or events not within a person's control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires, and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within a person's control, and thus not falling within this provision, shall include, without limitation, financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of the person's directors, officers, employees, contractors, or agents. 
(Ord. No. 170786 , § 4, 3-1-18)  
Chapter 25 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; department of finance, § 2-226 et seq.; finances generally, § 2-431 et seq.; schedule of fees, rates and charges, App. A. 
State Law reference— Municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; taxation and finance generally, F.S. Ch. 192 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Determination of rate of property taxation; proportioning of taxes to different funds. 
The city commission shall by resolution, determine the rate of taxation within the city on real and personal property and shall specify such rate or rates to be so levied for each fund respectively and shall certify the aggregate to cover all such taxes and report the same to the county tax assessor and county tax collector as provided by general law and the county tax assessor and county tax collector, respectively, shall perform those duties in the process of assessing and collecting taxes on real and personal property within the city as provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 3337, § 1, 54-87) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3337, § 1, adopted May 4, 1987, amending § 25-13 of the 1960 Code, has been included as § 25-1 hereof at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 25-2—25-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, Ch. 27. 
State Law reference— Public service tax, F.S. § 166.231 et seq. 
 
Sec. 25-16. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fuel oil as used in this article, shall include Fuel Oil Grade Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, kerosene, and coal oil. 
Purchaser shall include any person, firm, corporation, partnership, society, club or association of persons acting together as a unit who purchase or cause to be purchased for consumption utility service within the corporate limits of the city. 
Seller shall include any person, individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, corporation, partnership, society, club, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or other group or combination acting as a unit, and shall include the state and any political subdivision, municipality, state agency, bureau, board, commission, instrumentality or department, or any combination thereof, and the plural as well as the singular number. The University of Florida shall not be deemed a seller of any item otherwise taxable hereunder when such item is provided to university residences incidental to the provision of educational services. 
Utility service shall mean electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), water service, and fuel oil, sold, purchased, delivered or received within the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 25-4; Ord. No. 3286, § 1, 9-29-86; Ord. No. 3662, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 970352, § 1, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 001358, § 2, 6-25-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 25-17. - Levy. 
(a)  There is hereby levied by the city on each and every purchase in the city of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas, or manufactured), and water service, a tax of ten percent of the charge made by the seller of such service or commodity. There is hereby levied by the city on each and every purchase in the city of fuel oil a tax of four cents per gallon. These taxes shall in each case be paid by the purchaser thereof for the use of the city to the seller of such electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas, or manufactured), water service, and fuel oil at the time of paying the charge therefor, but not less than monthly. 
(b)  The tax hereby levied on purchases of utility service shall be collected only once upon the same commodity or service and after the commodity or service has lost its interstate character. 
(Code 1960, § 25-5; Ord. No. 3286, § 2, 9-29-86; Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 950558, § 1, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 970352, § 1, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 001358, § 2, 6-25-01)  
Sec. 25-18. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Political subdivisions, churches. Purchases by the United States government, the State of Florida, and all counties, school districts and the city, and by public bodies exempted by law or court order, and by any recognized church of this state for use exclusively for church purposes, are exempt from the tax levied under section 25-17. Any religious institution that possesses a consumer certificate of exemption issued under F.S. ch. 212, is exempt from the tax on telecommunications services levied under section 25-17(c). 
(b)  Fuel costs and purchased gas adjustments. All increases in the cost of utility services to the ultimate consumer resulting from an increase in the cost of fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973, are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed by section 25-17. The following Gainesville Regional Utilities' fuel costs and adjustments are hereby exempt: 
(1)  Electric fuel costs in excess of the October 1, 1973 cost of six and five-tenths mills ($0.0065) per kilowatt-hour. 
(2)  Firm natural gas fuel costs in excess of the October 1, 1973 cost of sixty-nine and six one-hundredths mills ($0.06906) per therm. 
(3)  Interruptible natural gas fuel costs in excess of the October 1, 1973 cost of fifty-five and sixteen one-hundredths mills ($0.05516) per therm. 
(4)  Liquid propane gas fuel costs in excess of the October 1, 1973 cost of one hundred fifty-eight and eight-two one-hundredths mills ($0.15882) per gallon. 
(c)  Special fuels, fuels in certain quantities and for certain uses. 
(1)  For the purposes of this article, the tax imposed by section 25-17 shall not include the following: 
a.  Purchases of special fuels as defined in F.S. Ch. 209; 
b.  The purchase of fuel oil or kerosene for use as an aircraft engine fuel or propellant or for use in internal combustion engines. 
c.  The purchase of natural gas or fuel oil by a public or private utility, including municipal corporations and rural electric cooperative associations, either for resale or for use as fuel in the generation of electricity. 
(2)  The extension of the utility tax authorized by F.S. § 166.231, to fuel oil as defined by this article is based upon the legislative finding that fuel oil as defined by this article is competitive with other utilities taxed by this article under the doctrine announced by the Florida Supreme Court in the case of Central Oil Company v. Cheney (Fla. 1971 253 So 2d 869). It is further determined and declared that items that are exempt under this article and other items which are not taxed under this article, such as coal, wood, charcoal and alcohol are not competitive with those other items that are taxed by this article. 
(d)  Enterprise zones; partial exemption for qualified businesses. 
(1)  Any business located within the enterprise zone established by Resolution R-95-6, shall be eligible to receive an exemption of 50 percent of the utility tax imposed by the city on the purchase of electrical energy if such business is a qualified business under the provisions of F.S. § 212.08, and is determined to be eligible for the exemption by the Department of Revenue. 
(2)  To receive the exemption, a business must file an application with the enterprise zone development agency on a form provided by the Department of Revenue for the purposes of F.S. §§ 166.231(8) and 212.08(15). A qualified business may receive the benefit herein provided for a period of five years from the billing period beginning not more than 30 days following notification to Gainesville Regional Utilities by the Department of Revenue that an exemption has been authorized. The benefits of this article shall expire on December 31, 2015. Any qualified business which has been granted an exemption under F.S. § 212.08(15) shall be entitled to the full benefit of that exemption as if expiration had not occurred on that date. Notwithstanding the expiration referenced above, if a subsequent audit conducted by the Department of Revenue determines that the business did not meet the criteria mandated in F.S. § 212.08(15), the amount of taxes exempted pursuant to this article shall immediately be due and payable to the City of Gainesville by the business, together with the appropriate interest and penalty, computed from the due date of each bill for the electrical energy purchased as exempt under this article. 
(Code 1960, §§ 25-4, 25-5.1, 25-9; Ord. No. 3062, § 1, 9-24-84; Ord. No. 3261, § 1, 9-22-86; Ord. No. 3838, § 1, 3-1-93; Ord. No. 950800, § 1, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 970352, § 1, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 050668, § I, 12-12-05)  
Sec. 25-19. - Collection from purchaser; compensation to seller. 
It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas, or manufactured), water service, and fuel oil, within the corporate limits of the city to collect from the purchaser thereof for the use of the city, the tax levied by section 25-17 at the time of collecting the selling price thereof, and to report and pay over on or before the 20th day of each calendar month to the city manager or designee, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect for any utility service without at the same time collecting the tax hereby levied unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the same from the purchaser. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting for any such utility service where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected bills. If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay for such utility service, including the tax hereby imposed, the seller shall have the right and is hereby authorized and empowered to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1960, § 25-6; Ord. No. 3286, § 3, 9-29-86; Ord. No. 3662, § 3, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 970352, § 1, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 001358, § 2, 6-25-01)  
Sec. 25-20. - Records; monthly statements; payment to city. 
(a)  Records. Each seller of services that are taxable under section 25-27 shall preserve applicable records relating to such taxes until the expiration of the time within which the city may make an assessment with respect to that tax. The city may, during the seller's normal business hours at the official location of the seller's books and records, audit the records of any seller of a service that is taxable under section 25-17, for the purpose of ascertaining whether taxable services have been provided or the correctness of any return that has been filed or payment that has been made. Each such seller must provide to the city, upon 60-days' written notice of intent to audit, access to applicable records for such service, except an extension of this 60-day period shall be granted if reasonably requested by the seller. The seller may at its option waive the 60-day notice requirement. 
(b)  Monthly statements; payments. 
(1)  Every seller is hereby required to sign and file not later than the 20th day of each month in the office of the city manager or designee, a statement setting forth the amount of the tax to which the city became entitled under the provisions of this article on account of bills paid by purchasers during the preceding month, and to pay the amount of the tax to the city manager or designee, to be deposited to the credit of such funds of the city as may have been provided by the city commission. 
(2)  Statements and payments shall be accepted as timely if postmarked on or before the 20th day of the month; if the 20th day falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or federal or state holiday, statements and remittances shall be accepted as timely if postmarked on the next succeeding workday. 
(Code 1960, § 25-7; Ord. No. 950558, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 970352, § 1, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 001358, § 2, 6-25-01)  
Sec. 25-21. - Monthly payment; forms; rules and regulations. 
(a)  In all cases where the seller of utility service collects the price thereof at monthly periods the tax hereby levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of the sales during such period provided that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole dollar to the amount computed. 
(b)  The city manager or designee shall prescribe, prepare and furnish forms for the reporting and return of the tax levied and collected under the terms of this article and sellers of utility service shall make all returns of the taxes collected by them on such forms. The city manager or designee is hereby further authorized to prescribe and promulgate necessary rules and regulations pertaining to the administration of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1960, § 25-8; Ord. No. 970352, § 1, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 001358, § 2, 6-25-01)  
Sec. 25-22. - Interest on late payment. 
Any seller failing to file any required return or pay the tax imposed by section 25-17 when due shall be subject to assessment of interest at the rate of one percent per month of the delinquent tax from the date the tax was due until paid. Interest shall be computed on the net tax due after application of any overpayments. 
(Code 1960, § 25-7; Ord. No. 3077, § 1, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 970352, § 1, 10-27-97)  
Sec. 25-23. - Penalties for non-payment or not filing return. 
Any purchaser willfully failing or refusing to pay the tax imposed by section 25-17 or to file any required return shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  In the case of willful neglect, willful negligence, or fraud, penalties shall be assessed at the rate of five percent per month of the delinquent tax, not to exceed a total penalty (not including interest) of 25 percent. The penalty for failure to file a return shall not be less than $15.00. 
(2)  In the case of a fraudulent return or a wilful intent to evade payment of the tax, the seller making such fraudulent return or willfully attempting to evade payment of the tax shall be liable for a specific penalty of 100 percent of the tax. 
(3)  Penalties shall be computed on the net tax due after application of any overpayments. 
(Code 1960, § 25-10; Ord. No. 970352, § 1, 10-27-97)  
Secs. 25-24—25-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 2-376 et seq.; peddlers, solicitors and canvassers, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Local occupational license taxes, F.S. Ch. 205. 
 
Sec. 25-41. - Levy. 
There is hereby levied a local business tax in the amounts set out in this article for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession or occupation within the city limits on the following: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within its jurisdiction; and 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within its jurisdiction; and 
(3)  Any person who does not qualify under the provisions of subsection (1) or (2) above and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce where such business tax is not prohibited by Section 8 of Article 1 of the United States Constitution. 
(Code 1960, § 16-1(a); Ord. No. 070022, § 10, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 25-42. - Business tax receipt—Required; issuance; penalty for violation. 
(a)  No person shall engage in or manage any business, occupation or profession for which there is a local business tax receipt required by this article or any other ordinance of the city, unless the person shall first procure a business tax receipt to conduct the same from the director of finance. 
(b)  All business tax receipts shall be signed by the director of finance or designee. 
(c)  Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation or profession without first obtaining a local business tax receipt, if required hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the tax determined to be due, either within seven days of written notification by the city or within 30 days of opening to the public, whichever occurs first, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(d)  Any person who engages in any business, occupation, or profession who does not pay the required local business tax within 180 days after the initial notice of tax due for either the initial local business tax receipt or any renewal thereof, and who does not obtain the required local business tax receipt shall be required to pay a penalty of $250.00 per offense and may be subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, plus any collection and administrative costs authorized in accordance with F.S. Ch. 205. 
(e)  All applications and affidavits required by this article shall be retained and destroyed pursuant to the guidelines of the state. 
(Code 1960, §§ 16-1(b), (c), 16-5(b); Ord. No. 3613, § 1, 4-2-90; Ord. No. 3975, § 1, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 980033, § 1, 7-13-98; Ord. No. 070022, § 10, 6-25-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.022.  
Sec. 25-43. - Same—A business tax receipt for each location; change in location. 
A business tax receipt shall only be valid for the location to which it is issued. Additional locations require separate receipts. When determining which apartment, condominium, etc., rental units under common controlling ownership comprise a location for assessing the business tax on the rental of the units, the following factors shall be considered: common management, common signage, common rental account, and site of the units in a compact, contiguous neighborhood. A change in location will require reapplication and payment of a transfer fee as provided by section 25-45. 
(Code 1960, § 16-1(d); Ord. No. 3975, § 2, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 070022, § 10, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 25-44. - Same—Application in writing; affidavit as to basis of business tax receipt. 
No business tax receipt shall be issued except upon written application of the person applying for the same, and it shall be the duty of the director of finance, before issuing a business tax receipt based wholly or in part upon property valuation, capacity, number of workers, or any other contingency, to require the person applying for such a receipt to file with the director of finance an affidavit giving full and complete information thereof. Any business, profession or occupation failing to provide information to the director of finance as to property valuation, capacity, number of workers, or any other contingency prior to August 1 each year and who engages in business on October 1 shall be considered as operating without a business tax receipt and subject to the penalty provided by section 25-47. The applications and affidavits required by this section shall be retained as part of the records of the office of the director of finance. 
(Code 1960, § 16-2; Ord. No. 3975, § 3, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 070022, § 10, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 25-45. - Same—Transfer. 
(a)  All business tax receipts except those issued pursuant to the business tax exemptions set forth in section 25-50 may be transferred to a new owner when there is a bona fide sale of the business upon payment of a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual business tax but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00 and presentation of evidence of the sale and the original business tax receipt. 
(b)  Upon written application and presentation of the original business tax receipt, any receipt may be transferred from one location to another location in the same municipality, upon payment of a transfer fee in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(Code 1960, § 16-3; Ord. No. 3249, § 2, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 3975, § 4, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 070022, § 10, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 171078 , § 1, 2-21-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.043(2), (3).  
Sec. 25-46. - Same—Terms; due dates for renewals; half-year business tax receipts. 
(a)  No business tax receipt shall be issued for longer than one year. 
(b)  All business tax receipts shall expire on the 30th day of September and shall be renewable on or before the first day of October. If October 1 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax shall be due and payable on or before the first working day following October 1. 
(c)  Half-year business tax receipts may be issued by the director of finance under the provisions of this article for the period April 1 to September 30th, upon payment of one-half of the tax fixed as the amount for the business tax receipt for one year. 
(Code 1960, § 16-4; Ord. No. 070022, § 10, 6-25-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 20.053(1).  
Sec. 25-47. - Same—Penalty for delinquent renewals. 
Those business tax receipts not renewed when due and payable shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an additional five-percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid; provided that the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent of the local business tax for the delinquent establishment. 
(Code 1960, § 16-5(a); Ord. No. 070022, § 10, 6-25-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053.  
Sec. 25-48. - Business taxes based on number of workers or inventory; how computed. 
Whenever the amount of a business tax shall be based wholly or in part on the basis of the number of workers, the number to be used in calculating the amount of the business tax shall be the average number of workers during the preceding receipted year or business operating period, or the average number of workers reasonably expected to be employed during the period for which the business tax receipt license is to be issued, whichever number shall be the greater. The average shall be obtained by adding the maximum and minimum number of workers for the period for which the average is to be obtained and the division by two of the sum of the maximum and the minimum. The term "workers" includes all persons actively working in the business, whether owners thereof or not. Whenever the amount of a business tax shall be based wholly or in part on the basis of inventory, the cost value of inventory shall be based on the most recent fiscal year end inventory taken prior to June 1 of the year the business tax receipt is issued. 
(Code 1960, § 16-6; Ord. No. 3975, § 5, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 070022, § 10, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 25-49. - Gambling and lotteries, zoning violations not authorized. 
The issuance of any business tax receipt under the terms of this article shall not be construed to authorize or permit the conduct of any business, occupation or profession in any area of the city in violation of the zoning laws or any other ordinance of the city or any law of the state; nor shall anything in this article or other ordinances of the city be construed to authorize gambling or the operation of a lottery. 
(Code 1960, § 16-9; Ord. No. 070022, § 10, 6-25-07)  
Sec. 25-50. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following persons are entitled to an exemption from a business tax and any fees imposed under this chapter, provided such person completes and signs, under penalty of perjury, a request for fee exemption furnished by the city and provides written documentation in support of his or her request for an exemption: 
(1)  A veteran of the United States Armed Forces who was honorably discharged upon separation from service, or the spouse or unremarried surviving spouse of such a veteran. 
(2)  The spouse of an active duty military servicemember who has relocated to the municipality pursuant to a permanent change of station order. 
(3)  A person who is receiving public assistance as defined in F.S. § 409.2554. 
(4)  A person whose household income is below 130 percent of the federal poverty level based on the current year's federal poverty guidelines. 
(b)  If a person who is exempt under subsection (a) owns a majority interest in a business with fewer than 100 employees, the business is exempt. Such person must complete and sign, under penalty of perjury, a request for fee exemption to be furnished by the city and provide written documentation in support of his or her request for an exemption for the business under this subsection. 
(c)  With the exception of a veteran under subsection (a)(1), any person who claims an exemption under subsection (a) must annually certify each fiscal year that he or she continues to qualify for the exemption on record, and provide written documentation. 
(d)  All disabled persons physically incapable of manual labor, widows with minor dependents, and persons 65 years of age or older, with not more than one employee or helper, and who use their own capital only, not in excess of $1,000.00, and who live in Alachua County, may engage in any business or occupation without being required to pay a business tax. The exemption provided in this section shall be allowed only upon the certificate of the county physician, or other reputable physician, that the applicant is disabled, the nature and extent of the disability be specified therein, and in case the exemption is claimed by a widow with minor dependents, or a person over 65 years of age, proof of the right to the exemption shall be provided. 
(e)  Neither subsection (d) nor any other law or ordinance exempts any person from the payment of any amount required by law for the issuance of a license to sell intoxicating liquors or malt and vinous beverages. 
(f)  Any person who claims an exemption under subsection (d) must annually certify each fiscal year that he or she continues to qualify for the exemption on record. 
(g)  College and high school students may, with the approval of the athletic association or proper school authorities, sell the pennants, badges, insignia and novelties of their school without being required to pay a business tax. 
(h)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require a business tax receipt for practicing the religious tenets of any church. 
(i)  All persons who are full-time employees of the University of Florida, do not have offices off the University of Florida campus, and do not hold themselves out to the public as available for practice of their professions, shall be exempt from the payment of the local business tax. 
(j)  All persons engaging in or managing a business, profession, or occupation regulated by the department of business and professional regulation who have paid a local business tax for the current year to the county or municipality in the state where their permanent business location or branch office is maintained shall be exempt from payment of the local business tax levied by this article for work or services on a temporary or transitory basis in the city. 
(Code 1960, § 16-7; Ord. No. 3249, § 1, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 3975, § 6, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 070022, § 10, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 171078 , § 1, 2-21-19) 
State Law reference— Exemptions, F.S. § 205.063 et seq.  
Sec. 25-50.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 171078 , § 1, adopted February 21, 2019, repealed § 25-50.1, which pertained to exemptions—enterprise zone. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 25-51. - Schedule. 
EXHIBIT A 
ZONING GROUP I—AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, FISHING 
Hatchery ..... $131.25 
Nursery-shrubs, trees & plants ..... 131.25 
ZONING GROUP II—MINING 
Sand, dirt, rock or shell ..... 131.25 
Wood & coal yards ..... 131.25 
ZONING GROUP III—CONSTRUCTION 
Burglar alarm-install, monitor & service ..... 131.25 
Contractor/sub-contractor ..... 131.25 
Signs-installation ..... 131.25 
Tree service—unlimited ..... 131.25 
Tree service—trimming & pruning only ..... 84.00 
ZONING GROUP IV—MANUFACTURING 
Bottling plant &/or distributor ..... see below* 
Manufacturing ..... see below* 
*Fee schedule: 
1—6 Workers ..... 52.50 
7—13 Workers ..... 105.00 
14—20 Workers ..... 157.50 
21—50 Workers ..... 210.00 
Over 50 Workers ..... 525.00 
ZONING GROUP V—TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS, ELECTRIC, GAS & SANITARY SERVICES (INCLUDES WAREHOUSES) 
Agency—travel ..... 105.00 
Aircraft—fixed base operator ..... 210.00 
Aircraft—rental/leasing: 
—Aircraft for rent: 
1—6 ..... 52.50 
7—13 ..... 105.00 
14—20 ..... 157.50 
21—50 ..... 210.00 
Over 50 ..... 525.00 
Ambulance service ..... 105.00 
Auto—Buses: 
—First vehicle ..... 52.50 
—Each additional vehicle ..... 10.50 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Auto—Limousines with drivers: 
—First vehicle ..... 52.50 
—Each additional vehicle ..... 10.50 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Auto—Storage 14 day maximum ..... 105.00 
Auto—Storage or parking lot: 
—Spaces not in excess of 25 ..... 52.50 
—Over 25 spaces ..... 157.50 
Auto—Taxicabs or vehicles with drivers: 
—First vehicle ..... 52.50 
—Each additional vehicle ..... 10.50 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Auto—transfer, hauling or delivery company: 
—First vehicle ..... 52.50 
—Each additional vehicle ..... 10.50 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Auto—wrecker yard—storage—no retail sales ..... 105.00 
Cold storage plant ..... 105.00 
Directories—compiling &/or selling ..... 105.00 
Gas (L/P) and/or fuel oil dealer ..... 105.00 
Gas company—natural or manufactured ..... 105.00 
Gas company—natural or manufactured/fran ..... 105.00 
Gasoline and oil dealer wholesale ..... 105.00 
Radio wire or background music ..... 105.00 
Radio/TV—Studio for O/C station ..... 105.00 
Radio/TV/cable broadcasting ..... 105.00 
Radio/TV/cable broadcasting/franchise ..... 105.00 
Radio/TV/cable mobile studio ..... 105.00 
Railroad company ..... 525.00 
Storage warehouse or lot ..... 105.00 
Studio—TV advertising, etc. Film made ..... 105.00 
Telegraph company ..... 210.00 
Telephone company ..... 525.00 
Telephone company/franchise ..... 446.25 
Telephone solicitation ..... 105.00 
ZONING GROUP VI—WHOLESALE TRADE 
Bakery—Wholesale, plant outside city ..... 105.00 
Distributor—Merchandise or commodities ..... 105.00 
Livestock bet/commission agent ..... 105.00 
Merchant—Wholesale from vehicle/$3000 ..... 105.00 
Merchant—Wholesale 
—When cost value of inventory based on most recent fiscal year end inventory prior to June 1st equals: 
0—$10,000.00 ..... 105.00 
10,001.00—20,000.00 ..... 157.50 
20,001.00—50,000.00 ..... 210.00 
50,001.00—100,00.00 ..... 315.00 
100,001.00—150,000.00 ..... 420.00 
Over $150,000.00 ..... 525.00 
ZONING GROUP VII—RETAIL TRADE 
Art show, festival, etc.: 
—First ten booths/stalls ..... 78.75 
—Each additional booth/stall ..... 3.15 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Auto—New car dealer ..... 315.00 
Auto—New car dealer—Second location ..... 315.00 
Auto—Salvage yard ..... 210.00 
Auto—Service station: 
—1—6 pumps ..... 52.50 
—7—13 pumps ..... 105.00 
—14—20 pumps ..... 157.50 
—21—50 pumps ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 pumps ..... 525.00 
Auto—Used cars ..... 210.00 
Auto—Used cars sold by new car dealer ..... 99.75 
Bakery—Baking on premises for R/T sales: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Catalogue order service/mail order ..... 105.00 
Caterer ..... 105.00 
Caterer—Food prep—Off premises only ..... 105.00 
Cemetery ..... 315.00 
Christmas tree lot ..... 99.75 
Coin-op/vending mach. Less than five cents: 
—Each machine ..... 10.50 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Coin-op/vending mach. five cents or more: 
—Each machine ..... 15.75 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
—Concession stand ..... 52.50 
Drive-in/B-B-Q Stand, etc ..... 105.00 
Flea/farmer's market: 
—First ten booths/stalls ..... 78.75 
—Each additional booth/stall ..... 3.15 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Florist ..... 105.00 
Florist—Catalogue sales only ..... 105.00 
Home party sales (comb. With 1805, 1811, 1812) ..... 78.75 
Indoor sales—Temporary location ..... 315.00 
Junk or scrap metal dealer ..... 315.00 
Manufacturing—Silk/cut floral arrang. Only ..... 52.50 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Merchant—retail 
—When cost value of inventory based on most recent fiscal year end inventory prior to June 1st equals: 
—0—$5,000.00 ..... 52.50 
—$5,001.00—$10,000.00 ..... 105.00 
—$10,001.00—$20,000.00 ..... 157.50 
—$20,001.00—$50,000.00 ..... 210.00 
—$50,001.00—$100,000.00 ..... 262.50 
—$100,001.00—$300,000.00 ..... 315.00 
—$300,001.00—$500,000.00 ..... 420.00 
—Over $500,000.00 ..... 525.00 
Merchant—retail w/pharmacy 
—When cost value of inventory based on most recent fiscal year end inventory prior to June 1st equals: 
—0—$5,000.00 ..... 52.50 
—$5,001.00—$10,000.00 ..... 105.00 
—$10,001.00—$20,000.00 ..... 157.50 
—$20,001.00—$50,000.00 ..... 210.00 
—$50,001.00—$100,000.00 ..... 262.50 
—$100,001.00—$300,000.00 ..... 315.00 
—$300,001.00—$500,000.00 ..... 420.00 
—Over $500,000.00 ..... 525.00 
Mobile home sales ..... 315.00 
Motorcycle sales or rental only ..... 105.00 
Motorcycle sales, repairs & rental ..... 210.00 
Pawnshop ..... 315.00 
Peddler ..... 52.50 
Peddler—food cart ..... 105.00 
Physical therapy devices ..... 78.75 
Restaurant: 
—0—10 Seating accommodations ..... 52.50 
—11—15 Seating accommodations ..... 78.75 
—16—20 Seating accommodations ..... 105.00 
—21—50 Seating accommodations ..... 131.25 
—51—100 Seating accommodations ..... 210.00 
—101—200 Seating accommodations ..... 288.75 
—201—250 Seating accommodations ..... 367.50 
—251—300 Seating accommodations ..... 472.50 
—Over 300 Seating accommodations ..... 525.00 
Stand—Farm products, fruits, plants ..... 52.50 
ZONING GROUP VIII—FINANCE, INSURANCE, & REAL ESTATE 
Appraisal bureau or agency ..... 105.00 
Auto broker (purchasing service) ..... 105.00 
Bail bonding agent ..... 99.75 
Bank building & loan association ..... 315.00 
Bank building & loan association-Branch ..... 131.25 
Bank, building & loan assn.-Auto teller ..... 105.00 
Bonding company ..... 131.25 
Bonding company criminal or bail ..... 131.25 
Broker—Business ..... 105.00 
Broker—Business (multiple), each ..... 105.00 
Broker—Management office ..... 105.00 
Insurance adjustor ..... 105.00 
Insurance adjustors (multiple), each ..... 105.00 
Insurance agent ..... 47.25 
Insurance agents (multiple), each ..... 47.25 
Insurance Claims Investigator ..... 99.75 
Insurance company or broker ..... 131.25 
Loan & finance co.—Chapter 516 ..... 315.00 
Loan & finance co.—Chapter 520 ..... 315.00 
Loan & finance co.—Lease installment ..... 315.00 
Loan & finance co.—2nd mortgage only ..... 315.00 
Merchant—Importer ..... 105.00 
Money transfer only ..... 105.00 
Mortgage or loan—Broker ..... 105.00 
Mortgage or loan—Solicitor/agent ..... 99.75 
Real estate appraiser ..... 105.00 
Real estate broker ..... 105.00 
Real estate broker—Branch office ..... 105.00 
Real estate listing bureau ..... 105.00 
Real estate salesperson ..... 52.50 
Stock bond or mutual fund—Dealer (multiple), each ..... 105.00 
Stock, bond &/or mutual fund—Dealer ..... 105.00 
Stock, bond &/or mutual fund—Sales ..... 99.75 
ZONING GROUP IX—SERVICES 
Abstracts of title ..... 210.00 
Advertising matter—Distributor ..... 105.00 
Advertising—Agency ..... 105.00 
Advertising—Graphics/art layouts ..... 78.75 
Advertising—Motor vehicles ..... 105.00 
Advertising—Outdoor signs & billboards ..... 105.00 
Advertising—Sound amplifying vehicles ..... 26.25 
Advertising—Trade inducement ..... 105.00 
Agency ..... 105.00 
Agency—Claims & collections ..... 105.00 
Agency—Credit reporting ..... 105.00 
Agency—Display/stock not for sale ..... 105.00 
Agency—Employment ..... 105.00 
Agency—Equipment ..... 105.00 
Agency—Manufacturer's representative ..... 105.00 
Agency—Marketing ..... 105.00 
Agency—Private detective/investigative ..... 105.00 
Agency—Private investigative: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Agency—Temp. services (originally Serv. For Pub.) ..... 105.00 
Amusement park/permanently located ..... 525.00 
Animal Care—Boarding ..... 52.50 
Animal care—Grooming ..... 52.50 
Animal care—Hospital without vet ..... 105.00 
Apartment, condominium, etc. rental: 
—0—4 units ..... No charge 
—5 units ..... 52.50 
—Over five units, each additional unit ..... 1.05 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Armored car service ..... 105.00 
Auction shop ..... 210.00 
Auctioneer ..... 105.00 
Auto—Body painting, upholstery & top shop: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Auto-car cleaning, waxing, detailing: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Auto—car wash/mechanical: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Automobile repair: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
ZONING GROUP IX—SERVICES 
Auto recovery service: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Auto—Rental of trailers to be towed ..... 105.00 
Auto—Stall rental for repair: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Auto—U Drive It leasing: 
—First vehicle ..... 105.00 
—Each additional vehicle ..... 10.50 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Auto—Vehicle repair garage (incl. motorcycle) ..... 52.50 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Auto—Wrecker service: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Automobile association ..... 52.50 
Banquet hall ..... 105.00 
Barbershop/beauty parlor: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Billiards, bagatelle or pool: 
—Each machine ..... 26.25 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Bookkeeping or income tax service ..... 105.00 
Bowling alley: 
—First lane ..... 105.00 
—Each additional lane ..... 10.50 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Burglar alarm—Rental/leasing of equip ..... 52.50 
Business office—Not otherwise taxed: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Child care ..... 52.50 
Coin-op/amusement machine: 
—Each machine ..... 26.25 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Coin-op/music machine: 
—Each machine ..... 26.25 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Coin-op/per or dist of amuse/vend mach ..... 210.00 
Coin-op/weighing machine: 
—Each machine ..... 26.25 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Contest company ..... 315.00 
Copy business: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Counselor/advisor (non-professional): 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Counselor/advisor—Hearing aid: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Dance hall ..... 210.00 
Data processing service: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Dental hygienist/assistant ..... 105.00 
Divine healer ..... 131.25 
Dry clean plant ..... 210.00 
Dry clean—Pick up station ..... 26.25 
Dry clean—Pick up station/no local plant ..... 52.50 
Dry clean—self service or automatic: 
—1—3 machines ..... 52.50 
—Each additional machine ..... 5.25 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Electronics—Computer analyst, each ..... 105.00 
Maximum ..... 525.00 
Electronics—Computer programmers: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Exterminator—Termites/other insects ..... 210.00 
Fortuneteller—Required fingerprinting: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Funeral home ..... 210.00 
Go-karts & like amusement devices ..... 210.00 
Golf—Driving range only ..... 105.00 
Golf—Miniature course ..... 105.00 
Golf—Regular course, 9 or 18 holes ..... 210.00 
Gymnasium, athletic club or health salon ..... 131.25 
Hospital ..... 315.00 
Hotel, rooming house, motel, tourist, ct.: 
—0—4 Rooms ..... 0.00 
—5 Rooms ..... 52.50 
—Over five rooms, each additional room ..... 2.63 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Interior decorator/designer ..... 105.00 
Janitorial & allied serv.—Interior clean: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Janitorial & allied ser.—Exterior clean: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Janitorial & allied serv.—Park lot sweep: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Kennel—Dog & other animals ..... 131.25 
Laboratory ..... 105.00 
Laboratory—Dental ..... 105.00 
Laundry—Carpet/drape—off customer site ..... 105.00 
Laundry—Diaper service only ..... 105.00 
Laundry—Facility ..... 210.00 
Laundry—Self service or automatic: 
—1—3 machines ..... 52.50 
—Each additional machine ..... 5.25 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Lawn/yard maintenance: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Linen, uniform & towel service only ..... 105.00 
Masseur/masseuse ..... 105.00 
Microfilming/not lic. as photographer ..... 105.00 
Mobile home serv, repair, awn. Inst.: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Museum ..... 105.00 
Newspaper—Local office for o/c paper ..... 105.00 
Newspaper/less than six times a week ..... 105.00 
Newspaper/6 or more times a week ..... 446.25 
Notary public: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Photo or film dev./not otherwise lic ..... 105.00 
Photographer ..... 105.00 
Physical/speech therapy ..... 105.00 
Piano/organ tuner ..... 52.50 
Professional ..... 105.00 
Professional (multiple), each ..... 105.00 
Maximum per firm/company ..... 525.00 
Professional—Accountant/auditor ..... 105.00 
Professional—Acupuncture ..... 105.00 
Professional—Architect ..... 105.00 
Professional—Artist ..... 105.00 
Professional—Artist/tattoo ..... 105.00 
Professional—Athletic trainer ..... 105.00 
Professional—Attorney/lawyer ..... 105.00 
Professional—Branch office ..... 105.00 
Professional—Chemist ..... 105.00 
Professional—Chiropractor ..... 105.00 
Professional—Clinical social worker ..... 105.00 
Professional—Consultant ..... 105.00 
Professional—Dentist ..... 105.00 
Professional—Direct disposer (cremation) ..... 105.00 
Professional—Engineer/civil, consulting ..... 105.00 
Professional—Land surveyor ..... 105.00 
Professional—Landscape architect ..... 105.00 
Professional—Marriage & family therapist ..... 105.00 
Professional—Mental health counselor ..... 105.00 
Professional—Occupational therapist ..... 105.00 
Professional—Optician filling prescrip. ..... 105.00 
Professional—Optician/prescrip & lenses ..... 105.00 
Professional—Optometrist ..... 105.00 
Professional—Osteopathic physician ..... 105.00 
Professional—Physician/surgeon (MD) ..... 105.00 
Professional—Podiatrist ..... 105.00 
Professional—Psychiatrist ..... 105.00 
Professional—Psychologist ..... 105.00 
Professional—Veterinarian ..... 105.00 
Professional—Writer ..... 105.00 
Promoter ..... 105.00 
Publisher including graphics, etc ..... 105.00 
Publisher—Agent ..... 105.00 
Recording studio: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Recreational vehicle/motor homes, trucks ..... 210.00 
Recreational vehicle/trvl. trailers, etc ..... 210.00 
Recycling company: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Rental/portable buildings ..... 131.25 
Rentals/leasing business: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Rentals/leasing—Heavy equipment ..... 210.00 
Rentals/leasing—Other ..... 52.50 
Rentals/leasing—Portable toilets ..... 210.00 
Rentals/leasing—Sanitary containers ..... 210.00 
Rides/ferris wheels, etc.: 
1—3 days, each device ..... 52.50 
Each additional day, each device ..... 15.75 
Rinks—bicycles, skating, etc ..... 105.00 
Sanitarium, nursing home, etc ..... 210.00 
School ..... 52.50 
School—Aircraft ..... 105.00 
School—Animal care—Obedience ..... 105.00 
School—Art studio ..... 52.50 
School—Automobile driving ..... 52.50 
School—Business ..... 52.50 
School—Cosmetology ..... 52.50 
School—Crafts ..... 52.50 
School—Dancing ..... 52.50 
School—Dramatic ..... 52.50 
School—Exercise ..... 52.50 
School—Karate/judo ..... 52.50 
School—Model or charm ..... 52.50 
School—Music (piano, voice, instrument) ..... 52.50 
School—Private ..... 52.50 
School—Real estate ..... 52.50 
School—Riding or academy ..... 52.50 
Service for the public: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Service for the public—Repair: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Service for the public—Sewer cleaning: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Shooting gallery ..... 210.00 
Show—Small animals/dog, pony, etc ..... 105.00 
Show—Wrestling, boxing, musicals, etc ..... 210.00 
Show/carnival, per day ..... 315.00 
Maximum per event ..... 1,575.00 
Show/circus, per day ..... 315.00 
Maximum per event ..... 1,575.00 
Show/exhibit (freaks, curiosities, etc.) ..... 131.25 
Stenographer, typist, court reporter: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Swimming pool (not municipally owned) ..... 105.00 
Tailor ..... 52.50 
Taxidermist ..... 52.50 
Telephone answering service ..... 105.00 
Theater seating 1000 or more ..... 525.00 
Theater seating 500 or less ..... 315.00 
Theater seating 501 to 999 ..... 420.00 
Theater/drive-in ..... 315.00 
Ticket office not otherwise taxed ..... 105.00 
Trailer/mobile home camps or parks: 
—0—4 spaces ..... 0.00 
—5 spaces ..... 52.50 
—Over five spaces, each additional space ..... 1.05 
—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Upholstery shop: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
Watchman, guard or patrol agency: 
—1—6 workers ..... 52.50 
—7—13 workers ..... 105.00 
—14—20 workers ..... 157.50 
—21—50 workers ..... 210.00 
—Over 50 workers ..... 525.00 
ZONING GROUP X—PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 
Fair—certified county (per event) ..... 525.00 
Fair—County (per event) ..... 525.00 
ZONING GROUP XI—NONCLASSIFIABLE ESTABLISHMENTS UNCLASSIFIED—Maximum ..... 525.00 
Fees for unclassified will be set based on reasonable assumptions with a maximum of $525.00. 
(Code 1960, § 16-8; Ord. No. 3217, § 1, 4-28-86; Ord. No. 3258, § 1, 9-22-86; Ord. No. 3296, 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 3323, § 1, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 3613, § 2, 4-2-90; Ord. No. 3647, § 1, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 3919, §§ 1—3, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 3975, § 7, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 950188, § 1, 7-10-95; Ord. No. 000191, § 1, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 070022, § 10, 6-25-07) 
Cross reference— Schedule of fees, rates and charges, App. A.  
Sec. 25-52. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the terms of this article shall, upon such conviction, be punished as provided by section 1-9. 
(Code 1960, § 16-11)  
Secs. 25-53—25-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TAX EXEMPTION FOR HISTORIC PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 25-61. - Tax exemptions for historic properties. 
The City of Gainesville hereby authorizes ad valorem tax exemptions for historic properties, pursuant to F.S. §§ 196.1977 and 196.1998. 
(Ord. No. 950480, § 1, 8-28-95)  
Sec. 25-62. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings: 
Contributing property shall mean a building, site, structure, or object which adds to the historical architectural qualities, historic associations, or archaeological values for which a district is significant because 
(a)  It was present during the period of significance of the district and possesses historic integrity reflecting its character at that time; 
(b)  It is capable of yielding important information about the period; or 
(c)  It independently meets the National Register of Historic Places criteria for evaluation set forth in 36 CFR part 60.4 or in Section 30-112 of the Land Development Code for the City of Gainesville Local Register of Historic Places. 
Eligible improvement shall mean changes to the interior and/or exterior condition of real property brought about by the expenditure of labor or money for the restoration, renovation or rehabilitation of such property. Improvements include additions and accessory structures (i.e., a garage) necessary for efficient contemporary use. 
Eligible property shall mean a site, building, structure or object that, at the time an exemption is granted, is, and is certified to the city commission by the Historic Preservation Division to be 
(a)  Individually designated on the National Register of Historic Places; 
(b)  A contributing property in a national register listed historic district; 
(c)  Designated as a historic property or landmark under the provisions of the City of Gainesville historic preservation ordinance; or 
(d)  A contributing property in a historic district designated under the City of Gainesville historic preservation ordinance. 
Government or nonprofit purpose shall mean at least sixty-five (65) percent of the useable space of a historic building is occupied or used by an agency of the federal, state or local government or nonprofit corporation whose articles of incorporation have been filed by the Department of State in accordance with F.S. § 617.0125. 
Preservation exemption covenant shall mean the historic preservation property tax exemption covenant paralleling Florida DOS Form No. HR3E111292 which indicates that the owner agrees to maintain and repair the historic property so as to preserve the architectural, historical, or archaeological integrity of the property during the exemption period. 
Regularly and frequently open to the public shall mean public access to the property is provided not less than fifty-two (52) days a year on an equitably spaced basis, and at other times by appointment. The owner may charge a reasonable nondiscriminatory admission fee. 
Renovation or rehabilitation shall mean the act or process of returning a historic property or portion thereof that is of historical or architectural significance to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the property which are significant to its historical, architectural, cultural and archeological values. For historic properties or portions thereof that are of archaeological significance or are severely deteriorated, renovation or rehabilitation shall mean the act or process of applying measures designed to sustain and protect the existing form and integrity of a property, or reestablish the stability of an unsafe or deteriorated property while maintaining the essential form of the property as it presently exists. 
Restoration shall mean the act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work. 
(Ord. No. 950480, § 1, 8-28-95)  
Sec. 25-63. - Scope and duration of tax exemptions. 
(a)  The city commission may grant an ad valorem tax exemption for eligible improvements to eligible properties made on or after September 1, 1995. The exemption will be for 100 percent of the assessed value of the eligible improvements, and will apply only to those taxes levied by the City of Gainesville that are not levied for the payment of bonds or authorized by a vote of the electors pursuant to section 9(b) or section 12, Article VII of the Florida Constitution. 
(b)  The amount of the exemption shall be determined by the Alachua County Property Appraiser based upon its usual process for post-construction inspection and appraisal of property following rehabilitation or renovation. 
(c)  Any exemption granted under this article to a particular property shall remain in effect for ten (10) years. The duration of the exemption shall continue regardless of any change in the authority of the City to grant such exemptions or any change in ownership of the property. In order to retain an exemption, however, the historic character of the property, and improvements which qualified the property for an exemption, must be maintained over the period for which the exemption was granted. 
(Ord. No. 950480, § 1, 8-28-95)  
Sec. 25-64. - Exemption for government or nonprofit purpose. 
(a)  If an improvement qualifies an eligible property for an exemption and the property is used for a government or nonprofit purpose and is regularly and frequently open to the public, the owner is eligible for an exemption from ad valorem taxation of one hundred (100) percent of the assessed value of the property, provided 
(1)  The assessed value of the improvement is equal to at least fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the property as improved; 
(2)  The improvements are made by or for the use of the existing owner; and 
(3)  The improvements are made on or after the effective date of this ordinance. 
(b)  For an exemption granted under this section, the following conditions, as well as those indicated in section 25-62, shall justify removal of a property from eligibility for the exemption, as described in section 25-65: 
(1)  The property is sold or otherwise transferred from the owner who made application and was granted the exemption; or 
(2)  The property is no longer used for a government or nonprofit purpose, or is no longer regularly and frequently open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 950480, § 1, 8-28-95)  
Sec. 25-65. - Procedure for obtaining tax exemption. 
(a)  Application. An applicant (owner of record or authorized agent) seeking an ad valorem tax exemption for historic properties must file with the city manager or designee the two-part Historic Preservation Property Tax Exemption Application with "Part 1: Preconstruction Application" (Part 1) completed. In addition, the applicant shall submit the following: 
(1)  A completed application for a Certificate of Appropriateness for the qualifying restoration, renovation, or rehabilitation. 
(2)  An application fee of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) to be determined by the city manager or designee based on the estimated cost of the work to be performed and the administrative costs to be incurred by the city in processing the application and monitoring compliance. 
(b)  Review by property appraisers office. Upon receipt of the preconstruction application, the city manager or designee will transmit the application to the Alachua County Property Appraiser's office, which will review and provide an estimate of the probable increase in the appraisal of the property to the applicant and the City. The applicant can withdraw the application within forty-five (45) days of receiving the estimate and be reimbursed for the filing fee. 
(c)  Review by historic preservation board. 
(1)  The City of Gainesville Historic Preservation Board (HPB) shall review Part 1 applications for exemptions. The HPB shall determine whether the property is an eligible property and whether the Part 1 proposed improvement is consistent with the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and is therefore an eligible improvement. 
(2)  For improvements intended to protect or stabilize severely deteriorated historic properties or archaeological sites, the HPB shall apply the following additional standards: 
a.  Before applying protective measures that are generally of a temporary nature and imply future historic preservation work, an analysis of the actual or anticipated threats to the property shall be made. 
b.  Protective measures shall safeguard the physical condition or environment of a property or archaeological site from further deterioration or damage caused by weather or other natural, animal or human intrusions. 
c.  If any historic material or architectural features are removed, they shall be properly recorded and, is possible, stored for future study or reuse. 
d.  Stabilization shall reestablish the structural stability of a property through the reinforcement of loadbearing members or by arresting material deterioration leading to structural failure. Stabilization shall also reestablish weather resistant conditions for a property. 
e.  Stabilization shall be accomplished in such a manner that it detracts as little as possible from the property's appearance. When reinforcement is required to reestablish structural stability, such work shall be concealed wherever possible so as to not intrude upon or detract from the aesthetic and historical quality of the property, except where concealment would result in the alteration or destruction of historically significant material or spaces. 
(3)  For applications submitted under the provisions of section 25-64, the HPB shall also determine that the property meets the standards set forth in that section. 
(4)  The HPB shall notify the applicant and the city commission in writing of the results of its review and shall make recommendations for correction of any planned work deemed to be inconsistent with the requirements for an eligible improvement. 
(5)  When an applicant is applying jointly for the ad valorem tax exemption and for federal historic preservation tax credits, the applicant will complete the National Park Service's (NPS) federal tax credit application and Part 1 of the historic preservation property tax exemption application and submit both to the city manager or designee. The HPB shall defer action on the applications until the NPS has rendered a determination. In the event the NPS approves the federal tax credit application, the Part 1 application shall be amended to reflect any conditions issued by the NPS. The HPB shall then approve the tax exemption application and forward it to the city commission to be handled as part of the normal approval process set forth below. A denial by the NPS shall cause the HPB to deny the ad valorem tax exemption. 
(d)  Request for review of completed work application. 
(1)  Upon completion of work specified in the "Part 1" application, the applicant shall submit a "Part 2: Final Application for Review of Completed Work" (Part 2). The HPB shall conduct an inspection of the subject property to determine whether or not the completed improvements are in compliance with the work described and conditions imposed in the approved Part 1 application. Appropriate documentation may include paid contractor's bills and canceled checks, as well as an inspection request by the applicant within two (2) years following approval of the Part 1 application. 
(2)  On completion of review of the Part 2 application, the HPB shall recommend that the city commission grant or deny the exemption. The recommendation, and reasons therefor, shall be provided in writing to the applicant and to the city commission. The applicant shall be given at least ten (10) days notice of the date of the public hearing of the city commission on the requested exemption. If a denial is recommended, and the applicant submits elevations and plans which indicate that the applicant intends to undertake the work necessary to comply with the recommendations of the HPB, the denial of the application may be continued by the city manager or designee for a period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days, while the applicant makes a good faith effort to comply with the recommendations. The applicant may resubmit documents indicating that the reasons for recommendation of denial of the application have been remedied and the city manager or designee will reinspect the work. 
(e)  Approval by city commission. A majority vote of the city commission shall be required to approve a Part 2 application and authorize the ad valorem tax exemption. The commission, in overturning or modifying the recommendation of the historic preservation board shall utilize the same standards as used by the historic preservation board in reaching its decision. If the exemption is granted, the city commission shall adopt an ordinance that includes the following: 
(1)  The name of the owner and the address of the historic property for which the exemptions granted. 
(2)  The date on which the ten-year exemption will expire. 
(3)  A finding that the historic property meets the requirements of this article. 
(4)  A copy of the historic preservation exemption covenant, as provided in section 25-66, signed by the applicant and the mayor-commissioner or designated successor. 
(f)  Notice to property appraiser. The property owner shall have the historic preservation exemption covenant recorded in the official records of Alachua County, and shall provide a certified copy of the recorded historic preservation exemption covenant to the city manager or designee. Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the certified copy, the city manager designee shall transmit a copy of the approved "Part 2: Final Application", as well as the historic preservation exemption covenant to the Alachua County Property Appraiser with instructions that the property appraiser provide the ad valorem tax exemption to the applicant. Responsibility for paying the recording costs lie with the applicant. 
(g)  Effective date of exemption. The effective date of the ad valorem tax exemption shall be January 1 of the year following the year in which the application is approved by the city commission and a historic preservation exemption covenant has been transmitted to the Alachua County Appraiser. 
(h)  An applicant previously granted a historic rehabilitation tax exemption by the historic preservation board may undertake additional improvement projects during the exemption period, or following its expiration, and reapply for an additional historic rehabilitation tax exemption for such work. An additional ten-year exemption shall apply only to the additional improvement. 
(Ord. No. 950480, § 1, 8-28-95)  
Sec. 25-66. - Required covenant. 
(a)  Effect of covenant. To qualify for an exemption, the property owner must enter into a covenant with the City of Gainesville for the term for which the exemption is granted. The form of the covenant shall be the "Historic Preservation Property Tax Exemption Covenant" (DOS Form No. HR3E111292). The covenant shall be binding on the current property owner, transferees, and their heirs, successors, or assigns. 
(b)  Revocation of exemption. Violation of the covenant or agreement will result in the property owner being subject to the payment of the differences between the total amount of taxes which would have been due in March in each of the previous years in which the covenant or agreement was in effect had the property not received the exemption and the total amount of taxes actually paid in those years, plus interest on the difference calculated as provided in F.S. § 212.12(3), as amended. In the event of a violation of the covenant, or damage to the historic property as detailed below, the HPB shall conduct a hearing, as provided in Section 30-112(d)(7)e of the Land Development Code, to allow the property owner to show cause why the exemption should not be revoked. Identification of the following conditions shall result in termination of the historic property tax exemption covenant, revocation of the exemption, and removal of a property from eligibility for the property tax exemption: 
(1)  The owner is in violation of the provisions of the historic preservation tax exemption covenant; or 
(2)  The property has been damaged by accidental or natural causes beyond the owner's control to the extent that the historic integrity of the features, materials, appearance, workmanship and environment or archaeological integrity which made the property eligible for listing in the Natural Register or designation under the provisions of the local preservation ordinance have been lost or so damaged that restoration is not feasible. Feasibility determinations will be made utilizing the economic hardship standards in Section 30-112 of the Land Development Code. Under this condition, the applicant is not required to pay back interest plus taxes. 
(c)  Appeal of revocation. The applicant can appeal a decision to revoke the exemption to the city commission. The procedure for appealing the decision, and the conduct of the hearing will be as specified in Section 30-112(d)(7)i of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 950480, § 1, 8-28-95)  
Secs. 25-67—25-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LOCAL COMMUNICATIONS SALES TAX 
 
Sec. 25-81. - Local communications services tax. 
Effective with respect to communications services reflected on bills dated on or after October 1, 2001, there is imposed and levied by the city a local communications services tax, administered in accordance with F.S. Ch. 202. The city hereby imposes the following rate structure in accordance with Chapter 202 and Alachua County's local option sales tax: 
(a)  For taxable sales of communications services on bills dated October 1, 2002 through October 31, 2002, the local communications services tax rate shall be 5.62 percent, which percentage includes 0.6 percent allocated to Alachua County's local option sales tax in accordance with F.S. § 202.20(3). 
(b)  For taxable sales of communications services on bills dated November 1, 2002 through December 31, 2002, the local communications services tax rate shall be 6.22 percent, which percentage includes 0.6 percent allocated to Alachua County's local option sales tax in accordance with F.S. § 202.20(3). 
(c)  For taxable sales of communications services on bills dated January 1, 2003 through October 31, 2003, the local communications services tax rate shall be 5.62 percent. 
(d)  For taxable sales of communications services on bills dated November 1, 2003 through August 31, 2007, the local communications services tax rate shall be 5.32 percent. 
(e)  For taxable sales of communications services on bills dated September 1, 2007 through August 31, 2008, the local communications services tax rate shall be 7.0 percent. 
(f)  For taxable sales of communications services on bills dated on or after September 1, 2008, the local communications services tax rate shall be 5.57 percent. 
(Ord. No. 001358, § 3, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 020154, § 1, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 070023, § 2, 6-25-07)  
Secs. 25-82—25-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD EXEMPTIONS FOR PERSONS 65 AND OLDER 
 
Sec. 25-90. - Ad valorem additional homestead exemption authorized. 
Pursuant to Section 6(f), Article VII, of the Florida Constitution, and F.S. § 196.075, an additional homestead exemption in the amount of $20,000.00, effective January 1, 2004, increasing to the amount of $25,000.00, effective January 1, 2005, which exemption shall be limited to tax levies of the City of Gainesville, shall be available to any person who has the legal or equitable title to real estate and maintains therein the permanent residence of the owner, who has attained age 65 and whose household income does not exceed $20,000.00, adjusted as described below. 
(Ord. No. 030491, § 1, 11-10-03)  
Sec. 25-91. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Household means a person or group of persons living together in a room or group of rooms as a housing unit, but the term does not include persons boarding in or renting a portion of the dwelling. 
Household income means the adjusted gross income, as defined in § 62 of the United States Internal Revenue Code, of all members of a household. 
(Ord. No. 030491, § 1, 11-10-03)  
Sec. 25-92. - Procedures. 
Beginning January 1, 2004, every taxpayer claiming the additional homestead exemption provided herein must file an application with the Alachua County Property Appraiser not later than March 1 of each year for which such exemption is being claimed. Such application shall include a sworn statement of household income for all members of the household and shall be filed on the form prescribed by the Florida Department of Revenue. On or before June 1 of each year that an application is made, the taxpayer must provide the necessary supporting documentation to the Alachua County Property Appraiser. The necessary documentation includes copies of any federal income tax returns for the prior year, any wage and earnings statement (W-2 forms), and such other documentation as may be required by the department of revenue or the Alachua County Property Appraiser necessary to verify household income. Failure to provide the proper documentation may result in a loss of exemption for the requested year. 
(Ord. No. 030491, § 1, 11-10-03)  
Sec. 25-93. - Household income adjustment. 
The $20,000.00 income limitation referenced in section 25-90 shall be adjusted annually, commencing January 1, 2001, by the percentage change in the average cost-of-living index in the period January 1 through December 31 of the immediate prior year compared with the same period for the year prior to that. The index is the average of monthly consumer-price index figures of the stated 12-month period, relative to the United States as a whole, issued by the United States Department of Labor. 
(Ord. No. 030491, § 1, 11-10-03)  
Sec. 25-94. - Right of survivorship. 
If title to the homestead property is held with a right of survivorship, the person residing on the property and otherwise qualifying may receive the entire amount of the additional homestead exemption. 
(Ord. No. 030491, § 1, 11-10-03)  
Sec. 25-95. - Penalties. 
Receipt of the additional homestead exemption provided by this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in F.S. § 196.131 (criminal) and § 196.161 (recovery, liens), as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 030491, § 1, 11-10-03)  
Chapter 26 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Regulation of motor vehicles in cemeteries, § 7-21; offenses, Ch. 17; vending booths, § 19-91 et seq.; police, Ch. 21; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 23; vehicles for hire, Ch. 28; land development code, Ch. 30; recreation vehicles, § 30-86; gasoline and alternative fuel service stations, § 30-93; limited automotive services, § 30-94; access management, § 30-336; vision triangle, § 30-341. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles, F.S. Ch. 316 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - F.S. Ch. 316 adopted by reference. 
The provisions of Title XXIII, Ch. 316, Florida Statutes, as applicable to municipalities, are hereby expressly adopted by the city. 
(Code 1960, § 27-1)  
Sec. 26-2. - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions adopted by section 26-1 from F.S. Ch. 316, the following words and phrases, when used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Bicycle shall mean any device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is twenty (20) inches or more in diameter, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two (2) front and/or two (2) rear wheels. 
Bike lane shall mean a lane marked within the travelled roadway area specified for preferential use by bicycles. It is identified by standard guide signing, special lane lines and/or other pavement markings. 
Bike path shall mean a facility physically separated from a travelled roadway area for the use of bicycles and/or pedestrians. It shall be identified by standard guide signing and pavement markings as necessary. 
Bike route shall mean a bike route identified as bicycle facility by standard guide signing. 
Parking enforcement specialist shall mean an individual who successfully completes a training program established and approved by the criminal justice standards and training commission for parking enforcement specialists and whose current duties with the city include parking enforcement. 
Parking lines shall mean the marks upon the pavement of any street painted for the purpose of indicating parking for vehicles and the space included in such line shall be designated as parking spaces. 
(Code 1960, § 27-2; Ord. No. 070626, § 1, 1-28-08) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-3. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
When the city manager, as the administrative officer of the city commission, determines it to be in the public interest, he/she should make provision for the control of traffic by designating speed limits, one-way streets, through streets, stop streets, marking off and designating parking spaces, loading zones, taxi stands, bus stops, safety zones and driveways and the length of time for parking on specified streets, and shall place and maintain appropriate traffic signs and signals pursuant thereto. Such provisions and designations shall be of the same force and effect as if provided for specifically by ordinance, and any violation thereof shall be unlawful. To better accomplish this duty, the city manager shall appoint a director of traffic engineering. 
(Code 1960, § 27-3)  
Sec. 26-4. - Powers and duties of the director of traffic engineering. 
(a)  There is hereby established in the City of Gainesville a traffic engineering department with a director of traffic engineering, whose duties and responsibilities shall be as hereinafter set out. 
(b)  The director of traffic engineering shall be a registered professional engineer in the State of Florida. 
(c)  It shall be the general duty of the director of traffic engineering to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this city, and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by the city manager. 
(Code 1960, § 27-4)  
Sec. 26-5. - Powers and duties of the director of police services. 
(a)  There is hereby established in the police department of this city a records section to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the director of police services. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the patrol division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the traffic engineering department and other offices of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of this city. 
(c)  The police department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of this city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Said record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(e)  Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police department shall cooperate with the traffic engineering department in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(f)  The police department shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents and arrests reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. Such records shall accumulate during at least a three-year period and from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent three-year period. 
(g)  The police department shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city manager and shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police. 
(Code 1960, § 27-5)  
Sec. 26-6. - Obedience to police officers or police service technicians. 
Drivers must at all times comply with any direction by voice or hand of any member of the police department as to stopping, starting, rate of speed, manner of approaching or departing from any place, the manner of taking on or letting out passengers, or loading or unloading goods in any place, or any directions deemed necessary by any police officer or police service technician in the interest of the public safety and convenience. 
(Code 1960, § 27-6; Ord. No. 3484, § 1, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 070626, § 2, 1-28-08) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 316.072(3).  
Sec. 26-7. - Arrest authority of officer at scene of an accident. 
A police officer at the scene of a traffic accident may arrest any driver of a vehicle involved in the accident when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that the person has committed any offense which is a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Gainesville or of the laws of the State of Florida, in connection with the accident. 
(Code 1960, § 27-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 316.645.  
Sec. 26-8. - Duty of driver in case of injury to or death of animals. 
It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle involved in an accident in the city resulting in injury to or the death of any domestic animal, including, but not being limited to, dogs and cats, to immediately stop and diligently endeavor to locate and notify the owner of the animal or the person having custody thereof, of such fact. 
(Code 1960, § 27-40)  
Sec. 26-9. - Blocking of streets by trains. 
It shall be unlawful for the conductor or other person in charge of any railroad train, car or engine to permit or allow any train, car or engine to stand or remain across any street of the city in such a manner as to block or prevent the safe passage of any person or vehicle or to activate any automatic signal devices resulting in such block or preventing of safe passage, for a longer period than five minutes. 
(Code 1960, § 22-3; Ord. No. 3134, § 2(22-2), 5-20-85) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate blocking of railroad crossings, F.S. § 338.21(6); blocking crossing during darkness, F.S. § 351.03(2)(a).  
Sec. 26-10. - Violations; penalty. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided by another section of this chapter, or by F.S. Ch. 316, any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1960, § 27-8)  
Sec. 26-11. - Referral of civil parking citations to hearing officer. 
The city commission expressly and specifically allows and intends that any and all cases involving violations of a city municipal parking ordinance be referred to the traffic hearing officer designated to preside over civil traffic infractions in Alachua County. 
(Ord. No. 970887, § 1, 3-23-98)  
Secs. 26-12—26-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-27. - Speed limit. 
No person shall operate any vehicle in the city at a rate of speed greater than the posted speed limit in a school zone which shall not be less than 15 miles per hour nor more than 20 miles per hour, or at a rate of speed greater than 30 miles per hour at other times and places; except, the city manager may designate the speed up to 45 miles per hour as lawful upon the various thoroughfares in the city, and such increased speeds shall be lawful where appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected. The city manager may also designate reduced speed limits where he/she deems it necessary. Provided, however, where speed limits are controlled and prescribed by an agency of the State of Florida on streets within the city, those limits shall prevail and shall be the speed limits under this section. 
(Code 1960, § 27-9; Ord. No. 001596, § 1, 8-27-01) 
State Law reference— Establishment of municipal speed zones, F.S. § 316.189; establishment of school speed zones, F.S. § 316.1895.  
Sec. 26-28. - Driving across sidewalk or bike path to cross private property, to cut corner or take short cut. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person driving or operating any vehicle to cross any sidewalk or bike path in the city for the purpose of driving across private property in order to cut corners or to take short cuts whether or not there shall be a driveway constructed across the sidewalk at the place of crossing. This section shall not render it illegal to cross any sidewalk at any place where a driveway has been constructed if the purpose of entering private property is for the transaction of any lawful business thereon. 
(b)  If any person shall so drive any vehicle across any sidewalk, or bike path the fact that he/she shall not bring the vehicle to a full stop upon the private property shall be prima facie evidence that he/she did not enter the private property for the purposes of transacting any lawful business thereon. Any person charged with the violation of this section may show by competent evidence that he/she entered the property for the purpose of transacting business thereon. 
(Code 1960, § 27-10)  
Sec. 26-29. - Driving on private property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on the private property of another without the express consent of the owner or occupant of the property. 
(b)  Upon the written complaint made by the owner or occupant to the police department for the violation of this section, the police department is authorized to remove or cause to be removed in accordance with section 26-53 any person and vehicle so operated in violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1960, § 27-11)  
Sec. 26-30. - Operation of motor vehicles on public property. 
(a)  Definition. The words "public property" as used in this section shall include all real property owned or leased by any governmental entity or agency or any combination of such entities or agencies. 
(b)  Prohibition. Except as expressly permitted in this section, it shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in this section for any person to operate any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, whether licensed or not, upon any public property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Exceptions and permits: 
(1)  This section shall not apply to the operation of motor vehicles, motorcycles or motor driven cycles upon the public streets, highways, roads, driveways, parking lots or garages or upon other areas specifically designated for vehicular use in the city. 
(2)  The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to the operation of bicycles, golf carts or to lawn mowers or other service machinery. 
(3)  The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to the operation of publicly owned or leased vehicles on any public property. 
(4)  Upon application, the city manager may grant permits to persons for the operation of vehicles on public property for the following activities: 
a.  Circuses, carnivals and other amusement shows; 
b.  Programs sponsored, sanctioned or approved by the city or other governmental entity or agency; 
c.  Racing on duly authorized tracks; 
d.  Exhibitions of vehicles; and 
e.  Testing of vehicles either by a proposed purchaser or by a dealer of vehicles in such areas as the city manager designates for such use. 
Such permits shall not be deemed to exempt any holder of same from any other requirements regarding the particular activity permitted. The city manager shall not unreasonably withhold the issuance of lawful permits. 
(Code 1960, § 27-11)  
DIVISION 2. - THE GAINESVILLE TRAFFIC SAFETY ENHANCEMENT ACT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 100588, § 1, adopted Feb. 17, 2011, amended div. 2 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said division to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 26-31—26-42, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 070268, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 2009. 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Title, purpose and findings. 
(a)  Title. This division shall be known as the "The Gainesville Traffic Safety Enhancement Act" (the Act). 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this Act is to authorize and implement the use of traffic infraction detectors within the City of Gainesville's jurisdictional limits, in accordance with general law pursuant to F.S. § 316.0083. This Act will also supplement law enforcement personnel in the enforcement of red light signal violations and shall not prohibit county, state or local law enforcement officers from issuing a citation for a red light signal violation in accordance with normal statutory traffic enforcement techniques. 
(c)  Findings. The city commission finds that failing to stop at a red light constitutes serious threats to the public health, safety, or welfare of the community and such violations are irreparable or irreversible, and are itinerant and transient in nature. 
(Ord. No. 100588, § 1, 2-17-11)  
Sec. 26-32. - Use of traffic infraction detectors. 
The city is authorized to utilize traffic infraction detectors within its jurisdiction pursuant to F.S. § 316.0083. 
(Ord. No. 100588, § 1, 2-17-11)  
Sec. 26-33. - Implementation of general law. 
The city manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to implement a system utilizing traffic infraction detectors pursuant to the provisions and requirements of F.S. § 316.0083, as may be amended from time to time, and may take any action which is necessary for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 100588, § 1, 2-17-11)  
Secs. 26-34—26-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Off-street parking and loading regulations, § 30-328 et seq. 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking prohibited in specified places, F.S. § 316.1945; additional parking regulations, F.S. § 316.195. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-46. - Owner's liability for illegal parking. 
(a)  Any and all violations of the following sections of this article relating to the parking of vehicles are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and trespass. 
(1)  Parking, etc., Generally, sections 26-47 through 26-52; 
(2)  Parking Meters and Parking Lots, sections 26-71 and 26-73 through 26-81; 
(3)  Curb Loading Zones, etc., sections 26-95 through 26-101; and 
(4)  Controlled Vehicular Parking, sections 26-116 through 26-127. 
(b)  Any person cited for a violation of the sections specified above shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal infraction and shall be cited for such an infraction and ordered to appear before the traffic hearing officer for the county. Each day any violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. For overtime parking in a space, each succeeding equal time period beyond that authorized as the maximum time period for the parking space shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The registered owner of a vehicle is declared to be directly responsible to the city for the payment of the fine and fees for the vehicle when the vehicle is parked or left standing in violation of these regulations. The registered owner is the person or entity that is lawfully registered as the owner of the vehicle with the department of highway safety and motor vehicles on the day the violation occurs. 
(d)  When any law enforcement officer, police service technician, or parking enforcement specialist finds a vehicle parked in violation of any of the parking regulations specified in this section, the following actions shall occur: 
(1)  Notice of violation. The officer shall issue a notice of violation to the vehicle and shall place the notice in a conspicuous place on the vehicle. The notification form shall contain language informing the registered owner of the vehicle which section of this chapter has been violated, the procedures available to the registered owner under this section, and the administrative fee which the registered owner may pay to avoid citation for a noncriminal traffic infraction for the violation. 
(2)  Affidavit of explanation/first delinquency notice. 
a.  Any person who fails to respond to the original parking violation notice within the time period specified shall be deemed to have waived the right to contest the merits of such parking violation. 
b.  The city manager or designee may waive the specified administrative fee, after receipt of an affidavit of explanation, received or postmarked within seven calendar days of the writing of the original citation, under the following circumstances: 
1.  Malfunctioning meter. 
2.  Valid and verifiable emergencies. 
3.  Government employees on official business, verified by a supervisor. 
4.  City volunteers actually detained because of their volunteer duties, as verified by the volunteer coordinator. 
5.  Error in the issuance of the citation. 
c.  A person who has received a parking violation notice for parking a motor vehicle in a parking space designated by signs limiting parking to permitted city or county employees or officers, pursuant to section 26-47(a)(3)b., the proper use of which requires a specific permit or decal, may provide an affidavit of explanation, within the time frame specified in section 26-46(d)(2)b. above, with proof that the required permit or decal was issued to such motor vehicle or its owner or operator and that such permit or decal was valid at the time of the violation. The affidavit shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable administrative fee of $10.00. If the affidavit of explanation is not deemed sufficient, the administrative and delinquent fee shall be as provided in subsection (d)(3). 
(3)  Amount of fee. The administrative and delinquent fees provided for violations of any of the parking regulations specified in this section shall be in accordance with the schedule set out in appendix A. 
(e)  At any hearing of the case involving illegal parking in which the owner of the vehicle is being tried under this chapter, it shall be sufficient evidence on which the court or traffic hearing officer may rely to establish the name of the registered owner of such vehicle if a city police officer, police service technician, or parking enforcement specialist, shall state on oath that he/she has made inquiry of the department of highway safety and motor vehicles or similar agency of the state where the vehicle is registered and has been advised of the identity of the registered owner. If the person on trial denies that he/she is the registered owner, and such fact cannot be otherwise established, the court or traffic hearing officer may defer the final determination of the case until a certified record or appropriate certificate can be obtained from the office of the appropriate agency showing the record in that office on the date in question. 
(f)  At any hearing of a case involving illegal parking in which the owner of the vehicle is being tried under this chapter, the judge or hearing officer may, in his/her discretion, allow any person, whether the registered owner or not, to testify or otherwise give evidence if the person admits under oath or affirmation to have parked the vehicle at the time and place of the alleged offense. 
(g)  The city shall supply the department of highway safety and motor vehicles (department) with a magnetically encoded computer tape reel or cartridge or send by other electronic means data that is machine-readable by the installed computer system at the department, listing persons who have three or more outstanding parking violations, including violations of F.S. § 316.9155. The department shall mark the appropriate registration records of persons so reported. 
(Code 1960, § 27-14; Ord. No. 3045, § 1, 8-20-84; Ord. No. 3101, § 1, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 3484, § 2, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 3552, § 1, 8-14-89; Ord. No. 3597, § 1, 2-19-90; Ord. No. 3961, § 1, 2-28-94; Ord. No. 980285, § 1, 9-14-98; Ord. No. 980949, § 1, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 981159, § 1, 4-12-99; Ord. No. 070328, § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 070626, § 3, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 100832, § 1, 5-19-11)  
Sec. 26-47. - Prohibited in specified places or under certain circumstances. 
(a)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the direction of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
b.  On a sidewalk, bike path, or bike lane; 
c.  Within an intersection; 
d.  On a crosswalk; 
e.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the division of road operations of the department of transportation indicates a different length by signs or markings; 
f.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
g.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, upon a highway within a highway tunnel; 
h.  On any railroad tracks; 
i.  At any place where official signs or yellow curb markings prohibit stopping, standing or parking; 
j.  Alongside or adjacent to any curb painted yellow; 
k.  On a public right-of-way or private lawn without the permission of the owner; 
l.  Within the area between the street curb and sidewalk or designated sidewalk area; 
m.  In such a manner as to block a traffic lane, or interfere with the orderly flow of traffic or so as to constitute a hazard to passage of emergency vehicles; 
n.  Within any specially designated and marked handicap parking space provided in accordance with F.S. § 316.1955, unless such vehicle displays a parking permit issued pursuant to F.S. §§ 316.1958 or 320.0848, and/or such vehicle is transporting a person eligible for the parking permit; 
o.  Within any specially designated and marked access area adjacent to a designated and marked handicap parking space. 
p.  In the opposite direction of the flow of traffic. 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
a.  In front of or within five feet of a public or private driveway; 
b.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
c.  Within 30 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
d.  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
e.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of said entrance (when property signposted); 
f.  At any place where official signs prohibit standing. 
(3)  Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
a.  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
b.  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(4)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his/her control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing, and it shall be unlawful for the registered owner of any vehicle to park or leave standing or to permit another to park or leave standing, any vehicle: 
(1)  In any unmetered parking space for a period of time longer than that allowed in the space by authorized signs; 
(2)  Unoccupied and upon a public street of the city at any place, in a manner, or for a length of time prohibited by an ordinance of the city; 
(3)  Upon a public street for a continuous length of time in excess of 72 hours; provided nothing in this section shall operate to extend the hours of limited parking as indicated by authorized meters and signs; 
(4)  In any city off-street parking lot in excess of 48 hours; 
(5)  In excess of 25 feet in length in designated parking spaces except for emergency breakdowns and for unloading or loading purposes; 
(6)  On the property or premises of another without the permission of the owner or occupant of the property or premises; 
(7)  Displaying the vehicle for sale; 
(8)  Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(9)  Displaying advertising; 
(10)  Storage or as junkage or dead storage for more than 24 hours. 
(Code 1960, §§ 27-15, 27-17; Ord. No. 3484, § 3, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 3961, § 2, 2-28-94; Ord. No. 981159, § 2, 4-12-99; Ord. No. 020903, § 1, 4-14-03) 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places, F.S. § 316.1945.  
Sec. 26-47.1. - Fire lanes on private property devoted to public use. 
(a)  Fire lanes shall be established by the fire chief on private property devoted to public use, where the parking of vehicles or other obstructions may interfere with the ingress and egress of fire department vehicles for the protection of persons or property, such as at shopping centers, bowling lanes, theaters, hospitals, churches, private alleys, and similar locations. 
(b)  Marking of fire lanes designated by the fire chief shall be done by the owner or lessee of the private property. Fire lane signs shall be of a type conforming to the standards provided for in the most recent manual and specifications of the Florida Department of Transportation, and furnished and erected by the owner or lessee of the private property. 
(c)  Parking of vehicles in or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be prohibited at all times. 
(d)  The scheduled administrative fee for violation of this section shall be in accordance with schedule set out in appendix A, plus a surcharge to be used for firefighter training programs pursuant to and as authorized by Section 316.008(5), F.S. (1987), in accordance with the schedule set out in appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 3484, § 4, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 3597, § 2, 2-19-90; Ord. No. 981159, § 3, 4-12-99) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3484, § 4, adopted Nov. 14, 1988, adding § 27-15.1 to the 1960 Code, has been included as § 26-47.1 herein at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 26-48. - Parking to sell merchandise prohibited. 
Unless so authorized by a permit of the city manager, no person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of selling merchandise from the vehicle except in a duly established market place, or when so authorized or licensed under the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 27-16) 
Cross reference— Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers, Ch. 19.  
Sec. 26-49. - Diagonal parking. 
Diagonal parking is permitted only when signs or other markings so indicate but in no case shall any vehicle in excess of 20 feet in length park in a diagonal parking space or diagonally to the curbline on any paved street within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 27-18)  
Sec. 26-50. - Backing up to curb. 
No vehicle shall be backed up to any curb on a public street except during the time the vehicle is actually being loaded or unloaded, or except where parking backed up to the curb is specifically authorized and designated by posted sign and/or pavement markings. This section shall not apply to motorcycles. 
(Code 1960, § 27-20; Ord. No. 950169, § 1, 6-26-95; Ord. No. 160834 , § 1, 3-15-18)  
Sec. 26-50.1. - Limited on-street parking in the Central City District. 
(a)  On-street parallel parking shall be permitted in the Central City District on Main Street (SR 329) and University Avenue (SR 26) at the locations designated by the city manager and approved by the state department of transportation. 
(b)  Parallel on-street parking is permitted pursuant to this section only during the time specifically posted on signs. Time limitations shall be strictly enforced. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing, and it shall be unlawful for the registered owner of any vehicle to park or leave standing or to permit another to park or leave standing, any vehicle in any area authorized by this section beyond the regulated time limits authorized herein. 
(d)  The administrative fee for violation of this section is set out in appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 970469, § 1, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 980222, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 981159, § 4, 4-12-99)  
Sec. 26-50.2. - Special central city district parking permit. 
(a)  The city manager or designee is authorized to issue special central city district (CCD) permits to accommodate the following parking needs: 
(1)  Construction vehicles parking adjacent to a work site. 
(2)  Service or maintenance vehicles parking adjacent to a work site. 
(3)  Other unusual and otherwise legal and authorized activities where the operator of the vehicle shows that the inability to park near the site of the activity will severely and adversely impact the time needed to complete the activity or the efficiency in completing the activity. 
(b)  The special CCD permit is valid only in the CCD as shown on the map maintained by the department of planning and development services, and only in the area adjacent to the site of the activity. 
(c)  The special CCD permit is free and valid for up to six months. The city manager or designee shall determine the number of permits for a given activity and the time period for a permit. The applicant for a special CCD permit must present a valid current vehicle registration for the vehicle to be given a permit. 
(d)  The special CCD permit will allow the operator to park the vehicle on a city-maintained on-street or off-street parking facility without payment of meter fee or restriction on overtime parking. The permit must be displayed on the vehicle while it is so parked, in an area to be determined by the city manager or designee when the permit is given. 
(Ord. No. 990079, § 1, 7-12-99)  
Sec. 26-51. - Driving over raised street curb. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle over a raised street curb for the purpose of parking on public property or on private property without permission.  
Sec. 26-52. - Starting parked vehicle. 
No person shall start in motion a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked, unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Code 1960, § 27-22)  
Sec. 26-53. - Impoundment or immobilization of vehicle in violation of article. 
(a)  Authority of police and designated parking enforcement personnel. 
(1)  When any vehicle is parked or left standing in violation of this article on any city or publicly owned property, including city streets, highways, roads, alleys, parking lots or any other premises of the city, any police officer, police service technician, or parking enforcement specialist, is authorized to take possession of such vehicle and to remove such vehicle from such property and to store and possess such vehicle in conformity with this section. 
(2)  When any vehicle is parked or left standing in violation of this chapter on any private property, any police officer, police service technician, or parking enforcement specialist, is authorized, after receiving a written complaint from the owner or lawful possessor of such property and to store and possess such vehicle in conformity with this section. 
(b)  Immobilization. 
(1)  Any law enforcement officer, police service technician, or parking enforcement specialist, who comes into contact with an unoccupied parked vehicle, either on a public street or off-street parking facility, which he/she reasonably believes to be a vehicle for which there is three or more unpaid recorded parking violations, shall immobilize the vehicle in the manner prescribed in paragraph (b)(2), and fee shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule established in Appendix A. 
(2)  Immobilization of vehicles pursuant to subsection (b)(1) shall be accomplished by means of a Denver boot or other nondestructive device which prevents the vehicle from moving under its own power. The law enforcement officer, police service technician, or parking enforcement specialist, who causes the vehicle to be immobilized shall attach a notice to the vehicle advising the owner of the vehicle of the information necessary to enable the owner to have the immobilizing device removed. 
The notice shall be signed by the law enforcement officer, police service technician, or parking enforcement specialist, and indicate his/her identification number. 
(c)  Impoundment. 
(1)  Any law enforcement officer, police service technician, or parking enforcement specialist, who comes into contact with an unoccupied parked vehicle, either on a public street or off-street parking facility, which he/she reasonably believes to be a vehicle for which there is five or more unpaid recorded parking violations, shall impound the vehicle in the manner prescribed in subsection (c)(2). 
a.  Any law enforcement officer, police service technician, or parking enforcement specialist, who comes in contact with an unoccupied vehicle parked on the street in an area designated in section 26-50.1 outside the permitted time limit shall issue a citation as provided in appendix A and shall impound the vehicle in the manner prescribed in subsection (c)(2). 
b.  The city's contract towing company may be authorized to tow, without individual request by the city, any vehicle parked on the street in an area designated in section 26-50.1 beyond the regulated time limits authorized herein. 
(2)  Impoundment of vehicles pursuant to subsection (c)(1) shall be accomplished by means of removal of the vehicle to the nearest facility or other place of safety, or to a facility designated or maintained by the municipality. 
(d)  Owner responsibility and storage charges. The cost of towing, booting, or removing a vehicle impounded or immobilized under this section and the cost of storing the same or removing the immobilization device shall be chargeable against the owner and shall be a lien upon the vehicle. The owner of the vehicle shall pay these charges and any outstanding administrative delinquency, or collection fees owed, before the vehicle will be released. The vehicle may be stored in a public or private place. If the vehicle is stored in a private place, the amount charged for storage shall be the amount the city must pay for the vehicle's storage. If the vehicle is stored on city property, the charges for storage shall be $2.00 per day. The charges to the owner for towing shall be the cost of towing to the city. 
(e)  Notice to owner. Upon taking possession of any such vehicle, as provided in this section, the police department or other department initiating impoundment, shall endeavor to notify the owner thereof that such vehicle has been impounded and is being held for the towing and storage charges. A notice shall be given to the person to whom the vehicle is licensed in accordance with the registration list furnished by the register of motor vehicles. The notice shall be given within a reasonable time by registered mail and the actual charge for the giving of such notice shall be collected at the time the vehicle is returned to the owner thereof. 
(f)  Recovery. The registered owner of such vehicle shall be entitled to recover such vehicle only after making payment for the charges and expenses to the police department for the cost of towing or immobilizing such vehicle, plus the cost of storage and any outstanding administrative delinquency, or collection fees owed of such vehicle herein specified. The registered owner of such vehicle shall be responsible for paying the charges and fine as herein provided whether such registered owner was the person who unlawfully parked or left standing such vehicle, or not, and in each instance the police department shall require payment of the sums herein provided for before restoring to the registered owner possession of such vehicle. 
(g)  Sale of unredeemed vehicles. If the impounded vehicle is not claimed and all charges paid within 30 days after the police, police service technician, or parking enforcement specialist, have taken possession of such vehicle an action may be commenced in the county court or in any other court by the city attorney in the name of the city as plaintiff and against the name of the owner as defendant for the amount of the charges due and after judgment is obtained in favor of the city the vehicle may be levied upon and sold for the purpose of satisfying the judgment as required by law. 
(h)  Tampering or unauthorized removal of an immobilization device. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with an immobilization device or remove such device without proper authorization from the Gainesville Police Department, or other department initiating immobilization. 
(2)  A violation of the provisions of this subsection shall be punishable as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 27-23; Ord. No. 3484, § 5, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 951582, § 1, 7-8-96; Ord. No. 970469, § 2, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 981159, § 5, 4-12-99; Ord. No. 050530, § 1, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 070626, § 4, 1-28-08) 
Cross reference— Impoundment of nonoperating or abandoned vehicles, § 26-140.  
Secs. 26-54—26-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS, PARKING LOTS AND PARKING GARAGES 
 
Sec. 26-71. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Individual parking space shall mean a portion of the paved surface of the street, of a parking lot or of a parking garage which is of sufficient length and depth from the curb or other design impediment to accommodate the parking of a vehicle. 
Parking meter shall mean a mechanical and/or electrical device which shall indicate thereon the length of time during which a vehicle may be parked in an individual parking space. 
Parking pay station shall mean a mechanical and/or electrical device which shall control multiple parking spaces on street, on parking lots and in a parking garage either by collecting the parking amount in advance or upon return of drivers to their vehicles and charging for the respective amount either allowed by signage or the total amount of time for which a parking space was occupied by the vehicle. Types of pay station include but is not limited to, pay-and-display, pay-by-space and pay-on-foot. 
Remote pay system shall mean a pay by phone, mobile pay, or other such technology-based system for paying for parking other than by parking meter, pay station, or other physical installation or equipment located on-site of the parking space or parking area. 
(Code 1960, § 27-24; Ord. No. 3442, § 1, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 040024, § 1, 7-26-04; Ord. No. 160834 , § 2, 3-15-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-72. - Period of operation of meters and pay stations. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to establish and maintain on file with the public works department a list of the hours of the day and days of the week during which the operation of parking meters and pay stations shall be enforced for all on street, parking lots and parking garages. The period of operation shall be displayed either on the parking meter or by signs clearly stating the period of operation. 
(Code 1960, § 27-25; Ord. No. 3442, § 2, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 040024, § 1, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 26-73. - Installation, operation of meters, pay stations, and remote pay systems. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to install and implement: 
(1)  Parking meters at the curb line, alongside of or next to individual parking spaces as required. Each parking meter shall be set so as to display a signal indicating whether or not the individual parking space adjacent thereto is in use. Each parking meter shall be installed and set to display a signal indicating legal parking upon deposit therein of the required coin or coins of the United States of America, or by other mode of payment compatible with the technology of the parking meter. Upon the deposit of the required coin or coins, or payment by other mode of payment compatible with the technology of the parking meter, such signal shall indicate legal parking for the period of time lawfully designated for that area-and time of day. Each meter shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of the time paid for, it will provide a visual cue to indicate that the lawful parking period has expired. 
(2)  Pay stations for control of parking on street, parking lots and parking garages. Pay stations shall be installed as appropriate to control a number of spaces not to exceed the amount designated by the manufacturer's specifications to minimize efficiency and facilitate access to parkers. Pay stations accept coins, and may also accept bills, credit and debit cards as well as high-tech "smart cards". Pay stations issue receipts and can track revenue, usage and maintenance data, which is transmitted to a central computer location. 
(3)  Remote pay systems for control of parking on street, parking lots and parking garages. 
(Code 1960, § 27-26(a); Ord. No. 3442, § 3, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 040024, § 1, 7-26-04; Ord. No. 160834 , § 3, 3-15-18)  
Sec. 26-74. - On-street parking and parking lots. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized and directed to establish and appropriately mark zones where lawful on-street parking is permitted. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized and directed to maintain and appropriately mark the off-street parking lots hereby established by the city for lawful parking as provided by this division. Table 1 below lists city parking lots by name and location: 
TABLE 1. City Parking Lots 
Parking Lot 	Location 
Lot No. 2 	NW 2 nd Street between 2 nd and 3 rd Avenues 
Lot No. 3 	NE corner of N Main Street and 2 nd Avenue 
Lot No. 4 	SE 3 rd Street between SE 1 st and 2 nd Avenues 
Lot No. 5 	NE corner of E University Avenue and NE 1 st Street 
Lot No. 6 	SE corner of NE 1 st Street and 2 nd Avenue 
Lot No. 8 	SE corner of NE 5 th Street and 2 nd Avenue 
Lot No. 9 	SE 1 st Street between SE 1 st and 2 nd Avenues 
Lot No. 10 	Block bounded by SW 1 st Avenue; SW 1 st SW 2 nd Avenue and SW 2 nd Street 
Lot No. 13 	SW corner of W University Avenue and SW 1 st Street 
Lot No. 15 	800 block NW 5 th Avenue 
Lot No. 16 	900 block NW 5 th Avenue 
Lot No. 17 	1100 block NW 5 th Avenue 
Lot No. 18 	SW corner of NE 3 rd Avenue and 2 nd Street 
 
(c)  The categories of parking on street and on parking lots that require a deposit in parking meters/pay stations of coin or coins or payment by other mode of payment compatible with the technology of the parking meter/pay station are: Short term parking (not exceeding four hours) and Long term parking (in excess of four hours). The city manager shall establish and maintain on file with the public works department a list of parking rates for all metered on-street and parking lot spaces. Parking rates shall not exceed the maximum rates. 
(Code 1960, § 27-26(b); Ord. No. 3442, § 3, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 040024, § 1, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 26-75. - Garage parking. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized and directed to maintain and appropriately mark the following parking garage(s) hereby established by the city for lawful parking as provided in this division: 
Garage No. 1—Addressed as 105 SW 3 rd Street. 
(b)  The following categories of garage parking require the deposit of coin or coins and/or bills and/or payment by other mode of payment compatible with the technology of the pay station/revenue control equipment as listed on Table 2 below: 
TABLE 2. Parking Garage Rate Structure 
DAYTIME 	Up to 1 hour 
	Over 1 hour to 2 hours 
	Over 2 hours to 4 hours 
	Over 4 hours 
	Contract Parkers 
NIGHTTIME 	Nightly Flat Rate 
	Contract Parkers 
SPECIAL EVENT 	Daily Flat Rate 
UNLIMITED ACCESS 	Contract Parkers 
 
(c)  The city manager shall establish and maintain on file with the public works department a list of parking rates for garage parking. The parking rates shall not exceed the maximum rates. 
(Code 1960, § 27-26(c); Ord. No. 3442, § 3, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 3743, § 1, 10-7-91; Ord. No. 3806, § 1, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 000566, § 3, 8-27-01; Ord. No. 040024, § 1, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 26-76. - Exception for governmental vehicles. 
The provisions of this division referring to overtime metered parking, or overtime signs, shall not be applicable to employees on official business in government owned vehicles, whether or not marked by governmental license plates or other official governmental marking. This provision is not intended to obviate initial payment of meter fees, nor is it to be used as a substitute for normal governmental employee parking. 
(Ord. No. 3961, § 3, 2-28-94; Ord. No. 040024, § 1, 7-26-04; Ord. No. 110952, § 1, 12-6-12)  
Sec. 26-77. - Defacing, etc., meters; use of counterfeit devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter/pay station installed in accordance with this division or to deposit or cause to be deposited in any such meter/pay station designed to accept a coin of the United States, a slug, device, metallic substance or any other substitute for a coin of the United States. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any unauthorized or counterfeit item in meters/pay stations technologically capable of accepting modes of payment other than coins of the United States. 
(Code 1960, § 27-28; Ord. No. 040024, § 1, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 26-78. - Restricted long term parking. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to designate any off-street parking lot for restricted long term parking, designate whether the lot is low demand or high demand, and establish appropriate guidelines for administration of the restricted long term parking program. The off-street parking lots eligible for restricted long term parking are numbered and identified in section 26-74 of this chapter. Lots designated for restricted long term parking will be identified by signs posted at each entrance to the lot. Restricted long term parking may be designated in the entire lot or a portion of the lot. 
(b)  Parking in a restricted long term parking lot requires the purchase and display of a long term parking permit. The long term parking permit must be displayed so as to be plainly visible by hanging from rear view mirror of the motor vehicle. 
(c)  The city manager is authorized to issue long term parking permits to any person upon payment of the required fees. Such permits may be purchased from the city to cover the period of time from the date of purchase until the next succeeding June thirtieth or December thirty-first, whichever occurs first. The city manager is authorized to establish a pro rata schedule for permits purchased during the six-month period. 
(d)  The city manager is authorized to limit the number of long term parking permits sold. 
(e)  The city commission shall establish the maximum rate(s) for restricted long term parking. 
(f)  In the event a long term parking permit is lost or stolen, upon proper certification to the city manager, the lost or stolen permit shall be voided and a new permit shall be issued upon payment of a fee as set by the city commission. 
(g)  The applicant shall provide in writing the information required by the city manager before the permit is issued. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or change any long term parking permit authorized by this section. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or attempt to use or display any altered or changed long term parking permit. 
(j)  If any person attempts the use of the privilege given by a long term parking permit authorized by this section, but does so in violation of the express provisions of this section, such person shall be punished for violation of this section as well as for illegal parking. 
(Ord. No. 3442, § 5, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 3743, § 2, 10-7-91; Ord. No. 040024, § 1, 7-26-04) 
Editor's note— Prior to amendment by Ord. No. 3442, § 5, adopted June 27, 1988, § 26-78 pertained to special parking permits, as derived from § 27-29 of the 1960 Code.  
Sec. 26-79. - Parking within spaces required; impounding. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle in such a position that the same shall not be entirely within the area designated as an individual parking space whether the space has a parking meter or not; and any vehicle not so parked, may be impounded in accordance with section 26-53. 
(Code 1960, § 27-30; Ord. No. 981159, § 6, 4-12-99; Ord. No. 040024, § 1, 7-26-04)  
Sec. 26-80. - Parking without a permit in a restricted long term parking lot; impounding. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle in a restricted long term parking lot without the purchase and display of a long term parking permit pursuant to section 26-78(b). Any vehicle not in compliance with section 26-78(b) may be impounded in accordance with section 26-53. 
(Ord. No. 3442, § 6, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 040024, § 1, 7-26-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3442, § 6, adopted June 27, 1988, added § 27-30.1 to the 1960 Code; inclusion as § 26-80 herein and redesignation of former § 26-80 as § 26-81 was at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 26-81. - Overtime parking prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle or permit the same to be parked or remain parked in any parking space next to which a parking meter has been installed during the regulated time applicable thereto unless a coin of United States currency of the appropriate denomination as provided by section 26-74 shall have been deposited in the parking meter, or shall have been previously deposited therein for an unexpired interval of time and the meter has been placed in operation. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle or permit the same to be parked or remain parked in any parking space next to which a parking meter has been installed during the regulated time applicable thereto while the parking meter for the space indicates by signal that the lawful parking time in the space has expired. This provision shall not apply to the act of parking or the necessary time which is required to deposit immediately thereafter a coin in the meter. 
(c)  No person shall park a vehicle or permit the same to be parked or remain parked in any parking space next to which a parking meter has been installed during the regulated time applicable thereto for a consecutive period of time longer than that limited period of time for which parking is lawfully permitted in the metered space, irrespective of the number or amounts of coins deposited in the meter. The maximum consecutive period of time permitted in the space shall be indicated either on the parking meter itself or upon an appropriate and visible sign in the immediate area. The purpose of this provision is to prohibit the practice referred to as feeding meters and to require the vehicle to be removed from a parking space at or before the period of time has elapsed for a single-metered cycle of time as permitted by the meter. If a vehicle is found parked in the metered space and the vehicle is also found parked in the same place at a time during the next succeeding normal time cycle lawfully permitted in the metered space, then the vehicle shall be deemed to be parked in violation of the provisions of this section notwithstanding that additional coins may have been deposited in the meter adjacent, to the parking space. Each succeeding time cycle beyond that authorized for one period of time in the parking space shall be deemed to be a violation of this section and the person responsible therefor shall be required to pay a fine for each period the vehicle is so parked. 
(d)  All regulations in this subsection are applicable to pay stations. 
(Code 1960, § 27-31; Ord. No. 981159, § 7, 4-12-99; Ord. No. 040024, § 1, 7-26-04) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following § 26-80.  
Sec. 26-82. - Parking rates. 
(a)  The maximum rate for parking in the categories established in this chapter shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  The city commission may establish additional categories of parking, including categories based on the time of day and/or day of week. Such additional categories and maximum rates shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 040024, § 1, 7-26-04)  
Secs. 26-83—26-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CURB LOADING ZONES, ETC. 
 
Sec. 26-95. - Vehicle left over 48 consecutive hours, impounding. 
Any vehicle left parked in any city off-street parking lot for in excess of 48 hours may be impounded in the depository provided by the city for such purpose. 
(Code 1960, § 27-32; Ord. No. 981159, § 8, 4-12-99)  
Sec. 26-96. - City manager to designate curb loading zones. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this division are applicable. 
(Code 1960, § 27-33)  
Sec. 26-97. - Standing in passenger curb loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective. 
(Code 1960, § 27-34)  
Sec. 26-98. - Standing in freight curb loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. 
(Code 1960, § 27-35)  
Sec. 26-99. - City manager to designate public carrier stops and stands. 
The city manager is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicle on such public streets in such places and in such number as he/she shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1960, § 27-36) 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire generally, Ch. 28; establishment of open stands, § 28-24.  
Sec. 26-100. - Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated. 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided in section 26-99. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated as provided in section 26-99, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of the vehicle not farther than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(d)  The on-duty operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park his/her taxicab upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided in section 26-99. The provision shall not prevent the on-duty operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Code 1960, § 27-37) 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire generally, Ch. 28; establishment of open stands, § 28-24.  
Sec. 26-101. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when the stopping does not interfere with a bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Code 1960, § 27-38) 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire generally, Ch. 28; establishment of open stands, § 28-24.  
Sec. 26-102. - Downtown loading and unloading procedures—Mid-street parking. 
(a)  A business or entity making a downtown delivery of goods, supplies or materials, desiring to use mid-street loading and unloading, shall have a vehicle that is clearly identified and marked for business purposes, by signs, painted lettering, or similar permanent markings. 
(b)  A clearly marked business vehicle may utilize mid-street parking for the temporary short-term loading and unloading of goods, supplies or materials on two-way downtown off-streets (defined as side streets, not major thoroughfares or roadways, such as University Avenue or Main Street), as long as the parking of the vehicle does not obstruct traffic and conforms to the following requirements: 
(1)  The vehicles shall straddle the center lines, leaving at least ten feet on each side for other vehicles to pass, and shall not be positioned so as to prevent or block access from or to any streets, driveways, parking lots, or parking spaces, or to interfere with pedestrian crosswalks or traffic. 
(2)  Mid-street parking shall be limited to no more than 15 minutes, and shall be utilized solely for purposes of loading or unloading of goods, supplies or materials. 
(3)  All vehicles parked in accordance with this procedure shall be parked at least 30 feet from the intersection and shall have the emergency hazard flashers activated at all times. 
(4)  No mid-street parking or the loading and unloading of the vehicle is allowed between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 2:30 a.m. 
(5)  No mid-street parking or the loading and unloading of the vehicle is allowed during any special downtown events, or when traffic conditions otherwise render mid-street parking unsafe, as ordered by a law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 110371, § 1, 12-1-11)  
Secs. 26-103—26-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONTROLLED VEHICULAR PARKING 
 
Sec. 26-115. - Purpose and exercise of authority. 
The city commission hereby finds and declares that it is in the best interest of the City of Gainesville to reduce vehicular congestion on designated city streets and to facilitate the efficient movement of traffic by providing for parking preference during certain hours of the day and certain days of the week within designated areas that meet the criteria hereinafter set forth; and that controlled vehicular decal/permit parking regulation is necessary to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Gainesville. 
While providing adequate parking spaces adjacent to or close by residences/businesses in the affected area, it is in the public interest to reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of streets located within congested areas for the parking of vehicles by persons using such residential and mixed residential/commercial areas to gain access to other places; to protect those areas from excessive noise; to protect the residents/businesses of those areas from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences/businesses; to preserve the character of those areas; to promote efficiency in the maintenance of those streets in a clean and safe condition; to preserve the value of the property in those areas; to preserve the safety of children and other pedestrians; and to promote traffic safety, clean air and the comfort, health, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3720, § 1, 5-6-91; Ord. No. 980949, § 1, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 990079, § 2, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 020233, § 1, 4-28-03)  
Sec. 26-116. - Definitions. 
Whenever in this article the following words are used they shall, unless the context requires otherwise, be deemed to have the following meanings: 
(a)  Controlled vehicular parking area shall mean an area containing streets or parts thereof designated by the city commission for restricted parking as specified in this article. 
(b)  Property owner shall consist of residents, offices, businesses, institutions or other special designations that can provide proof of property ownership in the controlled vehicular parking area or be in possession of a business tax receipt, if applicable, for a business or occupation located in the controlled vehicular parking area. 
(c)  Controlled vehicular parking zones are geographical areas within the controlled vehicular parking area. Any controlled vehicular parking area may have more than one parking zone. The operational guidelines for the controlled vehicular parking areas will contain a map designating any such zones. 
(d)  Controlled vehicular parking area decal is a decal issued for the purpose of parking on a city street in a designated controlled vehicular parking area. Decals shall be issued for a particular vehicle, are not transferable, and are valid, unless revoked, until the end of the current program year. The decal shall be permanently affixed to the vehicle as per the operational guidelines. 
(e)  Controlled vehicular parking area permit is a permit issued for the purpose of parking on a city street in a designated controlled vehicular parking area. A permit can be transferred from vehicle to vehicle and is valid for the period stated in the operational guidelines for the controlled vehicular parking area. The permit shall be displayed on the vehicle as per the operational guidelines. 
(f)  Appeals board shall be a board of three city staff appointed by the city manager or designee to hear appeals related to the controlled vehicular parking area regulations of this article. 
(g)  Program year shall be a period specified in the operational guidelines for the controlled vehicular parking area. 
(h)  Property manager shall be a period or business authorized to act on behalf of the property owner on issues concerning rental of the property. 
(i)  Service permit shall mean a controlled vehicular parking area permit issued for trades people working in a controlled vehicular parking area. A service permit shall be valid in all zones within the controlled vehicular parking area. 
(j)  Visitor permit shall mean a controlled vehicular parking area permit issued for use by visitors to the property coming from outside the controlled vehicular parking area. 
(k)  Commercial permit shall mean a controlled vehicular parking area permit issued to offices, businesses, institutions or other special designations within the controlled vehicular parking area. 
(l)  Temporary decal/permit shall mean a controlled vehicular parking area decal or permit given to an applicant who qualifies for a regular parking decal or permit, but who is temporarily unable to get or use the regular decal or permit. 
(Code 1960, § 27-43; Ord. No. 3720, § 2, 5-6-91; Ord. No. 980949, § 1, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 990079, § 2, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 020233, § 1, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 070022, § 11, 6-25-07) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-117. - Criteria and procedures for establishing controlled vehicular parking areas. 
The following procedures shall be used to designate a controlled vehicular parking area: 
(a)  Upon petition from a majority of the property owners/residents in a proposed area, or upon city manager determination, the city manager or designee shall conduct a study to determine if the proposed area meets at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)  The number of vehicles parked or standing, legally or illegally, on the city street(s) in the proposed area during a designated time period and days of the week is equal to 50 percent of more of the legal on-street parking capacity of the area. 
(2)  Proposed development/redevelopment within the area is predicted to utilize 50 percent or more of the legal on-street parking capacity of the area during the designated time period and days of the week. 
(b)  The city manager may designate an area that meets the requirements listed in subsection (a) as a controlled vehicular parking area. In reaching a decision, the city manager shall consider the findings of the study of the proposed area, the results of a vote of the property owners in the proposed area, as identified on the Alachua County tax rolls, conducted by mail ballot by the city manager or designee, and any other information the city manager finds relevant. 
(c)  The city manager or designee shall indicate an approved designation upon an appropriate map in the public works department. 
(d)  The city manager may exempt developments that have been determined to be exempt through the city's development review process. 
(e)  The city manager or designee shall install parking signs along the public streets in the designated area, indicating when, where and how parking is restricted to decal/permit only, or decal/permit/meter. 
(f)  The city manager may remove the designation of a controlled vehicular parking area upon conducting a study demonstrating that the area no longer meets the criteria listed above or that it is in the best interest of the city to remove the designation, or upon receipt of a petition and in accordance with the above criteria and procedures in this section. 
(g)  Upon a new petition from a majority of property owners/residents in the area proposed in the original petition, submitted in writing to the city manager within 21 calendar days of the city manager's decision regarding designation, or removal of designation, of a controlled vehicular parking area, the city commission may in its legislative discretion consider whether to accept review of the decision and take action at a public hearing on the matter of the designation or removal of designation of a controlled vehicular parking area. 
(Code 1960, § 27-45; Ord. No. 3720, § 4, 5-6-91; Ord. No. 980949, § 1, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 020233, § 1, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 160834 , § 4, 3-15-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 020233, § 1, adopted April 28, 2003, renumbered the former § 26-119 as § 26-117 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. Prior to the renumbering of the former § 26-119 as § 26-117 by Ord. No. 020233, Ord. No. 990079, § 2, 7-12-99, repealed § 26-117 which pertained to findings and derived from Code 1960, § 27-42 and Ord. No. 980949, § 1, 3-8-99.  
Sec. 26-118. - Operational guidelines. 
(a)  Detailed operational guidelines for a controlled vehicular parking area shall be established and approved by the city manager and be on file in the public works department. The operational guidelines must be based on the conditions found in the specific controlled vehicular parking area or zone that caused the controlled vehicular parking area to be designated. The operational guidelines shall contain at least the following: 
(1)  Rules establishing the number and duration of decals and permits (including commercial, service, visitor and temporary decals/permits) per property or individual in the controlled vehicular parking area or zones within the controlled vehicular parking area. 
(2)  Designation of the program year. 
(3)  Designation of hours and days of the week that parking will be subject to the controlled vehicular parking area restrictions and grace periods during which the restrictions on parking will not be enforced. 
(4)  Documentation to be provided by applicants to prove entitlement to one or more decals or permits. 
(b)  The operational guidelines for a controlled vehicular parking area or zone may distinguish between owner-occupied and non-owner-occupied single-family housing, between single-family and multi-family housing and between residential and commercial property. However, any such difference in entitlement to decals and permits must be based on the differing needs of the types of residents and tenants as a whole and not on a bias for or against certain occupants or types of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 020233, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 020233, § 1, adopted April 28, 2003, created § 26-118 pertaining to operational guidelines. Formerly § 26-118 pertained to designation of controlled vehicular parking areas and was repealed by Ord. No. 980949, § 1, adopted March 8, 1999. The repealed provisions derived from Code 1960, § 27-44 and Ord. No. 3720, § 3, adopted May 6, 1991.  
Sec. 26-119. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 26-117.  
Sec. 26-120. - Issuance of controlled vehicular parking decals/permits/appeals of denials. 
(a)  Upon designation of a controlled vehicular parking area and in accordance with the operational guidelines for the controlled vehicular parking area, the city shall, upon application of those entitled to decals or permits, issue the appropriate parking decals and permits in compliance with the operational guidelines. Fees set by the city commission shall be imposed to help defray the cost of administering the controlled vehicular parking. 
(b)  A temporary decal/permit will be given to an applicant who qualifies for a regular parking decal/permit, but who is temporarily unable to get or use the regular decal/permit. The length of time for a temporary decal/permit and how the temporary/decal permit is issued shall be stated in the operational guidelines for the controlled vehicular parking area. 
(c)  Any property owner or property manager who is denied a decal or permit and believes that the limitation on the number or type of permits available for residents or tenants of his/her property creates a hardship due to circumstances unique to the property or its residents or tenants may appeal to the controlled vehicular parking area appeals board for relief. The appeals board shall schedule a hearing within 30 days of receiving the appeal and shall hear evidence concerning the circumstances alleged to create a hardship. The appeals board, on finding that such a hardship exists, may grant the property owner or property manager up to two additional decals/permits for one or more program years, as the board deems appropriate. 
(Code 1960, § 27-46; Ord. No. 3720, § 5, 5-6-91; Ord. No. 980949, § 1, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 990079, § 2, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 020233, § 1, 4-28-03)  
Sec. 26-121. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980949, § 1, adopted March 8, 1999, repealed § 26-121 which pertained to recording of area upon map, erection of signs, and violation, and derived from Code 1960, § 27-46.  
Sec. 26-122. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 020233, § 1, adopted April 28, 2003, repealed § 26-122 which pertained to issuance of controlled vehicular parking permits and derived from Code 1960, §§ 27-47 and 27-49(a); Ord. No. 3720, § 6, adopted May 6, 1991; Ord. No. 980949, § 1, adopted March 8, 1999; and Ord. No. 990079, § 2, adopted July 12, 1999.  
Sec. 26-123. - Privileges and restrictions on controlled parking area decal/permits. 
(a)  The holder of a controlled vehicular decal/permit shall be permitted to stand or park a motor vehicle displaying the decal/permit in the designated controlled vehicular parking area and designated zone for which the decal/permit was issued during such times and places as the parking of motor vehicles therein is permitted. The vehicle must have the decal permanently affixed on the vehicle as per the operational guidelines or the permit placed as per the operational guidelines when so parked. 
(b)  A controlled vehicular parking area decal/permit shall not authorize the holder to stand or park a motor vehicle in such places or during such times as the stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle is prohibited or set aside for specified types of vehicles, nor exempt the holder from the observance of any traffic regulation within the controlled parking area. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this section, for any person to display a decal on any vehicle other than the one listed on the application for decal. 
(d)  It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person to: 
(1)  Falsely represent himself/herself or another person as eligible for a controlled vehicular parking decal/permit; 
(2)  Falsely represent himself/herself as a property manager; or 
(3)  Furnish any false information in an application to the city in order to obtain a controlled vehicular parking area decal/permit. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this section, to park a motor vehicle in an area and at a time restricted to decal/permit parking only without displaying a valid parking decal or permit. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this section, to park a motor vehicle in an area and at a time restricted to decal/permit or metered parking without displaying a valid parking decal or permit or paying the meter fee. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this section, for a holder of a decal to sell, transfer or convey the decal. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this section, for any person to counterfeit or copy a decal or permit. 
(Code 1960, § 27-48; Ord. No. 3720, § 7, 5-6-91; Ord. No. 980949, § 1, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 990079, § 2, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 020233, § 1, 4-28-03)  
Sec. 26-124. - Issuance of sorority/fraternity member meal decals. 
Upon application and proof of membership in a fraternity or sorority, a decal shall be issued to a member of a sorority or fraternity located in the controlled vehicular parking area who does not reside there, but who eats meals there. The decal will be valid during regular meal hours as determined each program year as per the operational guidelines in cooperation with the affected fraternities and sororities. The decal will normally be valid for a program year. A fee set by the city commission shall be imposed to help recover the cost of administering the controlled vehicular parking. 
(Ord. No. 980949, § 1, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 990079, § 2, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 020233, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980949, § 1, adopted March 8, 1999, repealed the former § 26-124 and enacted a new § 26-124 as set out herein. The former § 26-124 pertained to temporary permits and derived from Code 1960, § 27-49(b).  
Sec. 26-125. - Revocation of decal/permit. 
(a)  The appeals board is authorized to revoke the controlled parking area decal/permit of any decal/permit holder based upon evidence that the decal/permit holder has violated the provisions of this article. The holder shall be served notice by certified mail or hand delivery of the proposed revocation; and upon request shall have an opportunity to present to the appeals board evidence as to why the decal/permit should not be revoked. The decal/permit holder must request such a hearing in writing and pay an appeal fee set by the city commission within ten days after the notice of proposed revocation is delivered or mailed. If the appeals board finds in favor of the decal/permit holder, the appeal fee shall be refunded. The holder of a revoked decal/permit must return the decal/permit to the city manager or designee, shall not be allowed to obtain another decal/permit until the next program year, and must pay a reinstatement fee set by the city commission prior to receiving a decal/permit for the next program year. 
(b)  Revocation under subsection (a) is in addition to any other available remedy provided by this Code for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 980949, § 1, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 990079, § 2, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 020233, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980949, § 1, adopted March 8, 1999, repealed the former § 26-125 and enacted a new § 26-125 as set out herein. The former § 26-125 pertained to commercial permits and derived from Ord. No. 2868, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 1984.  
Sec. 26-126. - Violations; penalty. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided by another section of this article, or by F.S. ch. 316, any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1960, § 27-8; Ord. No. 020233, § 1, 4-28-03)  
Sec. 26-127. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 980949, § 1, adopted March 8, 1999, repealed § 26-127 which pertained to guidelines and derived from Ord. No. 3720, § 8, adopted May 6, 1991.  
Secs. 26-128—26-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ABANDONED, WRECKED, NONOPERATING VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 2-376 et seq.; nuisances generally, Ch. 16. 
 
Sec. 26-136. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this division: 
Abandoned vehicle shall mean any vehicle which appears to be incapable of safe operation under its own power upon public street and/or any vehicle not having a current motor vehicle registration tag properly attached. 
Major repair shall mean the removal from the frame and the disassembly of the components of the power train of a motor vehicle to include either the engine, transmission or rear axle assembly. The term "major repair" shall also include in-frame repair of the engine which involves the removal of the cylinder head, or oil pan or pistons. 
Property shall mean any real property within the city which is not a street, highway or right-of-way. 
Street, highway or right-of-way shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
Vehicle shall mean a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(Code 1960, § 28A-10) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-137. - Abandonment of vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any vehicle within the city and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(Code 1960, § 28A-12)  
Sec. 26-138. - Major repair of vehicles on residential property prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a vehicle to undergo major repair on any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(Code 1960, § 28A-13) 
Cross reference— Land development code, Ch. 30.  
Sec. 26-139. - Abandoned, dangerous vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any abandoned vehicle to allow the vehicle to remain on any property or street, highway or right-of-way within the city for longer than 72 hours. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dangerous vehicle to allow the vehicle to remain on any property, street, highway or right-of-way within the city. For the purposes of this division, a dangerous vehicle shall mean a vehicle which represents or poses a danger to the public or the vehicle itself by reason of its physical location or condition (e.g., obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic; containing broken glass; leaking flammable liquids). The vehicle shall be immediately repaired or removed by either the owner or the city so as to eliminate the danger, and, if necessary, the vehicle may be impounded without prior notice of such impoundment and imposition of costs. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building. Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with regard to: 
(1)  A vehicle on the premises, for less than 15 days, of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and in a lawful manner when necessary to the operation of the business; 
(2)  A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(Code 1960, § 28A-14)  
Sec. 26-140. - Impoundment. 
(a)  City manager's authority. The city manager, or his/her designated representatives, are hereby authorized to remove or have removed and impounded any vehicle which reasonably appears to be in violation of this division. The owner of the vehicle shall be liable for towing, storage and notice costs incurred pursuant to proper impoundment. 
(b)  Notice: 
(1)  In those cases where a vehicle is reasonably determined to be in violation of sections 26-137, 26-138 and 26-139(a), the enforcing official shall cause to be placed on the vehicle a notice declaring that the vehicle is in violation of such sections, stating with reasonable particularity the factors or reasons which caused such determination. The notice shall indicate the date upon which it is issued and further indicate that the vehicle will be impounded and costs imposed unless removed or repaired within ten days after the date of issuance of the notice, so as to no longer be in violation. The notice shall also advise that after proper impoundment the vehicle will be released to the owner only upon payment of reasonable towing, storage and notice costs. The notice shall further state that if the owner of the vehicle wishes to contest the validity of the proposed impoundment and imposition of costs, the owner must, within ten days after the issuance of the notice, deliver to the city manager or designee a written request for a hearing on such matters. The enforcing official shall also cause a copy of the notice to be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular first class mail to the address of the vehicle's owner as last shown by the records of the division of motor vehicles of the state, or, if the vehicle has an out of state license plate, by the records of the division of motor vehicles of that state. If the owner is present at the time of the issuance of the notice, the notice may be hand delivered in lieu of posting and mailing. 
(2)  In those cases where a vehicle is reasonably determined to be in violation of subsection 26-139(b), the enforcing official shall cause to be placed on the vehicle a notice declaring that the vehicle is in violation of subsection 26-139(b), stating with reasonable particularity the factors or reasons which cause such determination. The notice shall indicate the date upon which it was issued and further state that the vehicle will be immediately impounded and costs imposed unless repaired or removed so as to no longer constitute such danger. The notice shall also advise that after proper impoundment the vehicle may be released to the owner after payment of reasonable towing, storage and notice costs. The notice shall further state that if the owner of a vehicle impounded pursuant to subsection 26-139(b) wishes to contest the validity of the impoundment and the imposition of costs, the owner must, within ten days after the issuance of the notice, deliver to the city manager a written request for a hearing on such matters. The enforcing official shall also cause a copy of the notice to be sent by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the vehicle's owner as last shown by the records of the division of motor vehicles of the state, or, if the vehicle has an out of state license plate, by the records of the division of motor vehicles of that state. If the owner is present at the time of the issuance of the notice, the notice may be hand delivered in lieu of posting and mailing. 
(c)  Hearing. If a written request for a hearing to contest the validity of the determination to impound and impose costs is delivered to the city manager or designee in accordance with the time limitations imposed by this article, the matter shall be considered at the next meeting of the board of adjustment occurring not less than 20 days after the filing of the request. The owner or his/her representative as well as the city manager or his/her designatee shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing. No appeal fees or other notices shall be required. 
(d)  Release of impounded vehicles. Vehicles impounded pursuant to sections 26-137, 26-138, and 26-139(a) shall only be released to the owner or his/her representative after payment of the towing, storage and notice costs. Vehicles impounded pursuant to sections 26-137, 26-138, 26-139(a) and 26-139(b) may be released upon payment of towing, storage and notice costs, or if a request for a hearing has been timely delivered, the vehicle shall be released to the owner upon confirmation that a timely request has been made. If a timely request for hearing has been made and the vehicle is therefor released prior to payment of costs, the release shall not be deemed a waiver of the city's right to institute either civil or criminal actions against the owner of the vehicle. 
(e)  Disposition of unreleased vehicles: 
(1)  Junk vehicle. If any vehicle is not removed and caused to be in compliance with the terms of this division within the time allowed and thereafter the vehicle is impounded and not released in accordance with this division, the vehicle may be disposed of as junk if the vehicle is not reasonably repairable, and any sums received from the sale of the junk shall be deposited in the general fund of the city to assist in defraying expenses for the enforcement of this division. 
(2)  Repairable vehicle. If the vehicle so impounded may be reasonably repaired so that title thereto may be transferred by appropriate authority, the same may be done through the procedure authorized under the provisions of F.S. Ch. 85, or under such other procedure as may be authorized by law. 
(3)  Disbursement of funds. From the funds received from any such sale, there shall be deposited in the general fund of the city to assist in defraying expenses of the enforcement of this division all necessary expenses incurred in connection with the impounding and sale of the vehicle, and the balance thereof may be claimed by the rightful owner within 30 days from the date of the sale. 
(Code 1960, §§ 28A-15, 28A-16; Ord. No. 020375, § 2, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 040782, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Cross reference— Impoundment or immobilization of vehicles parked illegally, § 26-53.  
Sec. 26-141. - Extension by board of adjustment of time for compliance. 
(a)  Grounds; written request required. For good cause based upon a hardship that will continue only temporarily, the board of adjustment is hereby authorized to grant an extension of time in the nature of a special exception to allow compliance with the requirements of this division, provided a written request for the extension of time is presented to the board of adjustment prior to the expiration of time otherwise allowed for compliance with the provisions of sections 26-136 through 26-140. 
(b)  Copy of request to city manager; report by city manager. The city manager, or his/her designated representatives, shall be immediately furnished with a copy of the written request for any extension of time and shall immediately file a written report regarding the request, which shall be considered by the board of adjustment at the same time the requested extension shall be considered. 
(c)  Authority of board of adjustment. The authority of the board of adjustment in hearing requests for extensions of time as provided for in this section shall in each instance be limited to either granting or denying the request for the extension (although the requested time may be altered) and the request shall not be considered as an appeal presented to the board of adjustment as provided in section 26-140(c) or 30-350, nor shall the board of adjustment be authorized to modify or vary the terms or conditions of the requirements of this division, except as specifically herein permitted. 
(d)  Hearings; notice. All requests for extensions of time shall be considered at the next meeting of the board of adjustment occurring not less than three days after the filing of the request and the person seeking the extension of time, as well as the city manager or his/her designated representatives, shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing. No other notices shall be required. 
(e)  Basis of extension; stipulations. In granting or denying the request for an extension of time the board of adjustment shall in each instance state its reasons therefor and before granting the request the board of adjustment shall first determine that no actual danger or hazard to the public health, welfare and safety exists, or may exist, because of the granting of the special exception; that the owner seeking the special exception will comply with the provisions of this division within a reasonable time to be determined by the board of adjustment, but not in excess of the period of time allowed pursuant to this section, and that the granting of the special exception is in fact required because of the peculiar hardship of the person unlike that experienced by others. The special exception, when granted, shall contain such stipulations, conditions and time limits for compliance with this division as the board of adjustment shall determine, but in no event shall any special exception be granted for a period of time greater than 60 days, and no special exception may be again renewed or otherwise extended. 
(Code 1960, § 28A-17)  
Secs. 26-142—26-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
Sec. 26-161. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Deviating truck shall mean a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling inside the city. 
Local truck route shall mean a street identified by signs for intracity truck travel. 
Through truck route shall mean a street identified by signs for a bypass for through city truck travel. 
Truck shall mean any motor vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, which either: 
(1)  Is over 80 inches in width; or 
(2)  Has a weight capacity of 10,000 pounds or more (net weight plus carrying capacity) as specified by the vehicle's manufacturer. 
Truck route shall mean a street, as designated in this article, over and along which trucks shall operate. 
(Code 1960, § 27-39.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-162. - Established; map. 
There is hereby established within the city the truck routes shown on the map attached to the original of this section and on file in the office of the clerk of the city commission. The streets and roadways indicated on the map as truck routes and no others shall be used for truck traffic within the corporate limits of the city except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1960, § 27-39.2)  
Sec. 26-163. - Observance required; exceptions. 
(a)  All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along the truck routes established pursuant to this article, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  This article shall not prohibit: 
(1)  Operation on street of destination. The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point, if streets on which truck traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(2)  Authorized emergency vehicles. The operation of authorized emergency vehicles upon any street in the city. 
(3)  Public utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or materialman while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the city. 
(4)  Detoured trucks. The operation of a truck upon any officially established detour in any case where the truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which the detour is established. 
(5)  Operation to personal residence. The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to reach the driver's personal residence. This section shall not authorize the parking of a truck in front of a personal residence or at any place where the zoning code would not permit same. 
(Code 1960, § 27-39.4)  
Sec. 26-164. - Hours of operation. 
Trucks shall be able to travel upon truck routes at all hours of the day and night unless duly authorized signs are installed limiting hours of use on a particular street or portion of a street. 
(Code 1960, § 27-39.4)  
Sec. 26-165. - City manager authorized to install signs. 
The city manager is authorized to install appropriate signs to control truck operations in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1960, § 27-39.5)  
Sec. 26-166. - Violations; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a truck on any street within the city other than as is provided in this article. Any person who is convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1960, § 27-39.6)  
Secs. 26-167—26-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Unlawful to possess bicycles from which identification has been removed, § 17-9; sale of bicycles at public auction if unclaimed, § 21-22. 
State Law reference— Bicycle regulations, F.S. § 316.2065 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-186. - Operation. 
(a)  Every person propelling a vehicle by human power or riding a bicycle have all of the rights and all of the duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this article, and except as to provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application. 
(b)  A person shall not ride a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, where such use of bicycles is prohibited by official traffic-control devices. 
(Code 1960, § 27-41(a)—(h))  
Sec. 26-187. - Equipment. 
(a)  Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake or brakes which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle within 25 feet from a speed of ten miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(b)  Bell. No person shall operate a bicycle in the city unless it is either equipped with a bell or has its operator possessing a bell of sufficient size and sound to serve as a warning device. The operator of a bicycle in the city, when propelling a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal with the operator's bell before overtaking and passing the pedestrian. 
(Code 1960, § 27-41(m), (s))  
Sec. 26-188. - Parking. 
(a)  Any person may park a bicycle on a sidewalk, provided it does not impede the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrians or other traffic, unless prohibited or restricted by an official traffic-control device. 
(b)  Any person may park near, and secure a bicycle to, any publicly owned pole or post for a period of not more than 72 consecutive hours, unless an official traffic-control device or any applicable law or ordinance prohibits parking or securing bicycles at that location. 
(c)  A person shall not secure a bicycle to any fire hydrant or police or fire call box or park a bicycle in a location that blocks or obstructs any building entrance or exit, ramp, breezeway or loading dock. A person shall not secure a bicycle to any tree in such a manner that the tree is damaged. 
(d)  A person shall not park a bicycle in such a manner as to obstruct the movement of any other legally parked vehicle.  
ARTICLE VI. - PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES ON STREETS 
 
Sec. 26-189. - Congregating on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for persons to assemble or congregate in crowds in such numbers as to block the use of any sidewalk or street of the city without a permit from the city manager or designee, issued pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Permit application. At least ten days prior to the date for which a permit is requested, an application shall be filed with the city manager. This time limit may be shortened to as little as two business days by the city manager or designee, based upon proof that, through no fault of the applicant, the timing of the event is based on an unexpected occurrence related to the purpose of the event, the application was submitted as soon as practicable and the event or activity for which the permit is filed will be rendered impossible or substantially ineffective if the event is delayed. The application shall include or be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Complete information as to the type of event or activity planned, the date and time, the expected number of participants, the expected duration, and the desired location or route, along with any factors particularly affecting the choice of location or route; and 
(2)  A fee to cover the cost of processing the application in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(c)  Granting or denial of permit. 
(1)  Granting of permit; time; considerations. The city manager or designee shall grant the requested permit within five business days of receipt of the application, or within one business day of receipt of an application asking for waiver of the ten-day prior notice requirement, if the event or activity for which it is requested: 
a.  Will not unreasonably interfere with the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, such as when alternative routes for such traffic are unavailable or impractical; 
b.  Will not unreasonably deny access to any properties or areas of the city by either vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
c.  Will not cause imminent danger or health hazard to any person and will not damage any public or private property; and 
d.  Will not create an unreasonable demand upon the city's emergency services personnel and equipment, so as to cause potential deficiencies in such services. 
(2)  Use of state or federal road. If the permit includes the closure of one or more state or federal roads, the city manager or designee shall send the necessary paperwork to the state department of transportation within five days of receipt of the application, or within one business day of receipt of an application requesting a waiver of the ten-day requirement. 
(3)  Denial of permit. If the city manager or designee finds the planned event or activity violates any of the above conditions, he or she shall inform the applicant that the permit will not be granted and request the city attorney apply to the circuit court for Alachua County for an order enjoining the applicant and other interested persons from conducting the planned event or activity. 
(d)  Permit conditions. In granting a permit, the city manager or designee shall specifically limit same as to date and time, location, and duration. In addition, the city manager or designee may attach conditions to the validity of the permit if such conditions are, in his/her opinion, reasonably necessary for the event or activity to meet the criteria specified in the preceding subsection (c). Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The conduct of all or any part of the event or activity at a location or on a route, either public or private, other than the location or route requested; 
(2)  A change in the date, time, or duration from that requested; 
(3)  The barricading of street intersections and the provision of identified monitors at such barricades; 
(4)  The posting of bond, cash deposit, or other security, not to exceed $500.00, to cover any damage to public property and the cost of extraordinary cleaning or maintenance expenses caused by the conduct of the event or activity on public property; and 
(5)  Prepayment and damage deposits for any city equipment rented or used in connection with the event or activity and city services required therefor. The applicant may petition the circuit court of Alachua County for review of the conditions placed on the permit. The court shall hear the appeal de novo without a jury, receive evidence and based upon the evidence presented shall make findings and order that the permit be granted either upon the terms requested or conditions stated by the court, or enjoin the holding of the event or activity if there is a reasonable likelihood that it will substantially harm the public health or safety and this cannot be avoided by the imposition of conditions on the permit. 
(e)  City services and equipment; cost. If any city services are reasonably necessary for the conduct of the event or activity, such as police officers to redirect traffic (over the number of officers who would normally be on duty and available in the area) or utilities service, the city manager shall require payment by the applicant for such services. The city manager may allow the use of any city equipment for any such event or activity, at a reasonable rental therefor. For any such activity or event in which the city officially participates, and for others when directed by the city commission, such costs and rents for services and equipment shall be waived. 
(f)  Revocation of permit. Once a permit has been issued, it may be revoked by the city manager or designee for any violation of the terms and conditions thereof. Any permit may also be revoked by the city manager or designee, or by any police officer on the scene, at any time that the event or activity permitted becomes, or creates a condition, dangerous to the health or safety of any person or otherwise fails to meet the criteria specified in subsection (c) above. At any time that a permit is revoked during the event or activity for which the permit was issued, a police officer shall announce the fact of the revocation to persons assembled for the event or activity. 
(g)  Dispersal of persons. Persons assembling or congregating in violation of this section, either without a permit or after a permit has been revoked, shall disperse after being ordered to do so by any police officer. Failure to so disperse shall also be a violation of this section. 
(Code 1960, § 23-18; Ord. No. 970130, § 1, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 090297, § 4, 10-15-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 090297, § 4, adopted Oct. 15, 2009, renumbered the former § 23-42 as § 26-189 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.  
Chapter 27 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; energy advisory committee, § 2-356 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; housing, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 23; public service tax, § 25-16 et seq.; concurrency management, § 30-30 et seq.; subdivisions, § 30-180 et seq.; environmental management, § 30-250 et seq.; permitted utility uses, § 30-343. 
State Law reference— Public utilities, F.S. Ch. 366; supervision and control of systems of water supply, sewerage, refuse and sewage treatment by the department of health and rehabilitative services, F.S. § 381.261. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Permit required for all connections to electric, gas, water, sanitary sewerage system or telecommunications. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either inside or outside the corporate limits of the city to tap, cut-in, connect to, or in anywise use any line, branch or part of either the electric, gas, water, sanitary sewer, or telecommunications systems of the city without a written permit issued by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
(Code 1960, § 28-70(a); Ord. No. 030278, § 1, 9-8-03)  
Sec. 27-2. - Violations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-9.  
Sec. 27-3. - Use of city's name prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, business or organization to use the name of the city, of Gainesville Regional Utilities, or the city's fictitious names, logos, service marks or trademarks in the promotion, advertisement or guarantee of its business or activity of performing conservation audits or other utility related services without the permission of the general manager for utilities, or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 1, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 030278, § 2, 9-8-03)  
Sec. 27-4. - Franchise required for operation of public utility; granting or extending by majority vote of city commission. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale within the corporate limits of the city any water, electric current or power, any natural gas or compressed gas, or to operate any public service or public utility without first having obtained a franchise or permit for the same from the city. For purposes of this section, apportioning or allocating the costs of utility service among occupants of a master-metered structure which is the responsibility of a consumer of record shall not constitute a sale of utilities, so long as the apportionment or allocation of costs reimburses the consumer of record for no more than the consumer's actual cost of utility service. 
(b)  The city commission may by majority vote of the commission enter into agreements which grant a franchise to any utility, public or private, for the establishment or construction of facilities through, over, under, upon, or across any street, alley, or public easement of any kind whatsoever. Any existing franchise, whether or not approved by the voters at a municipal election, may be amended or extended by majority vote of the commission in the same manner as any other written agreement of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 2, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-5. - Energy conservation policy. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to minimize the consumption of energy required to provide adequate, safe, economic, reliable and environmentally sound utility services. It is also the policy of the city to develop and provide cost effective services, information, and incentives which will reduce the consumption of and demand on utility resources by utility consumers. 
(b)  Copies of the energy conservation policy and its objectives, procedures, planning guidelines, program standards and future studies have been duly deposited with the clerk of commission and the general manager for utilities or his/her designee and shall be kept in these offices for public use, inspection and examination. 
(c)  The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may designate procedures for the provision of financial incentives and loans to utility customers for the installation of conservation and demand-side management measures, which are consistent with the energy conservation policies and objectives of the city. Financial incentives or loans may also be used to facilitate the implementation or acceptance of consistent conservation and demand-side management measures within the city's combined utility system service area. To receive the benefits of any such incentive or loan, the participating utility customer must enter into a written agreement with the city providing the terms and conditions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 3, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 951502, § 1, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 030278, § 3, 9-8-03)  
Sec. 27-6. - Utility service—Application; period of service; transfer of service; authority to determine type of service; withholding service for prior indebtedness authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any consumer to use any city utility service without first making application to the city and paying all charges and fees required therefore. Application for service shall be made in such manner (whether written, verbal, telephonic, electronic or otherwise) as approved by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee and shall constitute an agreement by the consumer with the city to abide by the rules of the city with regard to its utility service. Applications for service by firms, partnerships, associations and corporations shall be made only by their duly authorized agents and the official title of such parties shall be provided to the city at the time of application. Utility service at a given service address shall be provided in the name of one consumer only. By applying for and accepting service the consumer agrees to pay an additional charge equal to the cost of collection, including collection agency or attorney's fees and court costs if this account is placed in the hands of an agency or attorney for collection or legal action because of default in payment of any amount due. 
(b)  Liability for service shall begin on the day the consumer is connected to the city's service wires, lines and/or pipes and shall continue thereafter, unless disconnected for nonpayment or other cause, until written notice is given the city by the consumer of his/her desire to terminate the service. 
(c)  Applications for transfer of service shall be made by the consumer to the city not less than 24 hours before such transfer is desired and failure on the part of the consumer to make such application and to pay the service charge shall render the consumer liable for the minimum monthly charge for such service. 
(d)  The general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall have the authority to determine the type of service to be rendered by the city to each consumer. If, at any time, more than one rate classification is applicable to the consumer's service, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall, at the consumer's request, assist in determining the rate believed to be most favorable to the consumer. Another rate, if applicable to the service, may at any time be substituted, at the consumer's option, for the rate under which service is rendered, provided that not more than one substitution of a rate may be made within a year and that such change shall not be retroactive. 
(e)  The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may withhold or discontinue service rendered under application made by any member or agent of the family, household, organization or business unless all prior indebtedness to the city of such family, household, organization or business for service has been paid in full. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may also withhold or discontinue service if the general manager or his/her designee reasonably believes that service is, or was, being obtained or sought to be obtained by the misrepresentation of material facts by the applicant, customer or others on their behalf. A person having a delinquent account relocating to reside with his or her own family household whose account is in good standing shall not constitute cause for denial or discontinuance of service to said family household. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 5, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 970748, § 1, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 981083, § 1, 9-27-99; Ord. No. 030278, § 4, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 090288, § 1, 9-17-09)  
Sec. 27-7. - Deposits. 
(a)  Deposits generally. Prior to initiating utility service, the city shall, except as otherwise provided herein, require a deposit from all utility service customers as determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. Application for service by whatever means (written, verbal, telephonic, electronic or otherwise) and the payment of the deposit by the customer constitute the customer's agreement that the deposit is advance payment for future utility services which may be applied as otherwise provided in this section. Residential and nonresidential customer service deposits shall be credited to the customer at the end of a two-year period, provided that the customer has maintained a satisfactory payment record or upon closure of a customer's account and the issuance of the final utility bill. 
(b)  Residential service deposits. 
(1)  No deposit required. There shall be no deposit required from a customer who (i) has a satisfactory payment record for utility services with the city; (ii) provides a letter of satisfactory credit from another utility; (iii) enrolls in a payment plan approved by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee; or (iv) is deemed to have good credit as reported by the city's credit reporting agency. 
(2)  Standard deposit required. There shall be a standard deposit required from a, customer (i) with no available credit history; or (ii) deemed to have acceptable credit as reported by the city's credit reporting agency. 
(3)  Either standard deposit or full deposit required. A customer with an unsatisfactory payment history on a previous account with the city or who has been deemed to have unsatisfactory credit as reported by the city's credit reporting agency shall pay the higher amount of either a full deposit or standard deposit. 
(c)  Nonresidential service deposits. 
(1)  Deposit required. A full deposit may be required from a nonresidential customer. In the event a customer enrolls in a payment program plan approved by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, a customer shall pay a deposit amount equal to one times the estimated average monthly combined utility bill for the location at which utility services will be provided. 
(2)  No deposit required. A deposit shall not be required from a nonresidential customer who a) has a satisfactory payment record for utility services with the city or b) provides other assurance of payment, including, but not limited to, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or guarantee, in lieu of the deposit. 
(d)  Additional deposit. An additional deposit may be required for unsatisfactory payment history or for accounts for which the city has an insufficient utility deposit, as determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. Written notice of the additional deposit requirement shall be provided to the customer. The customer may appeal such requirement in an informal hearing with the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
(e)  Interest; unclaimed deposits. Except as provided above, the deposit shall be held by the city until final settlement of the customer's account, at which time the deposit shall be applied against any utility bill due the city for such services. Any unused balance shall be refunded when the account is settled and closed. All deposits which have remained with the city for at least six months shall earn simple interest, accrued from the date tendered and calculated to the nearest day. Interest shall accrue at a rate comparable to the utility's interest earnings for the period, as determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, and shall be credited to the customer monthly. In the event any deposit is unclaimed for a period of 12 months after the service is discontinued, such unclaimed deposit and any accrued interest thereon shall be turned over to the state department of financial services in accordance with Florida law following 30 days' written notice to such customer mailed to the address shown on the application for service or as otherwise provided by the customer. 
(f)  Exemptions. The United States of America, the State of Florida, and all political subdivisions, agencies, boards, commissions and instrumentalities thereof are exempt from any deposit requirements under this section. In addition, no deposit shall be required from any public utility supplying the public with electricity, gas, water, wastewater, transportation, telephone, or telegraph service. 
(g)  Bond in lieu of deposit. If a customer required to make a deposit so elects, the customer may post a surety bond or other financial assurance in lieu of the cash deposit. Such bond or financial assurance shall be issued by a surety authorized to do business in the State of Florida in an amount approved by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. The bond in lieu of deposit shall be on a form approved by the city which shall fully protect the city against any loss as a result of any nonpayment of utility bills rendered by the city to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 5, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 3800, § 1, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 970748, § 2, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 030278, § 5, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 060613, § 1, 3-26-07; Ord. No. 090288, § 2, 9-17-09; Ord. No. 120883 , § 1, 8-20-15)  
Sec. 27-8. - Consumers to grant easements, etc.; access to premises by city employees. 
(a)  The consumer shall grant or cause to be granted to the city without cost all rights, easements, permits, and privileges which are necessary for the rendering of service. Employees of the city, agents and contractors of the city under the city's direction shall have safe access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of reading meters, installing, inspecting, repairing or removing any of its properties, shutting off the flow of gas for reasons prescribed in this chapter, inspecting gas piping and appliances or for any purpose incidental to the rendering of the service. Access shall be granted at all times for emergency purposes. Safe access means physical access free from interference of any kind including but not limited to pets or other animals, fences or landscaping. 
(b)  If such access is precluded or denied due to locked gates or fences, animals, shrubbery, or the city is otherwise temporarily prevented access, the city may estimate the consumer's consumption on the basis of previous consumption or any other method in accordance with generally accepted utility practices which produces a reasonable estimate of consumption during the relevant period. Any difference between the estimated consumption and the actual consumption will be adjusted through subsequent readings. Where it has been necessary to estimate the consumer's consumption, the combined monthly statement shall carry appropriate notice to that effect. 
(c)  If the meter is inaccessible for two consecutive months the consumer will be notified that access must be made available to the city during the next regular meter reading cycle. If the meter is inaccessible to the meter reader at the time of the next regular meter reading, the consumer must call the city as specified in the notice to make special arrangements for a city representative to gain access to the meter for the purpose of reading and inspecting the meter. In addition to the special arrangements for access the city may require either 1) installation and use of a remote metering device, or 2) relocation of the meter to an accessible location. The cost of the remote metering device and its installation or meter relocation will be borne by the customer. Failure to arrange such access or to pay for the remote metering device and its installation or meter relocation will result in the initiation of termination of service. A charge in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A will be assessed for each specially arranged visit and/or the installation of a remote metering device. No additional charge will be assessed if the meter is made accessible for the regular meter reading cycle. 
(d)  Subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not be applicable to any consumer's account if the meter is found to have been tampered with as prohibited in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 6, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 970087, § 1, 8-11-97; Ord. No. 030278, § 6, 9-8-03)  
Sec. 27-9. - Protection of city property. 
It shall be the consumer's responsibility to properly protect the city's property on the consumer's premises or easement. The consumer shall prohibit access to such city property except access by utilities personnel or other persons authorized by law. When service lines, meters, pipes or other equipment are damaged by contractors, construction companies, governmental agencies or others, such damage will be repaired by the utility and the cost of repair shall be charged to the party or parties causing the damage. In the event of any loss or damage to property of the city caused by or arising out of carelessness, neglect or misuse by the consumer, the cost of replacing the property or repairing the damage shall be paid by the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 7, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-10. - City not liable for failure of service. 
The city will at all times use reasonable diligence to provide continuous service and having used due diligence shall not be liable to the consumer for complete or partial failure or interruption of service, or for fluctuations in voltage or pressure, resulting from causes beyond its control, or through the ordinary negligence of its employees, servants, or agents, nor shall the city be liable for the direct or indirect consequences of interruptions or curtailments made in accordance with the provisions of any of its rate schedules. The city shall not be liable for any act or omission caused directly or indirectly by strikes, labor troubles, accidents, litigation, shutdowns or repairs or adjustments, interference by federal, state, or municipal governments, acts of God, for any damage resulting from the bursting of any main, service pipe or cock, from the shutting off for repairs, extensions or connections, or for the accidental failure of supply from any cause whatsoever. In case of emergency the city shall have the right to restrict the use of utilities in any reasonable manner for the protection of the public, the city and its utilities. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 8, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 990725, § 1, 12-13-99)  
Sec. 27-11. - Consumer to indemnify city against certain losses. 
The consumer by applying for and receiving service from the city agrees to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city from and against any and all liability or loss in any manner directly or indirectly growing out of the transmission and use of electrical energy, gas, water, wastewater or telecommunications service by the consumer at or on the consumer's side of the point of delivery or connection. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 9, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 970748, § 2, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 030278, § 7, 9-8-03)  
Sec. 27-12. - Service in unincorporated areas. 
It is recognized that the issuance of building permits within the unincorporated areas of the county are within the jurisdiction of the county. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee, in cooperation with the county, will follow such ordinances or procedures that are adopted and effective within the unincorporated areas of the county, consistent with the intent of this article to make sure that proper fees and charges are made and collected prior to the rendering of utility services. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 10, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-13. - Receiving service without paying for same. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or consumer to receive or attempt to receive, except in the manner expressly authorized, utility service from the city without paying the required rates and charges. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 11, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-14. - Combined statements—Rendering; date payable; penalties; delinquencies. 
(a)  A combined statement for all applicable utility services, including, but not limited to, electricity, gas, water, chilled water, reclaimed water, wastewater collection, stormwater maintenance, refuse/garbage collection, telecommunications, backup generation, infrared scanning and rental security lighting, plus applicable taxes and surcharges, may be rendered each customer monthly for such service. The rendering of a combined statement is not an obligation on the part of the city and failure of the customer to receive the statement shall not release nor diminish the obligation of the customer with respect to payment thereof, or relieve the customer of any obligation under this article. 
(b)  Each combined statement shall specify at a minimum the applicable customer class, meter reading(s) and usage, billing and delinquent dates, days of service, and monthly service fees as well as provide information such as the applicable taxes, surcharges, and fuel and purchased power adjustment costs. 
(c)  Combined statements for service are due and payable when rendered. 
(d)  If approved by the general manager or his/her designee, payments may be deferred or made in installments. 
(e)  In addition to other rates and charges established by this chapter, a service charge in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A shall be assessed as a late fee on any combined statement not paid in full by the close of business 22 days after being rendered. The United States of America, the State of Florida, and all political subdivisions, agencies, boards, commissions, and instrumentalities thereof, are exempt from the payment of the late fee imposed and levied thereby. 
(f)  Any combined statement not paid in full by the close of business 29 days after being rendered shall be delinquent and reported to the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, who may thereupon discontinue any and/or all services. Combined statements may become delinquent at some time mutually agreed upon by the utility and the customer other than the period described herein. After disconnection, no services shall be restored until the customer makes arrangements satisfactory to the general manager for utilities or his/her designee to pay all required payments. A service charge in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A will be assessed upon issuance of a disconnection service order. Service will be restored the same day satisfactory payment and/or arrangements for satisfactory payment are made, provided that payment is made between 7:00 am to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding observed or federal holidays. There shall be additional reconnection charges set forth in Appendix A for payments made after 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, during weekends, or on observed and/or federal holidays. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 12, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 4033, § 1, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 950735, § 1, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 030278, § 8, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 060613, § 2, 3-26-07; Ord. No. 120883 , § 1, 8-20-15)  
Sec. 27-14.1. - Same—Separate services. 
If the city is furnishing two or more of the same utility services under separate applications to the same premises, each customer involved shall be treated separately and billed accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 13, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 950735, § 1, 10-9-95)  
Sec. 27-14.2. - Same—Metered services; consumption determinations; estimate of consumption when meters fail to register, billings for other services. 
(a)  For metered services the city shall endeavor to have each customer's meter or meters read at approximately monthly intervals to determine the billed consumption. 
(1)  Electric. Electric meters measure the amount of energy used in kilowatts over predetermined intervals (15 minutes, 30 minutes, 60 minutes, etc.). The measurements are accumulated by the meter to indicate the amount of energy consumed over the billing period in kilowatt-hours and/or the billing demand in kilowatts. The meter reading(s) taken during the current billing period and the resulting measurement(s) shall be disclosed on the combined statement. 
(2)  Gas. Gas meters measure the amount of gas used in cubic feet. The volumetric reading taken during the previous billing period and the reading taken during the current billing period together with the volumetric measurement of gas consumed during the period shall be disclosed on the combined statement. Customers pay only for the amount of heat in each cubic foot of gas (CCF); therefore, CCF are converted to therms, or 100,000 British thermal units. The therm conversion factor shall also be disclosed on the combined statement. 
(3)  Water/wastewater. Water meters measure the water used in gallons. For billing purposes, water meter readings are rounded downward to whole thousand gallons and shall be disclosed on the combined statement. For billing purposes, readings on meters installed to measure wastewater returned to the city's wastewater system are rounded downward to whole thousand gallons and shall be disclosed on the combined statement. 
(b)  If the meter on the customer's premises is destroyed or otherwise fails to register, the customer may be billed for the period involved on the basis of previous consumption, consumption after repair or replacement of the meter, or any other method in accordance with generally accepted utility practices which produces a reasonable estimate of consumption during the relevant period. Where it has been necessary to estimate the customer's consumption, the combined statement shall carry appropriate notice to that effect. 
(c)  All other services shall be billed either as provided above in section 27-14, in combination with another service or separately on a recurring day of the month when promulgated by the general manager or his/her designee, a contract governing said services, or in accordance with any separate contract between the consumer and the city for such services. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 14, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 950735, § 1, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 030278, § 9, 9-8-03)  
Sec. 27-14.3. - Same—Dishonored payments; penalties. 
(a)  A service charge in accordance with the schedule set out in appendix A shall be made for each payment not honored by a financial institution. 
(b)  If a payment is not honored by a financial institution, including, but not limited to, payments by check, electronic funds transfer, or credit card the general manager for utilities or his/her designee may deny the payment of future utility charges by such means and require payment only in the form of cash, cashiers check or money order. The privilege of payment by such means may be reinstated at the customer's request once the customer has regained a satisfactory payment record as determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 15, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 950735, § 1, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 030278, § 10, 9-8-03)  
Sec. 27-14.4. - Same—Billing adjustments. 
Where, as the result of any meter test, a meter is found to be non-registering or incorrectly registering, the city may render an adjusted bill to the customer for the amount of any undercharge or overcharge as directed by the general manager or his/her designee consistent with generally accepted utility practices. 
(Ord. No. 160253 , § 1, 9-15-16)  
Sec. 27-15. - Service charges. 
(a)  Installation or turn-on of utility service. A service charge in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A shall be paid to the city before any utility service, new or transferred from one service location to another, is installed or turned on. Should installation or turn-on services be requested for the same workday, for any fully-scheduled workday requiring after-hours service, or for holidays or weekends, additional service charges in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A shall be assessed. 
(b)  Field visit; service location. A service charge in accordance with the schedule set out in appendix A shall be paid the city for a field visit made to the consumer's service location. This service charge shall not apply if the field visit results in a disconnection of utility service(s) or is a specially arranged visit by a meter reader as prescribed in section 27-8(c). 
(c)  Field visit; disconnection of utility service. If service is disconnected because of delinquent payments, unauthorized connection, or consumer request, a service charge in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A shall be assessed. If commercial gas service is disconnected, or electric service is disconnected at the point of service (electric pole or service drop), or water service is disconnected by removal of the water meter due to unauthorized connection or consumer request, an additional service charge in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A shall be assessed. 
(d)  Field visit; reconnection of utility service. No service charge shall be assessed for reconnection of utility service(s) if disconnection of such service(s) was due to system requirements. However, if service was disconnected because of delinquent payments, unauthorized connection, or consumer request and service reconnection is requested and/or made after normal working hours (as promulgated by the general manager or his/her designee, Monday through Friday, excluding city holidays), an additional service charge in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A shall be assessed and paid to the city before any service is reconnected. 
(Ord. No. 3754, § 16, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 970593, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 030278, § 11, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 060433, § 1, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 070429, § 1, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 070744, § 1, 6-9-08; Ord. No. 090288, § 3, 9-17-09)  
Sec. 27-16. - Responsibility for taxes or assessments. 
The customer shall be liable for any taxes or assessments that are lawfully imposed by any governmental authority on any service. Exemptions from such taxes or assessments shall be granted only by the taxing or assessing authority having jurisdiction. It shall be the customer's responsibility to secure and document such exemption on a continuous basis to the satisfaction of the city. A failure by the city to levy or collect any such tax or assessment, does not relieve the customer of the responsibility for the payment of such tax or assessment. 
(Ord. No. 4033, § 2, 9-26-94)  
Sec. 27-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 090288, § 4, adopted Sept. 17, 2009, repealed § 27-17 which pertained to exception to the Alachua County electric utility privilege fee and findings and derived from Ord. No. 970219, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 1997.  
Sec. 27-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 090288, § 5, adopted Sept. 17, 2009, repealed § 27-18 which pertained to exception to the Alachua County electric utility privilege fee and findings and derived from Ord. No. 970219, § 2, adopted Sept. 8, 1997.  
Secs. 27-19—27-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3754, §§ 20—37, adopted Jan. 27, 1992, repealed various sections of Art. II, relative to electricity, and § 80 of said Ord. No. 3754 renumbered the remaining sections of this article to read as herein set out. The history notation has been retained in the renumbered sections for reference purposes. The repealed provisions of this article derived from Code 1960, §§ 28-2, 28-3, 28-5, 28-6, 28-8, 28-9, 28-14—28-21.1, 28-29; Ord. No. 3254, § 1, adopted Sept. 22, 1986; Ord. No. 3493, § 3, adopted Nov. 21, 1988; Ord. No. 3544, § 2, adopted July 10, 1989; Ord. No. 3644, § 1, adopted Aug. 20, 1990; Ord. No. 3665, adopted Sept. 24, 1990; Ord. No. 3695, §§ 2—4, adopted Feb. 18, 1991; Ord. No. 3696, §§ 1—5, 8, adopted Feb. 18, 1991. See the Code Comparative Table for a specific enumeration of repealed and renumbered sections. 
Cross reference— Electrical code, § 6-31 et seq.; minimum requirements for artificial lighting in housing code, § 13-126 et seq. 
State Law reference— Electrical code, F.S. § 553.15 et seq. 
 
Sec. 27-21. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
AC power shall mean electrical power of the type distributed by the electric utility distribution system and delivered for consumption to the customer's meter. AC power is created by systems that utilize time-varying electrical current ("alternating current"). 
Avoided energy cost shall mean the electric system's total costs which the electric system avoided stated in dollars of fuel consumed in generation divided by the net generation stated in megawatt hours, which shall be expressed in $/net kilowatt hours as published in the most recent annual generation operation report by the energy supply division, which shall be updated each calendar year based on actual fuel costs, expenses and net generation of the electric system. 
Business partners rate discount rider shall mean that written agreement in accordance with Appendix A, Utilities (1)1. between the city and certain nonresidential electric service customers whereunder the retail rates otherwise applicable to such customers are discounted in exchange for a long term, electric service commitment by the customer. The rider shall be available to only the following retail customer rate classes: general service non-demand, general service demand, or large power. 
Consumer shall mean any person or entity that receives and utilizes electric service at a specific location. 
Customer shall mean any adult natural person or legal entity: (a) taking electric, natural gas, water, chilled water, reclaimed water, wastewater collection, telecommunications, back-up generation, rental security lighting, and/or any other utility service provided by the city; (b) in whose name a service account is listed; (c) who occupies a location, premise, or building structure; and/or (d) who is responsible for the payment of utility bills. Where two or more customers join in an application for utility services, such customers shall be jointly and severally liable and shall be billed by means of a single periodic bill mailed to the customer designated to receive such bill. Whether or not the city received a joint application, where two or more customers are occupying, using, benefiting from, and/or living in the same residence, each customer shall have joint and several liability for the utility services provided and the resulting utility bills. 
Customer-owned renewable generation shall mean an electric generating system located on a customer's premises intended to offset part or all of the customer's electricity requirements with renewable energy under terms and conditions that do not include the retail purchase of electricity from the third party. 
Curtailable electric service rider shall mean all nonresidential electric customers who are eligible for large power electric service. Customers on this rate agree that the city may curtail at least 500 kW of power demand and must enter into an agreement designating the city as the customer's exclusive supplier of electricity for a minimum initial term of ten years. This rider may be applied to service that is a verifiable amount of electric power demand that can be reduced or interrupted upon request of the city but solely at the discretion of the customer. 
DC power shall mean electrical power of the type stored in batteries. DC power is generated by systems that utilize electrical current that does not vary over time ("direct current"). One important example of such a system is a photovoltaic solar array which converts sunlight into DC power. DC power must be converted to AC power before it can be distributed by the utility electrical distribution system. 
Demand shall mean the greatest average amount of electric power measured in kilowatts required by a consumer throughout any 30-minute interval during each billing month. 
Developer shall mean any person or entity with ownership or control of a development that can contract with the utility for the construction of electrical facilities. 
Distributed generation shall mean small, modular, decentralized, grid-connected or off-grid energy systems located in or near the place where energy is used. For purposes of net metering, the generation is connected to the customers' premises behind the electric revenue meter. For purposes of feed-in-tariff, the generation may be independent of an existing utility customer account or may be at an existing customer premises and connected to the grid beyond the electric revenue meter. A solar photovoltaic distributed resource will be referred to as SPDR in Appendix A. The nameplate capacity of SPDRs is stated in direct current (DC) and is referred to as such in the solar industry, therefore all references to solar capacity are intended to be interpreted as DC values. 
Economic development incentive (EDI) rate rider program shall mean the rate rider program available to qualifying nonresidential electric customers for metered demand associated with new permanent service to a single point of delivery or for qualifying nonresidential electric customers with increased metered demand associated with an existing single point of delivery. 
Electric system fuel and purchased power expense shall mean the cost or expense of fuel transported to and consumed in the generation of electricity in the city's generating plants and the identifiable costs incurred while having power delivered to the system to maintain adequate capacity reserve levels on the system, including, but not limited to, generation capacity charges, reservation charges, energy charges, adders, and/or any transmission or wheeling charges. 
Extraordinary fuel related expenses shall mean the cost of lime, urea, and/or any other additive consumed during the combustion process for the production of power as well as any other fuel related costs or expenses posted to account 502 as defined under Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) rules of accounting. Additionally, any costs or expenses incurred in marketing or selling renewable energy credits (RECs) or any other environmental attributes are extraordinary fuel related expenses. 
Feed-in-tariff shall mean the provision by which the utility may purchase renewable electric energy and the associated renewable energy credits or other environmental attributes from a customer or entity within the utility's electric service area pursuant to the standard offer contract. 
Full deposit shall mean an amount equal to two times the estimated average monthly combined utility bill for the location at which utility services will be provided, as determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
General service shall mean: 
(1)  Non-demand. All nonresidential electric service where a demand of 50 kilowatts or greater has not been established. When a customer on this rate establishes a demand of 50 kilowatts, or greater, the appropriate demand rate will be applied for the current billing month plus a minimum of 11 succeeding billing months. All energy supplied shall be through a single meter and a single point of delivery. Customers operating multi-family dwellings with residential electric service supplied through a single meter and a single point of delivery may enter into an agreement for service under this schedule. During the period beginning May 15 and ending October 15 each year, customers with an established billing demand of 50 kilowatts or greater may enter into an agreement for service under this schedule if their maximum demand established during peak periods does not exceed a demand of 49 kilowatts anytime within 12 consecutive billing months. Peak periods are defined in Appendix A, Utilities, subsection (1)f.1.(ii)(B), residential service, time-of-use rate. General service demand customers who wish to enter into an agreement for service under this schedule by metering demand during peak periods will pay a one-time meter installation charge in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(2)  Demand. All nonresidential electric service with an established billing demand of 50 but less than 1,000 kilowatts per month. Customers on this rate will be changed to the nondemand rate for the current billing month at such time as their demand has been below 50 kilowatts for 12 consecutive billing months following the effective date of this subsection. Customers with a nonresidential electric service demand of 50 kilowatts or less may enter into an agreement for service under this schedule. All energy supplied shall be through a single meter and a single point of delivery. 
Gross power rating shall mean the total manufacturer's DC nameplate generating capacity of the customer-owned renewable generation that will be interconnected to and operated in parallel with the city's electric distribution system. 
Interruptible electric service rider shall mean all nonresidential electric customers who are eligible for large power electric service. Customers on this rate agree that the city may interrupt at least 500 kW of power demand and must enter into an agreement designating the city as the customer's exclusive supplier of electricity for a minimum initial term of ten years. This rider may be applied to service that is electric power demand at a single metering point that can be totally interrupted either automatically or manually at the discretion of the city. 
Large power service shall mean all nonresidential electric service with a 12-month rolling average demand of 1,000 kilowatts per month or over. Customers on this rate will be changed to the applicable general service rate for the current billing month at such time as their 12-month rolling average demand falls below 1,000 kilowatts. All energy supplied shall be through a single meter and a single point of delivery. 
Meter tampering shall mean when any person shall willfully alter, injure, or knowingly suffer to be injured any electric meter or meter seal or other apparatus or device belonging to the city in such a manner as to cause loss or damage or to prevent any such meter installed for registering electricity, from registering the quantity which otherwise would pass through the same; or to alter the index or break the seal of any such meter; or in any way to hinder or interfere with the proper action or just registration of any such meter or device or make or cause to be made any connection of any wire or appurtenance in such a manner as to use, without the consent of the city, any electricity without such electric service being reported for payment or such electricity passing through a meter provided by the city and used for measuring and registering the quantity of electricity passing through the same. 
Metering point, as distinguished from point of delivery, shall mean the point at which the instrument is installed to meter the flow of electric energy from the city to the consumer. The city shall have the option to meter any service on either the primary or secondary side of the transformer. 
Month shall mean an interval between successive meter reading dates, which interval may be 30 days, more or less. 
Native load fuel expenses shall mean the total fuel and purchased power cost or expense to supply all retail and wholesale customers and shall not include the cost or expense to supply interchange sales. 
Natural gas fuel expenses shall mean the total expense of purchased gas volumes, as received by the local distribution system for delivery to end use customers. 
Net-metering shall mean a metering and billing methodology whereby customer-owned renewable generation is allowed to offset part or all of the customer's electricity consumption on site. In the event the customer-owned renewable generation creates any excess energy, it may be delivered to the city's electric distribution system. 
Other fuel revenues shall mean revenues received from the sale of renewable energy credits (RECs), environmental attributes, contractual fuel recovery, other non-retail, and/or wholesale fuel as identified by the general manager or his/her designee. 
Point of delivery shall mean the point where the city's wires or apparatus are connected with those of the consumer. 
Residential service shall mean service to a single living unit located in a single-family or multiple-family dwelling or a living unit consisting of a sorority, fraternity, cooperative housing unit of a college or university or other nonprofit group living unit. A living unit shall be a place where people reside on a nontransient basis containing a room or rooms comprising the essential elements of a single housekeeping unit. Facilities for the preparation, storage and keeping of food for consumption within the premises shall cause a unit to be construed as a single dwelling unit. Generally, all energy supplied shall be through a single meter at a single point of delivery. This definition is intended to define a rate class. This definition is not to be construed as a definition of service conductors or related service entrance equipment. 
Related civil infrastructure shall mean all components required to construct an underground duct system in addition to the conduit and concrete equipment foundations. These components include but are not limited to cable pull boxes, manholes, vaults, transition boxes, pedestals and miscellaneous parts (i.e. couplings, bellends, pulling eyes and similar hardware). 
Satisfactory payment record shall mean a 24 consecutive month period with no termination of utility services orders issued over the last consecutive 12-month period for either nonpayment, returned payments, and/or no more than three delinquent payments. 
Service shall include, in addition to all electric energy required by consumer, the readiness and ability on the part of the city to furnish electric energy to the consumer; thus, the maintenance by the city at the point of delivery of approximately the agreed voltage and frequency shall constitute the rendering of service irrespective of whether consumer makes any use thereof. 
Service leads shall mean the portion of the consumer's installation to which the city connects its service wires. 
Service wires shall mean the wires of the city to which are connected the service leads of the consumer. 
Standard deposit shall mean the current residential deposit amount prescribed in Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances. 
Standard offer contract shall mean the terms and conditions promulgated by the general manager for utilities for customers and non-customers qualifying under the provisions of Appendix A, Section Utilities (1) Electricity, i.1.(B). 
(Code 1960, § 28-1; Ord. No. 3665, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3695, § 1, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 960270, § 1, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 960498, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 970434, § 1, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 980557, § 1, 11-23-98; Ord. No. 030278, § 12, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 070374, § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 080566, § 1, 2-5-09; Ord. No. 090288, § 6, 9-17-09; Ord. No. 100537, § 1, 1-20-11; Ord. No. 120516, § 1, 8-21-14; Ord. No. 130582, § 1, 8-21-14; Ord. No. 130576 , § 1, 11-6-14; Ord. No. 120883 , § 2, 8-20-15; Ord. No. 170580 , § 2, 1-4-18; Ord. No. 170722 , § 2, 2-1-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 27-22. - Resale of electricity prohibited. 
Electric energy received under either residential electric service, general electric service, or large power electric service shall be used for the consumers' direct use only. No resale of such electric energy shall be permitted. 
(Code 1960, § 28-4; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 030278, § 13, 9-8-03)  
Sec. 27-23. - Approval of premises required. 
No electric service shall be rendered by the city to any consumer at any premises until such time as the appropriate building official, or his/her designee, shall have approved the premises for services as follows: 
(1)  Residential electric service. Approval of a dwelling for residential electric service must be obtained before initial provision of electric service. 
(2)  Other customer classes. Approval of the premises for electric service must be obtained prior to initial provision of service and/or transfer of electric service. 
(3)  Copy of approval. Each applicant for service must submit a copy of the approval where required as part of the application for service. 
(Code 1960, § 28-10; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-24. - Delivery voltages. 
All newly constructed or renovated structures shall be served at the utility's standard delivery voltages: 120/240 volt single phase, 120/208 volt three-phase wye, or 277/480 volt three-phase wye. For the purposes of this section, a building shall be considered renovated if existing electrical facilities are replaced, upgraded or reconstructed as a result of changed use of the building or increased electric load of an existing use. This requirement may be waived by the general manager for utilities or his designee when 120/240 volt three phase delta is the only voltage available or in cases of extreme hardship. 
(Ord. No. 3136, § 1, 6-10-85; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 980557, § 1, 11-23-98)  
Sec. 27-25. - Temporary electric service. 
Temporary electric service may be provided for construction activities, fairs, exhibits and other similar temporary purposes under the general service electric rate schedule. A prepaid fee shall be required for each temporary service in accordance with the schedule in appendix A. However, if additional electrical distribution facilities must be constructed, removed, or adjusted for the sole purpose of establishing temporary service(s), the estimated costs associated with the additional work shall also be due and payable in advance. The term of temporary service shall not exceed one year. 
(Code 1960, §§ 28-7, 28-7.01; Ord. No. 3294, § 1, 10-13-86; Ord. No. 3493, §§ 1, 4, 11-21-88; Ord. No. 3695, § 5, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3696, § 6, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, §§ 17, 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 980557, § 2, 11-23-98)  
Sec. 27-26. - Metering requirements. 
The customer (or developer) will provide and install meter socket(s) and related service entrance equipment in accordance with the Energy Delivery Service Guide referenced in section 27-36. All customer installed socket(s) and related service entrance equipment shall be properly maintained at the customer's expense. All meters, wires and other appliances furnished by the city shall remain the property of the city and the consumer shall properly protect the city's property on the consumer's premises. In the event of any loss or damage to property of the city caused by or arising out of carelessness, neglect or misuse by the consumer, the customer, or other unauthorized parties, the cost of making good the loss or repairing the damage shall be paid by the customer. 
(Code 1960, § 28-11; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 980557, § 2, 11-23-98)  
Sec. 27-26.1. - Same—Testing. 
Upon written notice, a meter will be tested by the city and if the meter when tested is found to be not more than two percent fast, the expense of the test shall be paid by the consumer in accordance with the schedule set out in appendix A, otherwise the expense of the test will be borne by the city. 
(Code 1960, § 28-13; Ord. No. 3695, § 6, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 030278, § 14, 9-8-03)  
Sec. 27-26.2. - Same—Tampering with; altering. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to meddle, tamper with, alter or change the wiring system on any premises or to interfere in an way with a meter or meter connection. Should it appear that electric energy has been stolen by altering the wires, reversing the meter or otherwise, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall have the right to discontinue the service until the defect is corrected and the service approved by the city's electrical inspector. 
(b)  Diversion cut-back charge. When an electric meter is found to have been tampered with service shall be subject to immediate disconnection. Before service may be restored, the estimated consumption as defined in subsection (c) of this section shall be paid by cash, postal money order or cashier's check or equivalent or satisfactory arrangements for payment shall be made. Upon payment of the estimated consumption, service shall be restored. If the customer's deposit has been previously refunded, a new deposit may be required. 
(c)  Estimated consumption and billing. When an electric meter is found to have been tampered with or current has been otherwise diverted, the consumer shall be billed for the estimated energy consumed based on the rate in effect at the time of such billing. The consumption shall be estimated on the basis of previous consumption, consumption after replacement of the meter, or any other method in accordance with generally accepted utility practices which produces a reasonable estimate. In addition, the consumer shall be billed for the actual cost of the investigation of the meter tampering, including cost associated with the estimation of consumption and the labor, supplies, materials and equipment used in connection with such investigation. The consumer shall also be liable to the city for the cost of collection, including agency, attorneys' fees and court costs if the account is placed in the hands of an agency or attorney for collection or legal action because of the customer's failure to pay any amount due. 
(d)  Prima facie evidence. The presence, on property in the actual possession of the consumer where the meter tampering has occurred, of any connection, wire, conductor, meter alteration, or device whatsoever which affects the diversion or use of electricity so as to avoid the registration of such use by or on a meter installed or provided by the city shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to violate this section if: 
(1)  The presence of such a device or alteration can be attributed only to a deliberate act in furtherance of an intent to avoid payment for utility services; 
(2)  The customer charged with the violation of this section has received the direct benefit of the reduction of the cost of such utility service; and 
(3)  The customer or recipient of the utility service has received the direct benefit of such utility service for at least one full billing cycle. 
(e)  Breaking of meter-pan seal. When it is necessary to break a meter or meter-pan seal, the electrician performing such work shall notify the designated city official. A service fee in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A shall be charged to the electrician when notice is not provided. Where a meter-pan seal is discovered broken, the meter shall be inspected to determine if it has been tampered with. If it has not been tampered with, the pan shall be resealed and the customer advised in writing that it is unlawful to break a meter-pan seal without notifying the appropriate city official. 
(Code 1960, §§ 28-12, 28-13.1; Ord. No. 3122, § 1, 4-15-85; Ord. No. 3695, § 7, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3696, § 7, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-27. - Base rates for retail service. 
(a)  Rates. The rates to be charged and collected for electric energy furnished by the city to retail consumers shall be in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(b)  Taxes. An amount equal to all applicable taxes imposed against the sale or consumption of electric energy shall be added to the rates hereinabove set forth. The United States of America, the State of Florida, and all political subdivisions, agencies, boards, commissions, and instrumentalities thereof, and all recognized places of religious assembly of the State of Florida are exempt from the city's utility tax. 
(c)  Surcharge for consumers outside city limits. The rates to be charged and collected by the city for electric energy furnished by the city outside of its corporate limits to consumers of retail electric service shall be the base rates as set forth above, plus a surcharge equal the amount of the city utility tax charged consumers inside the city limits; provided, however, that the United States of America, the State of Florida, and all political subdivisions, agencies, boards, commissions, and instrumentalities thereof and all recognized places of religious assembly of the State of Florida are exempt from the payment of the surcharge imposed and levied thereby. 
(d)  Availability. This service is available to consumers both within and outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1960, §§ 28-3.1—28-3.4; Ord. No. 3162, §§ 1—4, 9-23-85; Ord. No. 3469, § 1, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 3567, § 1, 9-25-89; Ord. No. 3695, § 8, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-28. - Electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment. 
(a)  An electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment shall be added to the base rate for electric service to all customer rate classifications as specified in the schedule set out in Appendix A. The electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment shall be computed to the nearest whole mill ($0.001) per kilowatt hour (kWh) of energy consumed in accordance with the formula specified in subsection (c) of this section. The purposes of the electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment calculation are to allocate the appropriate amount of system fuel cost(s) associated with the electric service to each kWh sold; to specify the amount of such costs that have resulted from increases in the cost of fuel subsequent to October 1, 1973; and, to segregate the remaining fuel recovery that is exempt from utility tax and surcharge. 
(b)  The electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment for each billing month shall be based on fuel cost and energy sales which are estimated by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. When applicable, a fuel levelization fund amount and a true-up correction factor, which shall be based on the actual system performance in the second month preceding the billing month, as certified by independent certified public accountants, shall be added to the electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment before applying to customer(s) bills. 
(c)  The following formula shall be used in computing the monthly electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment: 
(1)  Projected electric system fuel and purchased power expense for billing month 1       _____ 
(2)  Projected wholesale fuel revenue for billing month 1       _____ 
(3)  Projected other fuel revenue for billing month 1       _____ 
(4)  Projected fuel costs to be recovered by retail sales for billing month       _____ 
Item 1 - Item 2 - Item 3 
(5)  "True-up" calculation from second month preceding the billing month       _____ 
a.  Native load fuel expense for sales from the second preceding month       _____ 
1.  System generation fuel 3       _____ 
2.  Purchases from interchange and purchased power agreements 4       _____ 
3.  Fuel portion of interchange sales 4       _____ 
4.  Native load fuel expense       _____ 
Item 5a1 + Item 5a2 - Item 5a3 
b.  Total fuel revenue from the second preceding month       _____ 
1.  Electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment revenue 2       _____ 
2.  Embedded fuel 2, 6       _____ 
3.  Wholesale fuel revenue 2       _____ 
4.  Total fuel revenue       _____ 
Item 5b1 + Item 5b2 + Item 5b3 
c.  True-up from second preceding month       _____ 
d.  Fuel levelization amount from second preceding month       _____ 
e.  True-up for billing month       _____ 
Item 5a4 - Item 5b4 + Item 5c + Item 5d 
(6)  Calculation of electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment for billing month       _____ 
a.  Projected retail sales MWh       _____ 
b.  Projected fuel costs to be recovered by retail sales       _____ 
1.  Projected fuel costs 1       _____ 
Item 4 
2.  True-up for billing month       _____ 
Item 5e 
3.  Embedded fuel 6 projected for billing month       _____ 
4.  Fuel levelization amount used or added for billing month 5       _____ 
5.  Total fuel adjustment revenue requirement for retail sales       _____ 
Item 6b1 + Item 6b2 - Item 6b3 + Item 6b4 
c.  Fuel adjustment for billing month (mills, $/MWh)       _____ 
Item 6b5/Item 6a 
Footnotes: 
1 Electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment expenses, costs, retail sales, and wholesale sales, and other revenues are to be estimated for the billing month by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. For the purposes of this section, wholesale sales are total requirements sales for resale that are not interchange sales. 
2 Fuel and purchased power adjustment revenues, other fuel revenues, retail, and/or wholesale sales from the second month preceding the billing month shall be actual data as billed to the city's electric customers. 
3 System fuel costs for the second month preceding the billing month shall be based on actual system fuel costs. 
4 The fuel cost portion of interchange sales for the second month preceding the billing month shall be the cost of fuel applicable to such sales as determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. The fuel cost portion of interchange purchases for the second month preceding the billing month is determined from invoice(s) received for such purchases. In the case of interchange purchases, the entire cost including transmission charges, if any, will be included in the fuel cost for such transactions. 
5 The fuel levelization fund balance may be used each month to levelize the monthly electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment. At any given point in time, the fuel levelization fund balance shall be no greater than ten percent of the annual fuel budget and no less than negative five percent of the annual fuel budget. In the event that the fuel levelization fund balance varies from the above-identified range, the general manager or his/her delegate will present an information item to the city commission as soon as practicable. 
6 Six and one-half mills ($0.0065) per kWh was the cost of fuel, imbedded within base rates for retail service, on October 1, 1973, making it subject to taxation. 
(Code 1960, § 28-3.5; Ord. No. 3112, § 1, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 3429, § 1, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 3453, § 1, 8-8-88; Ord. No. 3640, § 1, 7-16-90; Ord. No. 3750, § 1, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 950731, § 1, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 130582, § 2, 8-21-14)  
Sec. 27-29. - Public streetlights—Generally. 
(a)  Definition. For purposes of this section, public streetlights are defined as lights installed along public thoroughfares. 
(b)  Service within corporate limits. A request for installation of public streetlights shall be addressed to the city manager or his/her designee, who shall determine, based upon considerations of public city welfare and availability of funds, if the installation should be made. If the city manager or his/her designee determines that such installation shall be made, the city manager or his/her designee shall authorize, by written instruction, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee to make such installation. All costs of installing, operating and maintaining the public streetlight system within the corporate limits shall be paid by the city's general government department. Ownership of the public streetlight system shall reside with the city's utilities department. The city's utilities department shall be reimbursed by the appropriate governmental agency for costs incurred according to the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(c)  Service outside corporate limits. A request for installation of public streetlights outside the corporate limits of the city shall be addressed to the county engineer or other designated government official, who shall determine, based upon consideration of public safety, welfare and availability of funds, if the installation should be made. If the county engineer determines that such installation shall be made, the county engineer shall authorize, by written instruction, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee to make such installation. All such installations shall be within the service area of the electric utilities system. All costs in installing, operating and maintaining the public streetlight system outside the corporate limits shall be paid by the local government which has authorized the provision of such public streetlight services. Ownership of the public streetlighting system shall reside with the city's utilities department. 
(Code 1960, §§ 28-5.2, 28-7.1(b); Ord. No. 3162, § 5, 9-23-85; Ord. No. 3495, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 3567, §§ 3, 4, 9-25-89; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-29.1. - Same—Rates. 
The city's utilities department shall be reimbursed by the appropriate governmental agency for streetlights and poles in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 3695, § 9, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-30. - Rental outdoor lights—Application for service. 
Application for rental outdoor light service shall be on forms furnished by the city and shall constitute an agreement by the consumer with the city to abide by the rules of the city in regard to its rental outdoor light service. The agreement shall specify the billable units (fixtures and poles) to be furnished and shall allow the city reasonable access across private property for the purposes of maintaining the facilities supplied. 
Application for service by firms, partnerships, associations and corporations shall be submitted only by their duly authorized agents, and the official title of the party shall be included in the application. 
(Code 1960, § 28-5.1; Ord. No. 3567, § 2, 9-25-89; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-30.1. - Same—Rates. 
Charges for rental outdoor light fixtures and poles shall be in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(Code 1960, § 28-7.2; Ord. No. 3162, § 6, 9-23-85; Ord. No. 3567, § 5, 9-25-89; Ord. No. 3695, § 10, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92) 
_____ 
Sec. 27-31. - Electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment added to public streetlight and rental outdoor light services. 
The electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment in section 27-28 shall be applied to public streetlight and rental outdoor light services based on the estimated average energy usage per fixture according to the following schedule: 
Non-LED Fixtures by Fixture Wattage 	Average Monthly Kilowatt-Hours (kWh) 
100W 	41 
150W 	62 
175W 	72 
200W 	82 
250W 	103 
400W 	164 
 
LED Fixtures by Fixture Type 	Average Monthly kWh 
Type 38,61 	15 
Type 56,73 	16 
Type 55,72 	18 
Type 52,69 	20 
Type 39,42,62,65 	32 
Type 53,54,70,71 	39 
Type 40,43,63,66 	45 
Type 45, 46 	70 
Type 41,44,64,67 	79 
Type 51,68 	82 
 
(Code 1960, § 28-7.3; Ord. No. 3567, § 9, 9-25-89; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 150246 , § 1, 9-17-15; Ord. No. 160253 , § 2, 9-15-16; Ord. No. 170257 , § 1, 9-21-17; Ord. No. 180282 , § 1, 9-20-18) 
_____ 
Sec. 27-32. - Availability of public streetlight and rental outdoor light service. 
The city will provide public streetlight and rental outdoor light service to any customer requesting such service pursuant to section 27-29 and section 27-30 of the city Code of Ordinances at the rates set forth in Appendix A; except that facilities provided at such rates shall include the fixture, the usual and customary fixture bracket and one span of secondary conductor. If noncustomary facilities or installations are initiated by the utility, the utility shall pay the actual cost of such facilities or installations. If the customer requests or requires noncustomary facilities or installations, the customer shall pay the actual cost of such facilities or installations. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 6, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 3786, § 1, 9-21-92)  
Sec. 27-33. - Relocation, modification or removal of existing facilities. 
If the city is required to relocate, modify or remove existing overhead and/or underground distribution facilities because of either a utility customer's request, or because changes in the customer's facilities and/or operations necessitate relocation, modification or removal of distribution facilities in order to comply with either the National Electrical Code, the National Electrical Safety Code or city policy, all costs of any such relocation, modification or removal shall be borne exclusively by such customer. All costs of relocating, modifying or removing utility facilities that are attributable to city initiated renewal or reconstruction projects shall be borne exclusively by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 3, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-34. - Availability of service. 
The city will supply electric service to any prospective customer within the corporate limits of the City of Gainesville and in the unincorporated areas of Alachua County, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Should the extension, installation, improvement or modification of facilities be required, either on-site or off-site, the City will pay the cost of such facilities if in the opinion of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, the immediate or potential revenues justify the full cost of the facilities. 
(b)  In those cases where estimated revenues are inadequate to cover the full cost of the extension, installation, improvement or modification, the customer shall make a contribution in aid of construction (CIAC). Revenue adequacy of the extension, installation, improvement or modification shall be evaluated based upon the internal rate of return (IRR). CIAC is required unless the IRR is 14 percent or greater. Where multiple customers are involved, contributions in aid of construction may be shared on a pro-rata basis. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 4, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 980557, § 3, 11-23-98)  
Sec. 27-35. - Installation of underground electrical facilities. 
When underground electrical facilities are to be installed, whether required by governmental authority, or at the request of a customer (or developer), the city will, at its expense and in the exercise of its engineering judgment, design the facilities. The cost of including that design in the construction plans and documents of the customer (or developer) shall be borne by the customer (or developer). The customer (or developer), shall then provide and install (or cause to have installed), at their sole expense, all conduit, concrete equipment foundations, and related civil infrastructure required for the installation of the electrical facilities including, but not limited to: primary and secondary voltage electrical systems, services, and lighting systems in accordance with the Energy Delivery Service Guide referenced in section 27-36. Ownership of all customer or developer installed facilities shall be transferred to the city upon acceptance by the city. In addition, the customer (or developer) will pay any "Contribution in Aid of Construction" which the city may require pursuant to section 27-34. Except as provided for by ordinance, the costs associated with utility initiated underground electrical system construction or reconstruction shall be borne exclusively by the utility. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 5, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 980557, § 3, 11-23-98)  
Sec. 27-36. - Energy delivery service guide. 
All electrical facilities and related civil infrastructure shall be installed, replaced or maintained in accordance with the Energy Delivery Service Guide promulgated by the Energy Delivery Department of GRU dated November 1, 1998, or the latest revision thereof. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 27-26 and 27-35, the provisions of the New Electrical Service Installation Guide dated October 28, 1996 shall remain in effect for a period of 180 days following the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives. Thereafter the provisions of the Energy Delivery Service Guide dated November 1, 1998 (or the latest revision thereof), shall take effect. 
The only exception to section 27-35 shall be a housing subdivision or similar development that is approved by GRU within 180 days of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, provided that substantial construction is begun on said development within 180 days of the date of GRU approval. This exception does not apply to the conduit for the secondary service of a single family detached home. The customer (or developer) may elect to comply with the provisions of the Energy Delivery Service Guide dated November 1, 1998, at any time prior to the effective date above. 
(Ord. No. 980557, § 3, 11-23-98)  
Sec. 27-37. - Net-metering. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to promote the use of customer-owned renewable generation to offset part or all of the customer's electric consumption. 
(b)  Net-metering program availability. The net-metering program is only available to the city's electric customers who have constructed or are willing to construct customer-owned renewable generation, at no cost to the city, and are willing to execute an interconnection agreement in form and substance as provided by the city. 
(c)  Methodology for net-metering calculation. The net of the kilowatt hours used by the customer (residential or nonresidential) less the kilowatt hours exported to the city's electric distribution system from the customer-owned renewable generation shall be the number of kilowatt hours that the customer is billed at the applicable retail rate. In the event that excess kilowatt hours are exported to the city's electric distribution system beyond the kilowatt hours used by the customer during the billing cycle, such kilowatt hour balance will carry forward to be netted against kilowatt hours used by the customer during future billing cycles. If, at the end of each calendar year, the customer's account contains a kilowatt hour credit balance, the customer shall be paid the credit at the then-current avoided energy cost. When a net-metering customer leaves the city's electric system, the net-metering customer's credit balance shall be paid at the then-current avoided energy cost. 
(d)  Customer charge. Regardless of whether excess energy is delivered to the city's electric distribution system, the customer shall pay the applicable customer charge and/or the applicable demand charge for the maximum measured demand during each billing period pursuant to the applicable rate schedules. 
(e)  Inspection. All customer-owned renewable generation equipment must be inspected and approved by the city prior to its operation and connection to the city's electric distribution system. City approval of the customer-owned renewable generation is not done for the benefit of the customer and is not a warranty or guarantee, express or implied, of any sort as to the customer-owned renewable generation. The customer is responsible for ensuring that their customer-owned renewable generation is inspected, maintained, and tested regularly pursuant to any manufacturer's recommendations to ensure proper and safe operation of the customer-owned renewable generation equipment. 
(f)  Gross power rating. Customer-owned renewable generation gross power rating shall not exceed 90 percent of the customer's electric distribution service rating. In no event shall customer-owned renewable generation greater than two megawatts, at any one customer-owned renewable generation site, be allowed to interconnect to the city's electric distribution system under the net-metering program. 
(g)  Customer-owned renewable generation liability. The customer is responsible for protecting all customer-owned renewable generation equipment, inverters, protective devices, and any other system components from damage from the normal and abnormal conditions and/or operations that may occur on the city's electric distribution system in delivering and restoring power. 
(h)  Insurance. The customer is responsible for maintaining the appropriate levels of general liability insurance for personal and property damage related to customer-owned renewable generation. 
(i)  Indemnification. The customer shall hold harmless and indemnify the city, its elected officials, employees, and/or any third-party city hired contractors for any and all losses resulting from the customer-owned renewable generation. 
(j)  Islanding. Customer-owned renewable generation shall not energize the city's electric distribution system when the city's electric distribution system is de-energized at the customer's service point. There shall be no intentional islanding, as described in the Institute of Electric and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) Standard 1547, between the customer-owned renewable generation and the city's electric distribution system. 
(k)  Renewable energy credits. The customer shall retain any renewable energy credits or certificates associated with the electricity produced by its customer-owned renewable generation. 
(Ord. No. 120516, § 2, 8-21-14)  
Sec. 27-38. - Economic development incentive rate rider program. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the city to make an economic development incentive (EDI) rate rider program available to qualifying nonresidential electric customers. 
(b)  Program application. Customers must submit an application to participate in the program on the form provided by the city. The application shall be reviewed by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. Upon approval of the EDI rate rider program application and once the qualifying metered demand is met, the discount shall commence upon the next billing cycle. 
(c)  Program qualifications for a new nonresidential customer. The EDI rate rider program is available to new customer applicants for initial permanent service with minimum electric metered demand of 100,000 kWh per month at a single point of delivery. 
(d)  Program qualifications for an existing nonresidential customer. The EDI rate rider program is available to existing customer applicants with a 20 percent net incremental metered demand increase above the customer's baseline usage prior to application for participation in the EDI rate rider program. The city shall establish baseline usage for each existing customer applicant based on the average billed kWh for the previous 12-month period at a single point of delivery. The metered demand, including the baseline usage and the net incremental metered demand increase above the customer's baseline usage, shall be a minimum of 100,000 kWh per month at a single point of delivery. 
(e)  Load shifting. The EDI rate rider program is not available for load shifted from one single delivery point in the city's system to another single delivery point in the city's system. 
(f)  Program discount. A discount based on the below-described percentages shall be applied to the customer charge, demand (kW) charge, and energy (kWh) charge according to the following schedule: 
Customer Type 	Discount 
New electric customer 	20% 
Existing electric customer 	15% 
 
The rate rider discount shall not apply to fuel adjustment charges, Gross Receipts Tax, Municipal Public Service Tax, Municipal Surcharge, Alachua County Public Service Tax, late fees, environmental fees, franchise fees, or any other applicable taxes, fees, rates or charges. All other terms and conditions under the otherwise applicable rate schedules shall apply, except as otherwise modified by this EDI rate rider program. 
(g)  Program duration. Participation in the EDI rate rider program shall terminate at the end of the fifth year of participation. The EDI rate rider program is not available for renewal and/or extension beyond the five-year term per location. 
(h)  Termination by city. The city may terminate the discount for failure to meet the qualifications of the EDI rate rider program. In the event that an EDI rate rider program participant fails to purchase the qualifying electric metered demand in any given billing cycle of at least 28 days, the city shall provide customer with notice of program termination. After the first notice of program termination, customer may apply for participation in the EDI rate rider program provided that customer has subsequently met the qualifying electric metered demand for three consecutive billing cycles. Upon the city's approval, the EDI rate rider program discount shall resume for the remainder of the original five-year term. Upon any second notice of program termination, the EDI rate rider program discount shall not be reinstated and shall be discontinued effective immediately. 
(i)  Termination by customer. Customer may elect to voluntarily terminate participation in the EDI rate rider program by providing the city with written notice of such termination. Upon the city's receipt of such notice, the customer is no longer entitled to any discounts provided pursuant to the EDI rate rider program. 
(j)  District cooling provisions. If a customer that is currently connected to the city's district cooling network would have met the requirements for participation in the EDI rate rider program, but for such customer's connection to the city's district cooling network, the customer shall be eligible for participation in the EDI rate rider program. The electric account for the city's district cooling network associated with the qualifying electric metered demand will receive the same applicable EDI rate rider program discount. For purposes of calculating eligibility, the customer's total metered demand will be determined by adding such customer's monthly electric kWh metered demand to their monthly chilled water ton per hour multiplied by 0.9 kW per ton. 
(Ord. No. 130576 , § 2, 11-6-14)  
Secs. 27-39—27-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 2-376 et seq.; health and sanitation, Ch. 11.5; recycling centers, § 30-106 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 27-71. - Purpose. 
This article is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The regulations, authority and rates established in this article are for the purpose of providing a solid waste collection and disposal program at a reasonable cost and promoting recycling by both residential and commercial customers. 
(Code 1960, § 28-22; Ord. No. 3807, § 1, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96)  
Sec. 27-72. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms are herewith defined: 
Applicant shall mean 
(a)  a person applying to the city for a franchise required to provide commercial service or collect construction and demolition debris within the city for hire, remuneration or other consideration: or 
(b)  a person applying to the city for a registration certificate required to collect, process, convey or transport recovered materials within the city for hire, remuneration or other consideration. 
Appropriate disposal and/or recycling site shall mean a place that is properly zoned, permitted, registered or licensed in accordance with all applicable local and state laws for the disposal of solid waste and/or the processing of recyclable materials that have been collected by commercial franchisees or registrants. 
Cart shall mean a serial-numbered, two-wheeled container with attached lid and handle, available in approximately 30, 60, and 90 gallon sizes, supplied and distributed by the solid waste collector. 
Certified recovered materials dealer shall mean a dealer certified as provided in F.S. § 403.7046. 
Commercial customer shall mean any person who receives commercial service. 
Commercial franchisee shall mean a person who has filed an application with, and received a franchise from, the city to provide one or more of the following services: 
(a)  commercial service; 
(b)  collection of construction and demolition debris. 
Commercial generator shall mean a person who is eligible to receive commercial service under this article and who is the point of origination of solid waste or recovered materials. 
Commercial service shall mean pickup of garbage and trash, but excluding hazardous waste, biomedical waste and yard trash, provided by a commercial franchisee to one of the following: 
(1)  a licensed mobile home park exceeding four dwelling units: 
(2)  multi-family residences exceeding four dwelling units under one common roof: 
(3)  any residential property that has opted-out of residential service under the terms of this article and is eligible to receive commercially collected residential service: 
(4)  business, commercial or industrial enterprises of all types licensed to do business in the city. 
Commercial service container shall mean an industry-standard container constructed of non-absorbent material, with or without a cover, made for mechanized pickup. 
Commercially-collected residential service shall mean the collection of solid waste, other than hazardous waste and bio-medical waste, provided to persons occupying residential dwelling units in buildings with five or more dwelling units within the city and persons occupying residential dwelling units in buildings with two to four dwelling units within the city who have been allowed by the city to opt-out of residential service. 
Compactor shall mean any container that has a compaction mechanism. 
Construction and demolition debris shall mean materials generally considered to be not water soluble nonhazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt roofing material, pipe, gypsum wallboard, and lumber, from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing or land development operations for a construction project, including such debris from construction of structures at a site remote from the construction or demolition project site. Mixing of construction and demolition debris with other types of solid waste, including material from a construction or demolition site which is not from the actual construction or destruction of a structure will cause it to be classified as other than construction and demolition debris. 
Contractor shall mean the firm with whom the city has contracted to provide residential service. 
Curbside shall mean the designated physical location for the placement of solid waste accumulations intended for residential service collection and disposal. This designated location shall be as near as possible to the traveled streets or alley normally serviced by the contractor's collection vehicles, but in no case upon such street or alley. The intention of a curbside designation is to allow collection by waste control personnel in a rapid manner with walking or reaching minimized. In all cases, the city manager or designee shall have the authority to approve or specify the precise location for such curbside placement. 
Customer shall mean the person, organization or corporation responsible for payment of all residential, commercial or commercially-collected residential services used at a specific location, and further defined as that person, organization or corporation who signed the utility application or commercial service contract requesting that services be made available at the specific location and thereby agreeing to pay for all usage of such services occurring at the location. 
De minimus quantity shall mean 
(a)  no more than 15 percent by volume of designated recyclable materials in a solid waste load delivered to a city facility or a facility under contract with the city or in a solid waste container at point of generation; or 
(b)  no more than 15 percent by volume non-putrescible and no more than five percent by volume putrescible solid waste in a recovered material container at the point of generation. 
Designated recyclable materials shall mean those recyclable materials that are designated in writing by the city manager or designee as potential recovered materials. 
Dwelling unit shall mean a living unit, house, mobile home, apartment or building used primarily for human habitation. 
Garbage shall mean all putrescible waste, which generally includes, but is not limited to, kitchen and table food waste, animal, vegetable, food or any organic waste that is attendant with, or results from, the storage, preparation, cooking or handling of food materials whether attributed to residential or commercial activities. 
Living unit shall mean a place where people reside on a nontransient basis, containing a room or room comprising the essential elements of a single housekeeping unit. Each separate facility for the preparation, storage and keeping of food for consumption within the premises shall be considered a separate living unit. 
Pre-paid garbage disposal bag shall mean a plastic bag, approximately 30 gallons in size, sold by the contractor solid waste collector or by a distributor approved by the city, for use in disposing of solid waste. 
Person shall mean an individual, group of persons, firm, corporation, association, organization, syndicate or business trust. 
Rates shall mean those charges and fees adopted by the city commission by resolution, ordinance or contract for the management of solid waste and recovered materials, including those charges and fees collected by commercial franchisees, except those charged by registrants to commercial generators and generators of construction and demolition debris. 
Recovered materials shall mean metal, paper, glass, plastic, textile or rubber materials that have known recycling potential, can be feasibly recycled and have been diverted and source separated or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use or reuse as raw materials, whether or not the materials require subsequent processing or separation from each other, but does not include materials destined for any use that constitutes disposal. Recovered materials as described above are not solid waste. 
Registrant shall be a person who has made application with the city to collect, transport, convey or process recovered materials in the city and has subsequently received a registration certificate from the city. 
Residential service shall mean the solid waste collection service provided to persons occupying residential dwelling units in buildings with four or fewer dwelling units within the city. 
Solid waste shall mean sludge unregulated under the federal Clean Water Act or Clean Air Act, sludge from a waste treatment works, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, or garbage, trash, special waste, or other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, agricultural or governmental operations. Recovered materials as defined in this article are not solid waste. 
Solid waste regulations shall mean those regulations prescribed by this article along with any administrative rules, procedures and contracts as may be established for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article. 
Source separated shall describe those recovered materials separated from solid waste (except other recovered materials or de minimus amount of solid waste) where the recovered materials and solid waste are generated. 
Trash shall mean accumulations of paper, magazines, packaging, containers, sweepings and all other accumulations of a nature other than garbage and lawn trash, and excluding designated recyclable materials, which are usual to housekeeping and the operation of stores, offices and other business places. 
Yard trash shall mean all accumulations of grass, leaves, shrubbery, vines, tree branches and trimmings which are normally associated with the care and maintenance of landscaping. 
(Code 1960, § 28-23; Ord. No. 4018, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 4032, § 1, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 4071, § 1, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 950798, § 1, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 27-73. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following: 
(1)  To place or cause to be placed any garbage or trash upon the property of another; 
(2)  To collect or transport solid waste for hire or for remuneration or any other form of consideration without first being granted a commercial franchise except as follows: 
(a)  Commercial generators transporting their own solid waste; and 
(b)  Persons transporting their own solid waste generated by their own dwelling unit or establishment to an appropriate disposal site; 
(3)  To collect or transport construction and demolition debris for hire or for remuneration or any other form of consideration without first being granted a construction and demolition debris franchise except as follows: 
(a)  Commercial generators transporting their own debris; 
(b)  Persons secondarily providing removal of debris created as a result of other primary services performed by those persons as described in subsection (11) below. Subcontractors who provide primarily collection or transport services shall not qualify for this exemption. 
(4)  To collect, process, convey or transport recovered materials in the city without having registered with the city, except as follows: 
(a)  Persons whose primary business is freight transport that may involve the intermittent transport of recovered materials: 
(b)  Commercial generators transporting their own recovered materials; and 
(c)  Persons transporting their own recovered materials generated by their own dwelling unit or establishment to an appropriate recycling site: 
(5)  To collect recovered materials from a solid waste container used by a consumer or commercial customer receiving service from a franchisee, franchise or registrant, after the consumer or commercial customer places the container and recovered materials at the curb or designated area for collection, except as permitted by the city on an emergency interim basis as part of the city's recycling program when the city manager or designee determines that it is necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare: 
(6)  To allow solid waste or recovered materials to spill, blow or drop from any vehicle on any road or to transport any solid waste or recovered material over any public road unless the solid waste or recovered material is securely tied or covered so as to prevent leakage or spillage onto the road; 
(7)  To place or store solid waste on any property for a period in excess of one week, unless it is securely contained or covered. 
(8)  To deposit or dispose of any garbage or trash on the paved or traveled portion of any public street, or any alleyway, sidewalk, bike path, stream, ditch, river, pond, bay, creek, park, other right-of-way or public place in the city except at areas as may be designated by the city. 
(9)  To deposit, dump or dispose of any garbage or trash at, upon or in any incinerator or landfill within the city without first obtaining the permission of the custodian thereof; 
(10)  To burn any garbage or trash within the city, except at designated incinerators or landfills, without first obtaining a permit from the city; 
(11)  To produce or accumulate any construction and demolition debris, tree branches or similar debris while acting in the capacity of a contractor (such as a tree surgeon, landscaper or building contractor), without removal of the same to a designated disposal area; 
(12)  To allow any scattered garbage or trash to remain at or near the curbside, or to fail to remove any windblown or animal scattered garbage or trash from a public area and right-of-way which have blown or otherwise scattered from the person's dwelling unit curbside collection point; 
(13)  To place any solid waste or recyclable materials out for collection by any alley service drive, easement or right-of-way not serviced by collection trucks; 
(14)  To place any solid waste or recyclable materials out for collection adjacent to the street if collection trucks service the area from an established alley; 
(15)  To place any solid waste or recyclable materials in an underground container for pickup; 
(16)  To do any act prohibited or to fail to do any act required by the solid waste regulations of the city. 
(17)  To deposit any hazardous waste as defined in F.S. § 403.703, in any cart or commercial service container; 
(18)  To place or cause to be placed any garbage, trash, recyclable materials or other solid waste in the cart or commercial service container belonging to another without proper authority; 
(19)  To remove any materials, without proper authority, from any container belonging to another which contains materials set out for recycling; 
(20)  To mix yard trash with normal solid waste loads, whether for residential or commercial service. 
(Code 1960, § 28-24; Ord. No. 3393, § 1, 1-25-88; Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 5-18-92; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96)  
Sec. 27-74. - City manager to make regulations; enforce article. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of collection, type and location of collection containers and other such matters pertaining to the storage, collection, conveyance and disposal as necessary and to change or modify the same after reasonable notice to affected persons. 
(b)  The city manager or designee is responsible for the enforcement of regulations regarding storage, collection, conveyance and disposal of all solid waste and recyclable materials generated within the city, including accumulations of same that may be in violation of this article or other solid waste regulations. A notification of violation will be provided and correction of the violation shall be made in the time specified by the notice; however, failing correction, the city is hereby authorized to collect and dispose of the material causing the violation and to bill the customer or owner of record of the property for the cost of providing this additional collection and disposal service. 
(Code 1960, § 28-25; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96)  
Sec. 27-75. - Commercial service. 
(a)  Provided: Commercial service shall be provided by collectors authorized to provide such service under a franchise with the city to persons that do not qualify to receive residential service. Collection of designated recyclable materials shall be provided by registrants, including franchisees who are registrants. 
(b)  Collection frequency and method: Commercial generators or commercially-collected residential service customers shall enter into an agreement with a franchisee of the city for the frequency and method of refuse collection. Such service shall be received no less than one time per week with no exception for holidays, except that collection service scheduled to occur on a holiday may be rescheduled with written notice to the customer as long as minimum frequency is met. Collection service provided to compactors is exempt from this minimum frequency. When necessary to protect the public health or to enforce the purpose of this article, the city manager or designee shall have the authority to stipulate the frequency of collection. Service shall consist of the mechanical dumping of commercial containers capable of being unloaded by proper equipment; or a manual hand service dumping of containers located at agreed upon sites upon the property; or other levels of service as may be required or agreed to. If the franchisee fails to perform collection according to the contract, the customer shall have 30 days from the first such failure to enter into an agreement with another franchisee before being cited for violation of this subsection. 
(c)  Preparation and storage. Storage containers shall be drained of free liquids prior to accumulation for collection. Storage areas and areas adjacent to the storage area shall be maintained by the customer in a neat, sanitary and sightly manner. Customers are responsible for maintaining the accessibility to storage containers or areas. If pickups are missed due to customer's failure to maintain accessibility, and unsanitary or unsightly conditions result, the customer shall be in violation of this article. All storage containers that are to be picked up by collection trucks must be approved by the city as meeting acceptable standards established by the city. Readily apparent damage to storage areas or container enclosures, normal wear and tear excepted, caused by the collector driver shall be reported by the driver to the customer prior to leaving the collection area if the business or management office is open and if not, by radio to the contractor's office, and personnel from the office will then contact the customer at the earliest possible time. 
(d)  Commercial service containers. The following commercial service container standards are guidelines under which the owners of containers, as well as the lessees of containers, will conform in order to ensure a healthy and aesthetically pleasing environment for the citizens of the city: 
(1)  Each container must be kept painted in good condition at all times, unless the container is made of aluminum, stainless steel or other similar materials that do not readily accept painting. 
(2)  Every container will be clearly marked on the front of the container with the following information: 
a.  A serial or property control number; 
b.  "NO PARKING," "UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY OR USE PROHIBITED," AND "DEPOSITING OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS OR EXPLOSIVES PROHIBITED" labeled conspicuously across its front. 
(3)  Each container must be free of rust holes, broken hinges or broken door fasteners and will have solid substantial bottoms with at least one drain hole for purposes of cleanout. 
(4)  All necessary containers will have properly fitting lids and or side door(s) in place that close automatically when lifted and that will prevent the entry of rodents, snakes and other animals, and allow for opening and closing action during the emptying cycle. Containers used for storage of materials other than garbage must meet the same criteria, except that lids or covers may not be required if the city manager or designee determines that it does not pose a threat to the health, welfare or safety of the citizens, or cleanliness of the container site or adjacent community. 
(5)  Containers at commercial locations are not to be filled to a height exceeding the level of the highest portion of the container body or rim. This limitation applies to dumpsters, cans, bins or any other method employed for storage. Customers must arrange for items such as furniture, appliances, construction and demolition debris or any material not considered a part of the customer's normal collection service to be picked up within seven days of being placed for collection. If these items are not picked up within seven days of being placed for collection, the city manager or designee may provide notice to the customer by hand delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested. If the customer has not removed the refuse within 24 hours after notification by the city, the city manager or designee may order such removal and all costs incurred shall be placed against the customer's utility account. At no time will any solid waste or storage containers be placed on the travel portions of any walk, street or alley within the city without prior authorization from the city manager or designee. 
(6)  The city waste control inspector shall notify the owners and/or lessees of containers not maintained in a condition of good repair or in violation of any provision of this section either by hand delivery of such notice or by sending notice by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall also post a notice in a conspicuous place on the premises. After notice is given in writing, the owner and/or lessee will have 24 hours in which to repair or replace any container that is a hazard during the unloading cycle and seven working days in which to repair or replace all other violations. 
(Code 1960, § 28-26; Ord. No. 3069, § 1, 10-15-84; Ord. No. 3174, § 1, 10-21-85; Ord. No. 3303, § 1, 11-24-86; Ord. No. 3328, § 1, 3-9-87; Ord. No. 3374, § 1, 9-28-87; Ord. No. 3410, § 1, 2-22-88; Ord. No. 3470, § 1, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 3531, § 1, 4-24-89; Ord. No. 3577, § 1, 10-9-89; Ord. No. 3648, § 1, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 4032, § 2, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96)  
Sec. 27-76. - Residential service. 
(a)  Provided. Residential service shall consist of curbside collection of all garbage and household trash, and an optional service of backyard collection of garbage and household trash. 
(b)  Preparation, storage, placement for collection. 
(1)  Garbage and household trash: 
a.  Each dwelling unit qualifying for residential service in the city shall be assigned a serial-numbered cart of the size requested by the occupant of the unit, or, if no size request is received, of the size determined by the city manager or designee. The occupant may exchange the cart for another of different size upon paying the fee as listed in Appendix A. Damaged and stolen carts will be replaced on request. 
b.  All garbage and household trash shall be drained of free liquids and stored for collection in the assigned cart, or in pre-paid garbage disposal bags, as accumulated. The cart shall not be filled above a height allowing the attached lid to be completely closed, nor shall the bags be filled such that they cannot be securely fastened shut or weigh over 40 pounds. The bags may be placed inside nondisposable containers. The assigned cart and the pre-paid garbage disposal bags shall be placed at the curb or roadside no earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the day preceding the scheduled collection day, and the emptied carts and nondisposable containers shall be removed from the curbside location not later than 9:00 p.m. of the day of collection. The carts and nondisposable containers shall be removed and kept, except during the hours permitted by this section for the placement of them for collection, at a location where they are not clearly visible from any public street. It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided for any owner or occupant to place, permit the placing of or allow the continued location of garbage and household trash containers in any location or at any times not provided for in this subsection. Garbage and household trash placed in containers other than the assigned cart or pre-paid approved garbage disposal bags will not be collected. Nondisposable or reusable containers intended not to be picked up by the collectors shall be clearly and appropriately identified. Anyone placing garbage or household trash in containers other than the assigned cart or pre-paid garbage disposal bags will be in violation of this article. 
c.  Any container, other than the assigned cart, that is allowed to remain at curbside or roadside at times other than those permitted by this section, and any container, other than the assigned cart, that has become damaged or deteriorated, may be impounded by the city. The owner of any such container so impounded shall be notified immediately in writing by the city by mail to the address where picked up or by placing a notice thereof in a conspicuous place on such premises, or both. The owner may redeem such impounded containers within 30 days after the same are impounded by the city by paying the charges in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. Any container not redeemed within the 30-day period may be used by the city in any manner as the city may determine in furtherance of the waste control program or may be sold to the highest bidder at a noticed public sale for each, which cash shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(2)  Yard trash. Yard trash that is properly bundled or containerized in such manner to enable one person to lift the trash in a single lifting movement to place same in the compaction truck, and which bundles or containers do not exceed 40 pounds in weight and five feet in length, will be collected at curb or roadside. If tree or shrubbery trimmings are not containerized they may be placed at curbside in a compact pile not containing any items exceeding 40 pounds in weight and five feet in length and will be picked up. Grass, leaves and pine straw must be containerized by either using disposable or reusable containers, and will be collected if properly placed for collection at curb or roadside. Nondisposable or reusable containers intended not to be picked up by the collectors shall be clearly and appropriately identified. Concrete, dirt, bricks, appliances, furniture or similar items are not considered yard trash, and will not be collected except by special service as described in section 27-77. 
(3)  Bin provided. Each dwelling unit shall be provided a bin for the purpose of storage and disposal of recyclable materials. Recyclable materials that meet the requirements set forth by the city manager or designee shall be collected from curb or roadside. Recyclable materials not fitting in the bin may be placed in nondisposable containers or paper bags and will be collected at curb or roadside. 
(c)  Responsibility for scattered garbage or trash. Customers are responsible for the cleanup from bags torn or cans spilled by animals, or otherwise spilled through no fault of the collectors. Collectors are not required to sweep, fork, shovel or otherwise clean up trash or garbage that has become scattered or is otherwise not readily picked up and placed in the compaction truck, including spillage resulting from overloaded containers. 
(d)  Backyard option and service fee exception. The residential service program will allow customers the option of requesting backyard collection. (This does not include yard trash.) Such requests must be made in writing to the city manager or designee 30 days in advance of the start of service and once requested, such service and associated fees shall remain in effect for a minimum of six months. Service charges for backyard service as specified in the schedule set out in Appendix A may be waived and the uniform curbside service charge applied where all occupants of the dwelling unit are physically incapacitated and unable to transport their cart and bin to the curb. Customers desiring backyard service at the curbside rate must be certified as to the necessity for this service by the city manager or designee who may impose such reasonable conditions as may be required for such service and certification. 
(e)  Service charges. In order to cover the direct cost, including but not limited to inspecting, billing, collecting, handling, hauling and disposal of solid waste, yard trash and recyclable materials, and indirect cost, including but not limited to administration, accounting, personnel, purchasing, legal and other staff or departmental services, service charges in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A shall be paid monthly to the city, which charge shall be included on the regular monthly statement for utility service. 
(f)  Residential service exclusion. 
(1)  Owners of buildings containing two to four residential dwelling units may petition the city to be excluded from residential service and allowed to contract for commercially-collected residential service. 
(2)  Petitions for exclusion shall be made to the city manager or designee. 
(3)  Petitions shall be made on city-provided forms, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Applicant's name. 
b.  Address of the property proposed to be excluded and number of dwelling units. 
c.  A copy of the proposed service agreement between the applicant and a franchised commercial provider, including the level and type of services to be provided and the number of dwelling units to be served. 
(4)  Upon receipt of a properly executed application and verification of the supporting documentation, the city manager or designee shall decide whether to grant the exclusion based on the following criteria: 
a.  Collection history (whether commercial or residential) 
b.  Accessibility of collection vehicles to property. 
c.  Available space for placement of carts. 
d.  Predominant use of property. 
e.  Safety. 
f.  Level of service requested by residents. 
(5)  The city manager or designee shall notify the applicant in writing of the decision. 
(6)  If the exclusion is approved, it shall be effective from the date specified by the city manager or designee until September 30, 2004, unless terminated earlier by the city manager or designee, or at the request of the property owner, due to changes in the contract between the city and its solid waste collector or change in circumstances concerning the property. 
(7)  If the exclusion is approved, the applicant must contract for recycling service specified in section 27-85. 
(Code 1960, § 28-27; Ord. No. 3069, § 2, 10-15-84; Ord. No. 3174, § 2, 10-21-85; Ord. No. 3303, § 2, 11-24-86; Ord. No. 3328, § 2, 3-9-87; Ord. No. 3374, § 2, 9-28-87; Ord. No. 3410, § 2, 2-22-88; Ord. No. 3470, § 2, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 3531, § 2, 4-24-89; Ord. No. 3577, § 2, 10-9-89; Ord. No. 3648, § 2, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 4032, § 3, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 4071, § 2, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 950798, § 2, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96; Ord. No. 990031, § 1, 6-28-99)  
Sec. 27-77. - Special service. 
(a)  Described. Any waste which, by reason of its bulk, shape or weight, cannot be placed in a container or bundled, or which exceeds the size and weight limitations of any section of this article, will be collected and disposed of by the contractor on an on-call basis. 
(b)  Scheduling and rates. Special collection will be scheduled at the earliest reasonable time by the contractor. The fee for special service collection and disposal will be arranged between the customer and the contractor. The contractor will bill directly for such services and collect a reasonable fee agreed to jointly by the contractor and the customer prior to the work being performed. 
(Code 1960, § 28-28; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96)  
Sec. 27-78. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3754, § 38, adopted Jan. 27, 1992, repealed former § 27-78, relative to combined monthly statements for all utilities and delinquencies, which derived from Code 1960, § 28-29 and Ord. No. 3493, § 3, adopted Nov. 21, 1988.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL SERVICE AND CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 27-79. - General provisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commence or engage in the business of providing containers for commercial service or providing commercial service or construction and demolition debris collection and disposal to properties in the city without a franchise issued by the city in accordance with this article. 
(b)  No franchise shall be awarded until the city determines that the franchisee is capable of complying with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Each franchise shall be subject to the charter of the city and this Code of Ordinances. Each franchise shall be subject to, and franchisees shall abide by, all present and future laws, regulations, orders of regulatory bodies, city code provisions and administrative rules applicable to the performance of the collection services hereunder. Each franchise shall obtain all licenses and permits presently required by federal, state and local governments, and as required from time to time. 
(d)  All commercial franchises issued on or after October 1, 1996, may be by contract, which may include, among other things, agreement on the disposal site for solid waste collected by the franchisee. 
(e)  Collection times shall be as follows: 
(1)  Each commercial franchisee shall make available daily (except Sunday) collection of solid waste. Collection shall begin no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and shall cease no later than 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, except that in areas of mixed residential and commercial occupancy collections shall begin no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and cease no later than 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(2)  Notwithstanding paragraph (e)(1), the city manager or designee may set other hours for the purpose of improving collection operations or safety, by the city first holding a neighborhood workshop to inform various residents, businesses and other stakeholders of the change being considered, and to solicit their input. The workshop will be held in a location generally near the subject area in a facility that is ADA compliant. The city will provide notification by mail to all owners of property and neighborhood associations within the area being considered as well as those within 400 feet of the perimeter of that area. The notices will be mailed at least 14 days before the workshop and the city will also advertise the workshop in a newspaper of general circulation at least 14 days before the date of the workshop. The workshop must start between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. on a weekday or between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on a weekend. The city shall prepare a written summary of the neighborhood meeting that includes a list of those in attendance, a summary of the issues discussed, and comments, concerns and suggestions by those in attendance. Any change in collection times shall be established in a written memorandum outlining the justification. All memoranda establishing collection times, and summaries of the neighborhood meetings, shall be retained on file by the solid waste division and made available to the public for inspection. These collection times should be reviewed periodically to determine whether the operational justification continues to exist. 
(3)  Notwithstanding paragraph (e)(1), the city manager or designee may authorize collection on Sunday where special needs of the customer make it necessary. In the event of an emergency, a franchisee may collect at times not allowed by this section, provided the city manager grants prior approval, to be later evidenced by a written memorandum. If no written memorandum is obtained, there shall be a presumption that the franchisee had not obtained prior approval. All written memoranda issued shall be retained on file by the solid waste division and made available to the public for inspection. 
(f)  Franchisee shall not be relieved of the obligation to promptly comply with any provision of the franchise by failure of the city to enforce compliance with the franchise. 
(g)  The franchise granted hereunder shall not be exclusive. The city reserves the right to grant similar rights or franchises to more than one person or corporation as well as the right in its own name to use its streets for purposes similar to or different from those allowed to franchisees hereunder. 
(h)  For all contracts between customers and commercial franchisees as of January 1, 1997, the franchisee shall pass through to its customers any savings realized through reduced service levels that the franchisee experiences due to the customers' participation in the mandatory recycling program. 
(i)  If a franchisee fails to perform its contract with any customer for longer than two weeks, the city may perform the work using its own equipment or assign the work to another franchisee, who shall be entitled to receive the revenue from the customer for work performed that would have gone to the defaulting franchisee. 
(j)  The franchisee shall submit to any load inspection program that the city may reasonably devise. 
(k)  Yard waste from a commercial generator or customer shall be collected separately from other solid waste. Each commercial franchisee shall inform all of its commercial customers of this requirement. 
(l)  A commercial franchisee shall respond to and, if feasible, resolve all complaints received by 12:00 noon on any business day by 5:00 p.m. of the same day and shall respond to and, if feasible, resolve all complaints received after 12:00 noon on any business day by 12:00 noon the next day. An emergency telephone number where the commercial franchisee can be reached shall be given to the city manager or designee. 
(m)  A commercial franchisee shall handle commercial service containers with reasonable care and return them to the approximate location from which they were collected. A commercial franchisee shall clean up all solid waste spilled during the collection operation. 
(n)  A commercial franchisee shall not be required to provide collection services when all appropriate disposal sites are closed or an emergency or imminent emergency exists, as determined by the city manager or designee. Collections shall resume on the instruction of the city manager or designee. 
(o)  A commercial franchisee shall not be deemed to be an agent of the city and shall be responsible for any losses or damages of any kind arising from its performance or nonperformance under its franchise. The franchisee shall defend at its own expense or reimburse the city for its defense, at the city's option, on any and all claims and suits brought against the city, its elected or appointed officers, employees, and agents resulting from the franchisee's performance or nonperformance of service pursuant to the franchise. 
(p)  Each commercial franchisee shall report to the city by December 15 of each year the percentage participation of its clients in commercial recycling and the amount of recycled material collected as a percentage of total solid waste collected from its customers for the year ending September 30. 
(q)  Each franchisee must provide the city with the location of the disposal site it uses for construction and demolition debris. 
(r)  In order to ensure that the franchisee provides a quality level of solid waste and recycling collection services, the following standards and fines are set. 
(1)  All complaints received by the city and reported to the franchisee shall be promptly resolved. Any complaint received by the franchisee shall be entered on a form approved by the city. All complaints received during the business day shall be transmitted on the approved form by 5:00 p.m. each business day. Any complaint received before noon shall be resolved the same business day. All other complaints shall be resolved by the end of the next business day. 
(2)  In the event legitimate complaints shall exceed two percent of the total customers served by the franchisee during any city fiscal year, or 0.5 percent of the total customers serviced by the franchisee during any calendar month, the city may seek fines for the following violation of this article, on a per incident basis, when committed by the franchisee: 
a.  Commingling solid waste with vegetative waste and/or recyclable materials. 
b.  Failure to replace damaged container within seven days of notification (48 hours for commercially collected residential customers). 
c.  Throwing of garbage cans or recycling containers. 
d.  Failure to transmit commercial complaint forms as specified in this subsection. 
e.  Failure to repair damage to customer's property. 
(3)  The city may seek fines for the following violations of the article, on a per day basis, when committed by the franchisee: 
a.  Failure to provide clean, safe, sanitary equipment. 
b.  Failure to maintain required office hours. 
c.  Failure to maintain proper licenses. 
d.  Failure to display franchisee name and phone number on equipment or containers. 
e.  Failure to collect solid waste upon notification by city. Franchisee will also be charged the cost incurred by the city if city personnel are required to collect the solid waste due to such failure. 
f.  Using improper truck to service commercial or commercially collected residential customer solid waste. 
g.  Failure to provide monthly recycling reports by the 30th day after each month in the format specified by the city. 
h.  Collection outside hours specified in section 27-79. 
i.  Failure to clean up spillage of any substance required to be cleaned up pursuant to federal, state or local laws, rules or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4018, § 2, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96; Ord. No. 990306, § 1, 9-27-99; Ord. No. 040220, § 1, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 080102, § 1, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 160709 , § 1, 10-5-17)  
Sec. 27-79.1. - Term of franchise. 
Any new franchise issued or renewal of an existing franchise shall be by application. The term of any new or renewal franchise shall extend until 11:59 p.m. on September 30 of each year unless forfeited or revoked sooner as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 040220, § 1, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 080102, § 2, 11-6-08)  
Sec. 27-80. - Franchise fees. 
(a)  Amount of fee. 
(1)  The commercial franchisee providing commercial service shall pay as compensation to the city, for the rights and benefits granted hereunder, a monthly fee as described in Appendix A. For purposes of the calculation stated as Appendix A, gross revenues shall consist of all revenues from the sale or lease of containers, all revenues from garbage and trash collection services, all disposal billed, late fees, bad debt recoveries and other fees collected from customers, with no deductions except for bad debts actually written off. 
(2)  The commercial franchisee providing construction and demolition debris collection service shall pay as compensation to the city, for the rights and benefits granted hereunder, an annual fee calculated based on all vehicles owned, leased, or otherwise used in construction and demolition debris collection service as described in Appendix A. 
(3)  Commercial franchisees providing both commercial service and construction and demolition debris collection service shall pay both fees described in subsections (1) and (2) above, but shall not be required to pay the fees in Appendix A deriving from subsection (2) above for vehicles which are not intended and shall never be used to haul construction and demolition debris. 
(b)  Compensation payments for commercial service shall be due 20 days after the end of each month, accompanied by statements of gross revenues as prescribed by the city's finance department, and shall be paid directly to the city's finance department. Statements and remittances shall be accepted as timely if postmarked on or before the 20th day of the month; if the 20th day falls upon a Saturday, Sunday or federal or state holiday, statements and remittances shall be accepted as timely if postmarked on the next succeeding workday. Compensation payments for construction and demolition debris collection service shall be due on October 15 of each year, and will be accepted as timely if postmarked on or before October 15, or the next succeeding workday if October 15 falls upon a Saturday or Sunday or state or federal holiday. Payments not received by the due date shall be assessed interest at the rate of one percent per month compounded monthly from the due date. 
(c)  All amounts paid shall be subject to confirmation and recomputation by the city. An acceptance of payment shall not be construed as an accord that the amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable. 
(d)  Billing maneuvers that have the effect of reducing or avoiding the payment of franchise fees are expressly prohibited and will be cause for termination of the franchise, as well as punishment as provided by section 1-9. 
(e)  Payment of this franchise fee shall not exempt the commercial franchisee from the payment of any other license fee, tax or charge on the business, occupation, property or income of the franchisee that may be imposed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4018, § 2, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96; Ord. No. 970352, § 2, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 000117, § 1, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 050120, § 8, 9-26-05; Ord. No. 080102, § 3, 11-6-08)  
Sec. 27-81. - Books, records and reporting requirements. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to review all records maintained by a franchise providing commercial service concerning its franchise on 30 days' written notice. 
(b)  Each commercial franchisee providing commercial service shall file written monthly reports within 30 days after the end of each month with the city manager or designee. The report shall contain an accurate statement of all receipts under the franchise from all sources, the number of accounts by service level, the quantities of garbage and trash collected and the number of routes for garbage and trash collection. 
(c)  Each commercial franchisee providing commercial service shall file an annual report including a schedule of total gross revenues as defined in section 27-80(a). This annual report shall be examined by an independent certified public accountant ("auditor") to certify that the computation of gross revenue used to calculate franchise fees remitted is in accordance with the terms of the franchise. The auditor's report shall state that the examination was performed in accordance with professional standards established by the AICPA and shall be filed with the city manager or designee within 120 days of the franchisee's year end. 
(d)  Each commercial franchisee shall submit by September 1 of each year an updated list of the type, number and complete description of all equipment to be used for providing service pursuant to this division. Vehicles placed into service since the preceding September 1 shall have the in-service dates noted, and vehicles no longer in service shall have the retirement dates noted. Commercial and demolition debris collection service franchisees will be invoiced for all net increases in vehicles operating during the prior year on a prorated basis, as well as invoiced for vehicles intended to be operated during the coming year. 
(Ord. No. 4018, § 2, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96; Ord. No. 000117, § 2, 11-27-00)  
Sec. 27-82. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Applications for a franchise shall be made to the city manager or designee on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the city. Application may be made for one or both of the following types of franchise: 
(1)  Commercial limited to collection of garbage and trash from commercially-collected residential dwellings and collection or processing of garbage and trash from commercial generators. 
(2)  Construction and demolition limited to collection and disposal of construction and demolition debris. 
(b)  Application forms will require, at a minimum, the following information and supporting documents. 
(1)  If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name(s) and business address(es) of the principal officers and stockholders and other persons having financial or controlling interest in the partnership or corporation; provided, however, that if the corporation is a publicly owned corporation having more than 25 shareholders, then only the names and business addresses of the local managing officers shall be required. 
(2)  Criminal convictions, including withheld adjudication and plea of nolo contendere for any felonies of the applicant if an individual, or any person having any controlling interest in a firm, corporation, partnership, association or organization making application, if requested by the city manager or designee. 
(3)  A statement of whether such applicant operates or has operated a solid waste collection business in this or any other state or territory under a franchise, permit or license; and if so, where, and whether such franchise, permit or license has ever been revoked or suspended and the reasons therefor. 
(4)  Proof that corporation is in good standing in the state of corporation, if applicant is a corporation, and, if not a Florida corporation, that applicant is qualified to do business in the State of Florida. If applicant is other than a corporation and is operating under a fictitious name, applicant shall be required to submit information that such fictitious name is registered and held by applicant. 
(5)  A list of the type, number and complete description of all equipment to be used by the applicant for providing service pursuant to this division. The city manager or designee may conduct an inspection of all equipment utilized in providing the services as outlined in the franchise to determine that the franchise possesses equipment capable of providing safe and efficient services. 
(6)  The applicant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance as specified herein and shall furnish a comprehensive general liability policy to the city manager or designee and also file with the city manager or designee a certificate of insurance for all policies written in the applicant's name. The applicant shall carry in its own name a policy covering its operations in an amount not less than $200,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and $200,000.00 per occurrence for property damage regarding comprehensive general liability. The applicant shall carry in its own name a policy covering its operation in an amount not less than $100,000.00 per person, $200,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury, and $50,000.00 per occurrence for property damage liability regarding automobile liability insurance. 
(7)  The insurance policies shall be filed in the office of the city manager or designee and shall remain on file so long as the franchisee operates a franchise. 
(8)  The applicant shall pay the city a nonrefundable application fee, as specified in Appendix A, at the time application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 4018, § 2, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96)  
Sec. 27-83. - Denial of application; suspension or revocation of franchise; right of appeal. 
(a)  Upon a finding of just cause, the city manager or designee shall deny a franchise in the case of application for new or renewed franchises, and suspend or revoke a franchise for a specified period of time in the case of previously issued franchises. Just cause shall include but not be limited to a failure to meet the requirements of this article, violation of any of the provisions of this article or any of the ordinances of the city, or the laws of the United States or the state of Florida, the violations of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer solid waste collection services to the public. 
(b)  Prior to denial, suspension or revocation, the applicant or holder shall be given reasonable notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to present to the city manager or designee evidence as to why the franchise should not be denied, revoked or suspended. The notice of intention shall be served upon the applicant or franchisee by registered mail or personal service. 
(c)  Any applicant or franchisee whose franchise is denied, suspended or revoked by the city manager or designee may appeal the decision to the city commission. The appeal shall be taken by filing written notice thereof, in duplicate, with the clerk of the commission within ten days after the decision of the city manager or designee. The clerk of the commission shall notify the city manager of the appeal and the city manager or designee shall forthwith transmit to the clerk copies of all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed is based. The clerk of the commission shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled city commission meeting which is not less than ten days from the date of the filing of the appeal. The city commission shall review the record and decide whether the decision of the city manager was based on competent, substantial evidence. It [If] the commission finds competent, substantial evidence for the city manager's decision, it will uphold the manager's decision; otherwise, it will reverse the manager's decision. The decision of the city commission shall constitute final administrative action. 
(Ord. No. 4018, § 2, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96)  
Sec. 27-84. - Penalties for violation. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this division shall be punished as provided by section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 4018, § 2, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 951263, § 1, 8-12-96)  
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL RECYCLING 
 
Sec. 27-85. - Mandatory commercial recycling established. 
(a)  Commercial generators. Beginning January 1, 1997, or such later date as designated by the city manager or designee, all commercial generators and generators of construction and demolition debris shall separate designated recycling materials and make them available for recycling. The commercial generator or generator of construction and demolition debris may utilize a registrant, which includes a commercial franchisee who has obtained a registration, to collect the recycled materials. Failure to separate the designated recyclable materials, except for de minimus amounts as determined by the city manager or designee, from solid waste loads delivered to a city facility, a facility under contract with the city or a solid waste container at point of generation will subject the commercial generator to civil citation as provided in sections 2-336 through 2-339 of this Code and may, in addition, result in a surcharge as provided in subsection (c) below. 
(b)  [Notice of noncompliant status.] Before a civil citation is issued, or a surcharge can be imposed, the commercial generator must be issued a notice advising of its noncompliant status. The notice shall provide a compliance date. If upon subsequent inspection the commercial generator is still not in compliance a civil citation will be issued. 
(c)  [Separation and collection or special pick-up by city.] If the city undertakes the separation and collection of the recycled materials or otherwise performs a special pick-up of garbage or trash because a commercial generator fails to separate the designated recyclable materials, except for de minimus amounts as determined by the city manager or designee, from solid waste loads delivered to a city facility, a facility under contract with the city or a solid waste container at point of generation, the city may have it removed and any expenses incurred will be included as a surcharge in the utility bill of the commercial generator. 
(d)  Appeal. A commercial establishment may appeal the imposition of a surcharge to the city manager or designee within 15 calendar days of such imposition. The notice of appeal shall include all information and grounds the commercial generator wants to be considered by the city manager or designee as to why the surcharge should not be imposed. The manager or designee shall have 15 calendar days to affirm or abate the surcharge. The determination of the manager or designee shall be final. 
(e)  Commercially-collected residential. All commercially-collected residential units shall establish a recycling program that includes recycling of all designated recyclable materials and is convenient and accessible to the residents by January 1, 1997. 
(f)  Location of containers. All recovered materials shall be placed in an appropriate industry standard container. Where garbage cans are used, they shall be placed at the roadside or at such other single collection point as may be agreed to between the registrant and the customer. All containers shall be kept in a safe, accessible location as designated or approved by the city and agreed to by the registrant and customer. 
(g)  Maintenance of containers. If a registrant provides recovered material containers to its customers, the registrant will be responsible for the proper maintenance of the container. Customers that acquire their own containers from any other source are responsible for the proper maintenance of the container, except that damage done by the registrant shall be the responsibility of the registrant; and for ensuring that the container can be serviced by the registrant's equipment. 
(h)  Proof of participation in recycling program. A commercial generator, generator of construction and demolition debris or owner of a commercially-collected residential property shall produce proof of a valid and current contract with a registrant or receipts for delivery of recovered materials to an approved site, upon request of the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 951263, § 2, 8-12-96; Ord. No. 080481, § 1, 6-16-11)  
Sec. 27-86. - Registration of recovered materials collectors. 
(a)  Registration required. On and after October 1, 1996, no person, including a commercial franchisee, shall collect, transport, convey or process recovered materials in the city without a registration certificate from the city. Each commercial franchise holder as of October 1, 1996, who desires to collect recovered materials as part of the commercial recycling program shall be granted a registration certificate upon filling out an application and providing the necessary documentation. No application fee will be required until such time as the commercial franchise would have terminated had it not been extended by subsection 27-79.1. 
(b)  Application for certificate. 
(1)  Applications for registration shall be obtained from and returned to the department of solid waste. 
(2)  The applicant shall state whether it is a processor, a transporter, or both. 
(3)  Requested information on the application shall be limited to that information required by F.S. § 403.7046. 
(4)  The application must be accompanied by 
a.  a copy of state certification as required by F.S. § 403.7046; 
b.  disclosure of ownership as set forth below; and 
c.  proof of insurance as set forth below. 
(c)  Renewal of registration. The certificate of registration may be valid for five years, and may be renewed up to two times upon 
(1)  disclosure of ownership as set forth below; 
(2)  proof of insurance as set forth below as of the time of renewal; and 
(3)  proof that the registrant is still providing service to customers. 
(d)  Operating requirements for registrants. Persons collecting, transporting, conveying or processing recovered materials in the city shall comply with the following operating requirements: 
(1)  Disclosure of ownership. Each registrant shall annually provide two copies of a notarized statement disclosing the names of its owners, general and limited partners, or corporate or registered name under which it will conduct its business as authorized by this article. 
(2)  Response to complaint. Each registrant shall be responsible for responding to any and all complaints which involve registrant's actions that create a nuisance or have the potential to create a nuisance. Response shall be within 24 hours of the complaint, or by 5 p.m. Monday if the complaint was received during a weekend. 
(3)  Clean-up. A registrant shall handle recovered materials containers with reasonable care and return them to the approximate location from which they were collected. A registrant shall clean up all materials spilled during its collection operation. 
(4)  Emergencies. A registrant shall not be required to provide collection services when all appropriate recycling sites are closed or a city emergency or imminent emergency exists, as determined by the city manager or designee. Collections shall resume on the instruction of the city manager or designee. 
(5)  Non-agency. A registrant shall not be deemed an agent of the city and shall be responsible for any losses or damages of any kind arising from its performance or nonperformance under its registration. The registrant shall defend at its own expense or reimburse the city for its defense, at the city's option, of any and all claims and suits brought against the city, its elected or appointed officers, employees, and agents resulting from the registrant's performance or nonperformance of service pursuant to the registration. 
(6)  Trucks. A registrant shall use trucks that are capable of preventing spillage or accidental release of recovered material during transport. 
(7)  Insurance. A registrant shall purchase and maintain the types and amounts of insurance set forth below from companies authorized to do business in the State of Florida. The city shall be named as an additional insured on the general liability insurance if the registrant utilizes city facilities. Failure to maintain insurance shall result in revocation of registration. 
a.  General liability insurance - $500,000.00 per occurrence if the registrant utilizes city facilities 
b.  Commercial motor vehicle insurance as required by F.S. Ch. 627. 
c.  Workers compensation as required by F.S. Ch. 440. 
(8)  Other laws, rules and regulations. A registrant shall procure at its own expense all local, state and federal franchises, certificates, permits or other authorizations necessary for the conduct of its operations. A registrant and its employees, officers and agents shall comply with all relevant local, state, and federal laws, rules and regulations, orders and mandatory guidelines applying to the collection or processing services being rendered. 
(9)  Effect of certificate. Issuance of a registration certificate by the city shall not be deemed to be a waiver of any applicable local, state or federal law or regulation, including but not limited to zoning or planning regulations, with respect to a recycling operation of any kind, nor shall it create any vested right to own or operate any type of recycling operation. 
(10)  Hours of operation. A registrant shall make available daily (except Sunday) collection of designated recyclable materials. Collection shall begin no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and shall cease no later than 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, except in areas of mixed residential and commercial occupancy where collections shall begin no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and shall cease no later than 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. The city manager or designee may authorize collection on Sunday where special needs of the customer make it necessary. 
(e)  Separation of residential and commercial materials. Curbside collection of designated recyclable materials from commercial generators shall be allowed only with prior approval of the city manager or designee, when considering a request to provide curbside collection, the city manager or designee shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Accessibility of collection vehicles to property. 
(2)  Available space for placement of containers. 
(3)  Predominant use of property. 
(4)  Safety. 
(f)  Delivery of materials. All recovered materials shall be delivered to a recovered materials dealer that has been certified by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or subsequent responsible agency, and the city. 
(g)  Reports. The registrant shall submit to the city manager or designee reports as authorized by F.S. § 403.7046, and the regulations promulgated pursuant to the authority stated in statute. 
(Ord. No. 951263, § 2, 8-12-96; Ord. No. 040220, § 3, 9-27-04)  
Sec. 27-87. - Revocation of registration. 
(a)  Upon a finding of just cause, the city manager or designee shall deny a registration in the case of application for new or renewed registration, and suspend or revoke a registration for a specified period of time in the case of previously issued registration. Just cause shall be consistent and repeated violation of state or local laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations relating to the applicant's or registrant's operation; or loss of state certification as a recovered materials dealer. 
(b)  Prior to denial, suspension or revocation, the applicant or registrant shall be given reasonable notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to present to the city manager or designee evidence as to why the registration should not be denied, revoked or suspended. The notice of intention shall be served upon the applicant or registrant by registered mail or personal service. 
(c)  Any applicant or registrant whose registration is denied, suspended or revoked by the city manager or designee may appeal the decision to the city commission. The appeal shall be taken by filing written notice thereof, in duplicate, with the clerk of the commission within ten days after the decision of the city manager or designee. The clerk shall inform the city manager of the appeal, and the city manager or designee shall forthwith transmit to the clerk copies of all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed is based. The clerk of the commission shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled city commission meeting which is not less than ten days from the date of the filing of the appeal. The city commission shall review the record and decide whether the decision of the city manager was based on competent, substantial evidence. It [If] the commission finds competent, substantial evidence for the city manager's decision, it will uphold the manager's decision; otherwise, it will reverse the manager's decision. The decision of the city commission shall constitute final administrative action. 
(Ord. No. 951263, § 2, 8-12-96)  
Sec. 27-88. - Penalties for violation. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this division shall be punished as provided by section 1-9 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 951263, § 2, 8-12-96)  
DIVISION 4. - EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE CONTAINERS AND SINGLE-USE CARRY OUT PLASTIC BAGS 
 
Sec. 27-89. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Expanded polystyrene containers means plates, bowls, cups, containers, lids, trays, coolers, ice chests, food containers and all similar articles that consist of blown polystyrene and expanded and extruded foams that are thermoplastic petrochemical materials utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques including but not limited to fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead foam), injection molding, foam molding and extrusion-blown molding (extruded foam polystyrene). 
Food service provider means a person or entity that provides food directly to the consumer, regardless of whether such food is provided free of charge or sold, or whether consumption occurs on or off premises, or whether the food is provided from a building, pushcart, stand or vehicle. Food service providers include, but are not limited to, restaurants, cafés, sidewalk cafés, delicatessens, coffee shops, grocery stores, markets, supermarkets, drug stores, pharmacies, bakeries, caterers, gas stations, vending or food trucks or carts and cafeterias. 
Retail establishment means any person or entity engaged in the retail sale of goods. Retail establishment includes any supermarket, grocery store, convenience store, shop, service station, restaurant, farmers' market vendor, and any other sales outlet where a customer can directly purchase goods, materials, and products. 
Single-use carry out plastic bag means a bag provided to a customer, typically at the point of sale or distribution, for the purpose of transporting items, which is made predominantly of plastic derived from petroleum or a biologically-based source. 
Special event permittee means any entity or person, and their subcontractors, agents or affiliates, who has been issued a special event permit by the city for a special event on city property, in a city facility or in the city's right-of-way, for the promotion or sale of their products and/or business. 
(Ord. No. 170487 , § 1, 1-17-19)  
Sec. 27-90. - Prohibition on use of expanded polystyrene and single-use carry out plastic bags. 
(a)  Food service providers and retail establishments shall not sell, use, offer for sale or use, or provide food or beverage in expanded polystyrene containers. Food service providers and retail establishments shall not sell, use, offer for sale or use, or provide to any person a single-use carry out plastic bag. 
(1)  Exceptions: Although the discontinuation of the use of expanded polystyrene containers and single-use carry out plastic bags is strongly encouraged, this article shall not apply to: 
a.  Expanded polystyrene containers used for prepackaged food that have been filled and sealed prior to receipt by the food service provider or retail establishment; 
b.  Expanded polystyrene containers used to store raw meat or seafood sold from a butcher case or similar refrigerated display or storage case; 
c.  Compostable bags that (i) conform to the current ASTM D6400; (ii) are certified and labeled as meeting the ASTM D6400 standard specification by a recognized verification entity; and (iii) are capable of undergoing biological decomposition in a compost site such that the material breaks down into carbon dioxide, water, inorganic compounds and biomass at a rate consistent with known compostable materials; 
d.  Reusable bags, meaning bags with handles that are specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and made of durable material specifically designed for and provided to consumers with the intention of multiple, long-term use; or 
e.  Any bags without handles provided to a customer (i) to protect food or merchandise from being damaged or contaminated by other food or merchandise, when items are placed together in a reusable bag or recyclable bag, including produce bags; (ii) to hold prescription medications dispensed from a pharmacy or veterinary office; (iii) that is designed to be placed over articles of clothing on a hanger, including dry cleaning bags; 
(b)  Special event permittees, or any vendor operating under that permittee, shall not sell, use, provide food or drink in, or offer the use of, expanded polystyrene containers or single-use carry out plastic bags in city facilities. Upon warning, the special event permittee or any vendor operating under that permittee must stop use of the expanded polystyrene containers or single-use carry out plastic bags, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 170487 , § 1, 1-17-19)  
Sec. 27-91. - Enforcement; penalties; injunctive relief. 
The city may enforce this article by civil citation in accordance with chapter 2, article V, division 6. In addition, persons who are not in conformity with these requirements shall be subject to appropriate civil action in the court of appropriate jurisdiction for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 170487 , § 1, 1-17-19)  
Secs. 27-92—27-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWERAGE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 6-91 et seq.; health and sanitation, Ch. 11.5; water supply regulations in housing code, § 13-111; sewerage regulations in housing code, § 13-113; centralized water and wastewater facilities, § 30-271; package wastewater plants, § 30-272; industrial pretreatment plants, § 30-273. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3754, §§ 39—41, adopted Jan. 27, 1992, repealed various sections of Div. 1, relative to general water and sewerage regulations, and § 80 of said Ord. No. 3754 renumbered the remaining sections of this division to read as herein set out. The history notation has been retained in the renumbered sections for reference purposes. The repealed provisions of this division derived from Code 1960, §§ 28-31.2, 28-32.1 and 28-32.2 and Ord. No. 3696, § 9, adopted Feb. 18, 1991. See the Code Comparative Table for a specific enumeration of repealed and renumbered sections. 
 
Sec. 27-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Abutting shall mean adjacent to or contiguous to or located immediately across any road, street, right-of-way or easement from the relevant water line, wastewater line or other relevant property. 
Additional facilities or structures shall mean any additional construction of buildings or real property appurtenances at a specific location that would create or tend to create additional demand for water or wastewater service. 
Apartment shall mean two or more buildings constructed on a single parcel of property where each building contains at least two living units or one building constructed on a single parcel of property containing two or more living units. 
Applicant shall mean the person, organization or corporation who signs an application form requesting electric, water or wastewater services be made available at a specific location and thereby agrees to pay for all such services at that location. (Also see "Customer"). 
Authorized representative of industrial user shall mean: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the industrial waste originates. 
Backflow preventer shall mean a mechanical device operated by the reduced pressure principle that is installed in conjunction with a water meter to prevent a flow of water from the customer's side of the meter into the city's distribution system under conditions where water pressure on the customer's side of the meter exceeds the pressure in the city distribution system. The installation and design of this device will be determined by the water and wastewater engineering division of the city. 
Base system shall mean the city's water transmission and distribution system or wastewater collection system which is in existence at the time an application is made for an extension of service. 
Best management practices or BMPs shall mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 27-180.1. BMPs include but are not limited to treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the amount of oxygen expressed in parts per million necessary to satisfy the oxygen requirements of a sample of wastewater incubated for five days at 20 degrees Celsius and tested in accordance with standards of testing in the latest edition of "Standard Methods" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Foundation. 
Biosolids shall mean the solid, semisolid, or liquid residue generated during the treatment of domestic wastewater in a domestic wastewater treatment facility not including solids removed from pump stations, lift stations, and screenings, grit, sand, and inorganic material removed from the preliminary treatment components of domestic wastewater treatment facilities. 
Building shall mean any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, vehicles, goods, merchandise, equipment, materials or property of any kind. This definition shall include, but is not limited to, tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, trailers, mobile homes, sheds, garages, carports, animal kennels, store rooms or vehicles serving in any way the function of a building as described herein. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Clean Water Act which may apply to a specific industrial user and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter I Subpart N, incorporated by reference in Chapter 62-660, F.A.C. 
Central wastewater system shall mean the pipe, pumps, tanks, treatment plants, collection mains and other appurtenances either connected directly to or isolated from the city's base system which serves two or more lots or which serves any multiple family, commercial, industrial, institutional or other use where the total wastewater flow exceeds 2,000 gallons per day. All central wastewater systems shall meet the design and construction requirements of the city. 
Central water system shall mean the water source, pumps, treatment plants, distribution mains, fire protection mains and other appurtenances either connected directly to or isolated from the city's base system which serves two or more lots or which serves any multiple family, commercial, industrial, institutional or other use where the total wastewater flow exceeds 2,000 gallons per day. All central water systems shall meet the design and construction requirements of the city. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) shall mean the amount of oxygen expressed in parts per million required for the chemical oxidation of organics in wastewater. 
City shall mean the City of Gainesville, doing business as Gainesville Regional Utilities. 
Connection charges shall mean a general term referring to the specific development charges that must be satisfied in order to receive water and/or wastewater service. For the purposes of this article, the following shall constitute water connection charges: transmission and distribution, meter installation, water treatment plant, standby fire line, fire hydrant installation, inspection service fees, crossing charges and tapping fees. For the purposes of this article, the following shall constitute wastewater connection charges: collection system, wastewater treatment plant, pumping station (primary and relay), force main (base system) charges, inspection service fees, crossing charges, and tapping fees. 
Consumer shall mean the person or persons who actually receive and utilize water service at a specific location, and/or who contribute, cause or permit the contribution of, wastewater into the city's wastewater system. 
Contribution in aid of construction (CIAC) shall mean a charge paid by an applicant desiring service from the city for a portion of the capital cost for additional facilities which must be constructed to provide water or wastewater service to the applicant. 
Customer shall mean the person responsible for payment for all electric, water or wastewater services used at a specific location, and further defined as that person who signed the application requesting that services be made available at the specific location and thereby agreeing to pay for all usage of such services occurring at the location. (See "Applicant"). 
Customer's installation shall mean all pipes, shutoffs, valves, fixtures, pretreatment equipment and appliances or apparatus of every kind and nature used in connection with or forming a part of an installation for utilizing water or wastewater service. Customer's installations are located on the customer's side of the "point of delivery," whether such installation is owned outright by the customer or is used by the customer under lease or otherwise. 
Deposit shall mean the amount of money placed with the city by each customer as security for payment of the water or wastewater bill. 
Detector check value shall mean a device which detects leakage or unauthorized use of water from fire line services. 
Developer shall mean any person or legal entity engaged in developing or subdividing land to which water and/or wastewater service is to be rendered by the city. Also where applicable, any individual or legal entity that applied for the provision of water mains or wastewater facilities in order to serve a certain property. 
Development shall mean a subdivision or any other parcel of land which consists of two or more lots. In addition, parcels of land for commercial projects or multiple-family dwellings shall be considered as developments. 
Discharge shall mean the introduction of sewage or industrial waste, or any other flow into the wastewater system. 
Dwelling shall mean a living unit, house, mobile home, apartment or building used primarily for human habitation. The word "dwelling" shall not include hotels, motels, tourist courts or other accommodations for transients, nor shall it include dormitories, fraternities, sororities, rooming houses, businesses or industrial facilities. Facilities for the preparation, storage and keeping of food for consumption within the premises shall cause a unit to be construed as a single dwelling unit. Each area with separate facilities for the preparation, storage and keeping of food for consumption within the premises shall be considered as a separate dwelling unit. 
(1)  Single-family shall mean a building containing not more than one dwelling unit on a single lot or a [dwelling] unit of a multiple-family dwelling where each dwelling unit is constructed on a separate lot and served by a single domestic water meter. Mobile homes containing one dwelling unit not in approved mobile home parks and served by a single domestic water meter are considered single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family shall mean a building which contains two or more dwelling units served by a single domestic water meter. 
Engineering estimate shall mean a calculation of the cost of a project based on the city's current contracts for material and labor plus overhead for engineering, contingency and general and administrative costs. If there is no contract for the project or a part of the project, the best available data as determined by the city will be used. 
Excess strength wastewater shall mean wastewater containing constituents whose parameters are in excess of those specified for normal strength wastewater. 
Extension shall mean a water or wastewater facility constructed to enable the provision of water, fire protection or wastewater service. 
Force main shall mean a wastewater line which carries wastewater under pressure from a lift station. 
Frontage shall mean a unit of measurement expressed in linear feet which is determined from one or more lengths of a property's boundaries. The method of determination of frontage shall be specified in the city's current "Water and Wastewater Policies." The method of determination of frontage shall take into consideration location of water or wastewater lines which are adjacent to the property being served, irrespective of whether such line is located in a public or private right-of-way, an easement, or on public or private property. 
Grab sample shall mean a sample taken without regard to flowrate and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Grease interceptor shall mean a device, usually located underground and outside of a food service facility, designed to collect, contain, and remove food wastes and grease from the wastestream while allowing the remaining wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater collection system by gravity. 
Grease trap shall mean a device, usually located inside the building and under a sink of a food service facility designed to collect, contain, and remove food wastes and grease from the wastestream while allowing the remaining wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater collection system by gravity. 
Identifiable internal water service lines shall mean a water line, owned and installed by the customer on the customer's side of the point of delivery whose purpose is to provide water service to any new or additional facility or structure. 
Individual or person shall mean any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government entities. 
Industrial use or user shall mean any use or user of the water or wastewater system that produces industrial waste. 
Industrial wastes shall mean solid or liquid wastes from any manufacturing or processing plant or other industrial undertaking and solid or liquid wastes discharged from any other source including but not limited to dwellings, and commercial establishments, which contain pollutants that exceed or have the potential to exceed normal strength wastewater limits or any other discharge limit established in this division, or which are wastes discharged from any source containing toxic pollutants as defined in this section, or which are wastes discharged at a flow rate of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday. 
Instantaneous discharge limit or instantaneous limit shall mean the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample as specified by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interceptor shall mean a large size gravity wastewater line which has been designed to receive wastewater from two or more collecting wastewater lines. 
Interference shall mean the inhibition or disruption of the wastewater collection system, treatment process or any wastewater system operations. This term includes disruption of wastewater sludge use or disposal. 
Lift station (also pump station) shall mean a facility which receives wastewater from gravity wastewater collection lines and/or other lift stations and pumps the wastewater under pressure through a force main to another location. 
Local discharge limit or local limit shall mean the maximum concentration or mass of a pollutant allowed to be discharged, determined from the analysis of a sample collected in a manner as specified by the general manager of utilities or his/her designee. Such limit may be an instantaneous discharge limit, daily discharge limit, or average discharge limit as determined by the general manager of utilities or his/her designee. 
Lot shall mean a part of a subdivision or any other parcel of land intended as a unit for building development or transfer of ownership, or both. Parcels of and less than one acre for commercial projects or multiple-family dwellings and parcels of land for each single-family dwelling shall be considered lots. 
Lot line shall mean the property line, abutting the right-of-way line or any line defining the exact location and boundary of the lot of property. 
Meter (water) shall mean the measuring device owned and installed by the city on a service line for the purpose of accurately measuring water use by a customer. 
Meter tampering shall mean when any person shall willfully alter, injure, or knowingly suffer to be injured any water meter or other apparatus or device belonging to the city in such a manner as to cause loss or damage or to prevent any such meter installed for registering water consumption, from registering the quantity which otherwise would pass through the same; or to alter any such meter; or in any way to hinder or interfere with the proper action or just registration of any such meter or device or make or cause to be made any connection of any appurtenance in such a manner as to use, without the consent of the city, any water without such water service being reported for payment or such water passing through a meter provided by the city and used for measuring and registering the quantity of water passing through the same. 
Mobile home park (approved) shall mean a parcel of property zoned under provisions of the applicable city or county zoning regulations whose allowed and recognized use is the business of renting spaces or lots upon which mobile homes are placed and occupied as single-family dwellings and shall include any associated and allowed laundry and recreational and common facilities incidental thereto. 
New industrial source shall mean any building, structure, facility, or installation which commenced construction after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act as specified in 40 CFR 403.3(k)(1). 
Noncontact cooling water shall mean water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with a toxic pollutant, industrial waste or wastewater. 
Non-significant categorical industrial user shall mean an industrial user which the general manager for utilities or his/her designee determines is not a significant industrial user based on a finding that the industrial user discharges 100 gallons per day or less of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and: 
(1)  The industrial user has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; and 
(2)  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement as specified in 62-625.600(17), F.A.C. together with any information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
(3)  The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
Normal strength wastewater shall mean wastewater which does not exceed the concentration of any constituent for which a normal strength wastewater limit has been established by the general manager of utilities or his/her designee. A copy of the established normal strength wastewater limits shall be kept on file in the office of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee and made available on request. Customers discharging wastewater containing any constituent exceeding a normal strength wastewater limit may be charged for excess strength wastewater according to Appendix A. 
Off-site facilities shall mean water mains, wastewater lines, force mains and lift stations constructed to connect on-site facilities with the nearest point in the base system at which adequate capacity is available to meet the requirements of the new services. 
Oil/water separator shall mean a device designed to remove oil (e.g. petroleum-based) from the wastestream while allowing the remaining wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater collection system by gravity. 
On-site facilities shall mean the water mains, services, meters, fire hydrants, wastewater lines, force mains, lift stations and pretreatment equipment installed within a residential, commercial or industrial development. It includes those facilities in peripheral streets and easements constructed wholly or in part for use by that development. 
Oversized facilities shall mean a facility designed in size and location by the city to be larger than that required to serve the applicant's project and greater than the following minimum criteria: 
(1) Water main: eight inches; 
(2) Gravity wastewater line: eight inches; 
(3) Force mains: four inches. 
In certain instances, oversizing may also refer to the routing or location of a water or wastewater facility by the city at a greater length than that required to serve the applicant's project. 
Pass through shall mean a discharge from the city's wastewater treatment works into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit or any federal or state law. This includes an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
pH shall mean the measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Point of delivery or connection: 
(1)  Water service shall mean the point where the city's water meter nipple is connected with the pipe of the customer, and where water service to the customer begins. 
(2)  Wastewater service shall mean the point where the service lateral crosses the customer's property line. 
Pollutant shall mean any toxic pollutant, dredged, spoiled, solid waste (as defined in 40 CFR 261), incinerator residue, garbage, grease, sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, dirt; any industrial, municipal or agricultural waste discharged into water; or any material designated by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee on the basis that the material has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the city's wastewater system. 
Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutants in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the city wastewater system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; process changes; or by facility process changes or other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants. 
Pretreatment standards or standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local discharge limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges shall mean absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. 
Residential service shall mean service to a single living unit located in a single-family or multiple-family dwelling or a living unit consisting of a sorority, fraternity, cooperative housing unit of a college or university or other nonprofit group living unit. A living unit shall be a place where people reside on a nontransient basis containing a room or rooms comprising the essential elements of single housekeeping unit. Each separate facility for the preparation, storage and keeping of food for consumption within the premises shall cause a housekeeping unit to be construed as a single living unit. All water supplied shall be through a single meter at a single point of delivery. 
Rooming unit shall mean a room or rooms used as a place where sleeping or housekeeping accommodations are provided for pay to transient or permanent guests. 
Septic tank waste shall mean any wastewater from holding tanks from vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Service shall mean the readiness and ability on the part of the city to furnish water or wastewater service to the customer on demand. Thus, the maintenance of water pressure at the point of delivery or presence of a wastewater service lateral shall constitute the rendering of service, irrespective of whether the customer makes any use thereof. 
Significant industrial user shall mean: 
(1)  Any industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards, unless the general manager for utilities or his/her designee determines the industrial user to be a non-significant categorical industrial user. 
(2)  Any industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the city wastewater system or contributes five percent or more of the dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the city wastewater system, excluding sanitary and noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater. 
(3)  Any industrial user designated significant by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the city's wastewater collection system, treatment process, or any wastewater system operation or for violating any federal, state, or local discharge limit or standard. 
Slug discharge shall mean any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code shall mean a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Standby fire line shall mean the pipe, isolating valve, detector check valves and fittings of the city which extend from the water main to the fire line pipes of the customer and which are used for supplying water exclusively for fire protection purposes. Point of service for standby fire lines shall be on the customer's side of the detector check valve vault. 
Stormwater shall mean any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Subdivision shall mean a division of a lot, tract or parcel of land or water into two or more lots, plots, sites or other subdivisions of land or water for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, building development or other use, and which further includes the term "subdivide," meaning to divide land by conveyance or improvement into lots, blocks, parcels, tracts or other portions. 
Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by filtering with a 1.2 micrometer pore diameter filter. 
Toxic pollutant shall mean any pollutant listed as a priority pollutant in 40 CFR 401.15. 
Wastewater shall mean the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the wastewater system. 
Wastewater line shall mean a pipe which carries wastewater and to which storm and surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Wastewater service lateral shall mean wastewater connection extending from the collecting wastewater line in the street to a customer's property line or from the collecting wastewater line in an easement to the easement line. 
Wastewater system shall mean the entire wastewater utility system that services the needs of the customer which includes treatment facilities, collection lines, lift stations, force mains and all other related appurtenances incidental thereto. 
Water system shall mean that entire water utility system that services the needs of the customer which includes treatment facilities, transmission, distribution and fire protection lines, meters and all other related appurtenances incidental thereto. 
(Code 1960, § 28-31.1; Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 6-15-87; Ord. No. 3602, § 1, 3-5-90; Ord. No. 3697, §§ 1, 2, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3735, § 1, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 3740, § 1, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 4034, § 1, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 980894, § 1, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 001622, § 1, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 030278, § 15, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 060457, § 1, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 120261, § 1, 9-20-12; Ord. No. 140171, § 1, 9-18-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 27-97. - Increase in certain connection charges paid after March 10, 1975. 
All connection charges paid after March 10, 1975, to the city for service to a particular location are subject to an increase in the amount owed when new rates have been established by the city subsequent to the payment of such charges and where no request to begin construction has been made within six months of the payment of the connection charges or where the city is unable to begin construction due to an inadequately prepared site. 
(Code 1960, § 28-31.3; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-98. - Restrictions on bill adjustments for certain leaks. 
No allowance or adjustment to any water usage bill shall be made for leaks of any nature occurring on the customer's side of the point of delivery. No allowance or adjustment to any wastewater bill shall be made for water leaks occurring on the customer's side of the point of delivery which results in flow into the wastewater system. 
(Code 1960, § 28-31.4; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 160253 , § 3, 9-15-16)  
Sec. 27-99. - Miscellaneous charges for work requested by customer. 
Miscellaneous charges shall be made for any work done by the city at the customer's request. Customers shall be charged for such work at direct cost plus overhead. Payment in full for the estimated cost will be required prior to the city's initiation of the work. Refunds will be made at the completion of the work where appropriate. 
(Code 1960, § 28-31.5; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-100. - Return of payments prohibited. 
Except for deposits required for initial utilities services, and except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article, no monies properly paid to the city under this article shall be refundable. 
(Code 1960, § 28-32; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-101. - System specifications inspection of premises. 
As a condition of receiving or continuing to receive water or wastewater utility services from the city, the duly authorized representative of the city shall have the right to specify the size, type, routing/location and design of all lines as well as taps, meters, laterals, lift stations, pretreatment equipment, treatment plants and any other components being added to the water or wastewater system. In addition, the duly authorized representative of the city shall have the right to remove, test, seal or interfere with any of the components for such causes that are detrimental to the water or the wastewater systems or deemed necessary by the city. If after written notice delivered to the premises or mailed to the premises and to the owner, if not owner occupied, stating a reasonable time in which such inspection is needed to be made, the reasons therefor, and the effect of failure to allow the inspection, the city's duly authorized representative is then denied access to the premises for the inspection, the city may then discontinue all utility services to the premises until the inspection is permitted. 
(Code 1960, § 28-32.3; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-102. - Pump station rebates. 
The general manager for utilities (general manager) is hereby authorized to adopt and administer a policy to rebate a portion of the developer paid costs of new pump stations and force mains. This policy will, at a minimum, provide for the recovery by the initiating developer from any subsequent developer that portion of the costs directly benefiting subsequent development. Payment of the apportioned share of the initial development costs (the rebate amount) by the subsequent developer shall be a condition to the provision of wastewater service to the subsequent development. The policy adopted by the general manager shall at a minimum include the following provisions: 
1.  The policy shall apply to those pump stations and force mains completed and accepted by the city after June 10, 1996; 
2.  The rebate amount shall be determined by the general manager or designee for each rebate pump station and force main based on the hydraulic capacity of the pump station and force main and the point at which a subsequent development connects to the force main; 
3.  A contract shall be executed between the city and the developer for each rebate pump station and force main stipulating at a minimum the rebate amount for the point or points of connection along the force main, the maximum rebate amount for that pump station and force main, and the period during which rebates shall be paid. Such period shall not exceed ten years from acceptance of the pump station and force main by GRU; and 
4.  To facilitate transition to the pump station policy, a $67.00 deduction per equivalent residential unit shall be applied to the pump station connection charge for pump stations 148, 149, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156 and 157. This deduction applies to the originating developer(s) on the listed pump station and shall be applied to the pump station connection charge for a period of eight years from June 10, 1996. There shall be no deduction applied to the force main connection charge. 
(Ord. No. 951541, § 1, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 960742, § 1, 2-24-97)  
Sec. 27-103. - Connection charge installment. 
The general manager of utilities (general manager) is hereby authorized to adopt and administer a policy to allow installment payments of connection charges to encourage connection to central water and wastewater facilities. The connection charges shall be repaid through a series of payments identified as the connection charge installment contained in Appendix A. The intent of this section is to minimize the impact of connection charges on decisions to abandon package or on-site treatment facilities and connect to the city's centralized water and wastewater facilities. The policy adopted by the general manager shall at a minimum include the following provisions: 
(1)  Connection charge installment payments shall be available only to existing homes or businesses served by package water or wastewater treatment systems, private wells, or septic tanks at the time of application. Connection charge installment payments shall not be available to new developments or to an expansion of an existing development; 
(2)  The connection charge installment payment term shall be ten years; 
(3)  The connection charge installment shall be billed on a monthly basis; 
(4)  Water and/or wastewater service may be disconnected if any portion of the monthly utility bill is not paid in a timely manner; 
(5)  In the event a customer who has entered into an agreement to make installment payments hereunder sells the affected property or closes the account, the obligation shall be satisfied as follows: 
a.  Five-eights inch meters - The balance due shall be payable in full or the customer may procure from the subsequent owner and provide to the city a written assumption of the obligation to pay the remaining balance due. It shall be the first owner's responsibility to notify the subsequent owner and obtain the required assumption of the payment obligation. This section shall not apply to a customer paying connection charges for more than two five-eights inch meters. 
b.  Meters larger than five-eights inch or three or more five-eights inch meters by the same owner - The installment payments will be billed to the current property owner regardless of changes in ownership, and will continue for the period specified in the agreement. It is the property owner's responsibility to advise any subsequent owner of these requirements. Such notification requirement shall be included in the original agreement. Upon change of ownership, no service shall be provided to the affected property until the succeeding owner has executed and delivered to the city a service agreement which includes the assumption of the obligation to pay the remaining connection charge balance due. 
(6)  In the event that water and/or wastewater service is disconnected for non-payment or at a subsequent owner's request, the city shall consider the associated capacity to be recovered and any installment payments previously made shall be forfeited. 
(7)  Connection charge installment payments shall be paid by the property owner and not by the tenant in the case of rental property. In the event that the owner of rental property chooses to pay connection charge installment payments, they shall also be required to pay monthly water and/or wastewater charges for the property until new tenants occupy the rental property or the lease expires. 
(8)  The general manger or designee shall have the sole discretion, based on credit-worthiness, whether to allow connection charge installment payments. 
(Ord. No. 960798, § 1, 6-23-97)  
Secs. 27-104—27-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3754, §§ 42—52, adopted Jan. 27, 1992, repealed various sections of Div. 2, relative to water service, and § 80 of said Ord. No. 3754 renumbered the remaining sections of this division to read as herein set out. The history notation has been retained in the renumbered sections for reference purposes. The repealed provisions of this division derived from Code 1960, §§ 28-33, 28-34, 28-39—28-41, 28-43, 28-45—28-48, 28-49.1; Ord. No. 3254, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 1986; Ord. No. 3294, § 2, adopted Oct. 13, 1986; Ord. No. 3428, § 1, adopted April 4, 1988; Ord. No. 3493, §§ 2—4, adopted Nov. 21, 1988; Ord. No. 3644, § 2, adopted Aug. 20, 1990; Ord. No. 3696, §§ 10, 12, adopted Feb. 18, 1991; Ord. No. 3697, § 3, adopted Feb. 18, 1991. See the Code Comparative Table for a specific enumeration of repealed and renumbered sections. 
 
Sec. 27-116. - Water management committee—Created, duties and responsibilities. 
There is hereby created the water management committee for the purpose of advising the city commission regarding good water management practices and which shall have the following specific duties: 
(1)  To assess the quality and quantity of water resources available to the citizens of the city and to identify and assess potential threats that might degrade water quality, increase flooding, reduce potential supply, or otherwise adversely affect water sources; 
(2)  To investigate the details of water management, including wastewater treatment and disposal, potable water supply, stormwater runoff discharge, floodplain and wetlands management, water shortage planning, water conservation and recycling practices, erosion and sedimentation controls, both within the city and adjacent jurisdictions that affect the city; 
(3)  To assist in developing and implementing good water management practices; 
(4)  To assist in informing the citizens of the city, through their public deliberations and by regular reports to the city commission regarding water management practices; and 
(5)  To study other pertinent matters relating to water management. 
(Code 1960, § 2-164)  
Sec. 27-116.1. - Same—Composition; appointment; terms; officers; subcommittees; meetings. 
(a)  The water management committee shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by the city commission for terms of three (3) years each after the initial appointments. Vacancies shall be filled by the city commission for the unexpired term. The membership of the committee shall be made up of persons demonstrating an interest and willingness to represent the community-at-large relative to any and all issues regarding water management which impact the city as set forth in section 27-116. 
(b)  The committee shall select its own chairperson and vice-chairperson and such officers as it deems necessary. The chairperson may appoint various subcommittees from time to time as need dictates; provided, however, that a majority of the full committee concurs with this decision. 
(c)  The committee shall hold regular meetings at least once every three (3) months and may meet at any time as a majority of the committee may decide, or upon call of the chairperson. 
(Code 1960, § 2-165; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-117. - Supplying separately owned properties through one meter prohibited; multiple use of privately owned water systems prohibited. 
(a)  Separately owned properties shall not be supplied with water through one (1) meter. 
(b)  No person other than the owner of a water system located on his/her property shall be furnished with water from the water system for any purpose. 
(c)  This section shall not, however, prohibit single metering of property owned as a cooperative or condominium, as long as service is provided to and metered on common property and there is an association or corporation to apportion, collect and remit all fees and charges and accept notices. No such corporation or association shall charge or collect from unit owners more than the fees and charges billed, plus actual administrative costs. 
(Code 1960, § 28-51; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-118. - Interconnection of private water system to city water system or tampering with mains prohibited. 
No person shall interconnect a privately owned water system to the city's water system or turn on any water service or tap or make any alteration to any main or distributing pipe of the city's water system or in any way interfere with or molest any of the wells, reservoirs, basins or water in the same, or permit any connection or tapping to be made to the city's water system on his/her premises or premises occupied by him/her or to knowingly use city water from unauthorized connections. 
(Code 1960, § 28-50; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-119. - Use of fluorine authorized. 
Upon approval by the state board of health, there shall be introduced into the water supply furnished consumers though the municipal water plant approximately one (1) part of fluorine to every million parts of water. 
(Code 1960, § 28-54; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-120. - Effect of division on existing contracts. 
Nothing in this division shall be deemed to change, impair or abrogate any special contract now existing between the city and any consumer served by the city with water. 
(Code 1960, § 28-55; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-121. - Deferred payment for residential water service. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 27-126.1 and 27-129, entitled respectively "(Water Meter) Installation Charges," and "Water Flow-based Connection Charges," if the criteria listed below are met, each applicant for residential water meter installation and/or water service shall have the option to defer payment of water meter installation charges, water transmission and distribution connection charges and water treatment plant connection charges during construction for a period of not more than six (6) months from the date of application. If payment is deferred, the city will install one (1) five-eighths-inch water meter for each single-family dwelling or residential building with multiple-dwelling units which ultimately will be individually metered. Only one (1) water meter will be installed at each building. The utility shall determine the meter location for residential buildings with multiple dwelling units. This section does not apply to applications for master water meters. 
(1)  Criteria for deferring payment: 
a.  Applicant must request a five-eighths-inch residential meter for a single-family dwelling or a residential building with multiple dwelling units. 
b.  All dwelling units to be served by the residential meter must be unoccupied at time of application and applicant must agree that no dwelling unit shall be occupied until all deferred charges have been paid. 
c.  Inspection for permanent electrical service must not have been made. 
d.  Permanent electric service must not have been installed. 
e.  Applicant must present service location addresses for all buildings at the time of application. 
f.  Application must be made pursuant to procedures established by the city and any required deposit must be paid. 
g.  Applicant must request payment deferral. 
(2)  Payment of deferred fees. No permanent electric power will be provided by the city to any single-family dwelling or to any unit in a residential building with multiple-dwelling units until all water meter installation charges, water transmission and distribution connection charges and water treatment plant connection charges have been paid. 
(3)  Nonpayment. All fees and charges must be paid within six (6) months of the meter application date. If the fees and charges are not paid within such period, the water meter will be removed, a water meter installation and removal charge as set out in the schedule in Appendix A will be assessed and the account will be closed. Service shall not be restored at such location until all applicable fees and charges have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 3428, § 2, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 3740, § 2, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-122. - Approval of plumbing and connections required. 
No water service shall be connected until the plumbing and connections incident thereto shall have been inspected and approved by the building official, or his/her designee, as follows: 
(1)  Water service to a residence. Approval of a dwelling for water service must be obtained prior to initial provision of service. 
(2)  Water service to other buildings. Approval of a building for water service must be obtained prior to initial provision of service or transfer of water service. 
(3)  Copy of approval. Each applicant for water service must submit a copy of such approval where required as part of the application for service. 
(Code 1960, § 28-52; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-123. - Liability of city; right to restrict use of water. 
The city shall not be liable from any damage resulting from the bursting of any main, service pipe or cock, from the shutting off of water for repairs, extensions or connections or from the accidental failure of the water supply from any cause whatsoever. In case of emergency the city shall have the right to restrict the use of water in any reasonable manner for the protection of the city and its water supply. 
(Code 1960, § 28-53; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-124. - Plan review service fee and inspection service fee. 
Applicants shall pay to the city a plan review service fee according to the schedule set forth in Appendix A, prior to submitting plans for review by the city. No on-site facilities constructed or purchased by the developer will be accepted by the city for connection to the city's water system unless the design and construction of such facilities meet all standards and specifications of the city. The facilities shall be inspected by the city prior to connection to the city's water system to ensure such compliance. For such inspection, the developer shall pay to the city an inspection service fee according to the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(Code 1960, § 28-37.1; Ord. No. 3114, § 1, 3-18-85; Ord. No. 3697, §§ 4, 5, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3740, § 3, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 150246 , § 2, 9-17-15)  
Sec. 27-125. - Main tapping charges. 
A charge shall be made for tapping into the water main when required according to the schedule set out in Appendix A. If an existing tap is to be replaced, any additional cost associated with the removal of an existing tap shall be added to the appropriate tapping charge. All tap charges shall be paid prior to service being rendered. 
(Code 1960, § 28-34.1; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-126. - Meters—Furnished by city; change in size. 
(a)  City to furnish. All necessary water meters shall be furnished by the city and shall remain the property of the city. 
(b)  Increase in size. A customer desiring a water meter larger than the size of the water meter then in service shall pay to the city the engineering estimate for material, labor and equipment costs plus overhead for installing the larger meter less the salvage value of the smaller water meter removed. In addition, the customer shall also pay the difference in the cost of the associated water and wastewater connection charges, if applicable, of the larger and smaller water meters. 
(c)  Reduction in size. A customer desiring a water meter smaller than the size of the meter then in service shall pay to the city the engineering estimate for material, labor and equipment costs plus overhead for installing this smaller size water meter less the salvage value of the larger water meter removed. If this water meter size reduction occurs within two years after the original meter was installed, the difference in the larger and smaller connection charges shall be refunded. The burden of proof of payment of the original connection charges shall be the customer's. 
(Code 1960, § 28-38; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-126.1. - Same—Installation charges. 
(a)  Meter assembly and service lateral. Upon filling out the appropriate application forms and payment to the city of the charges required, the city shall furnish all labor, material, and equipment necessary, in accordance with the "Water and Wastewater Construction Standards" of the city, to provide water service to the customer's property line. Each applicant shall pay to the city, prior to installation and/or initial use, a water meter installation charge based on the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(b)  Meter only. For customers in developments which have approved engineering drawings and prior approval of the city, and in which the developer installed the service lateral, yoke, meter box and all fittings necessary for the installation of the water meter, the city shall furnish the water meter and labor for its installation in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(c)  Water meter for water consumption not returned to the wastewater system. Any water customer may have the city install a separate water meter for the measurement of water not returned to the wastewater system or for irrigation purposes. The water used through this separate meter will be billed as a separate service and under the same provisions applicable to any existing water service but will not be subject to a monthly wastewater consumptive use charge or initial wastewater connection charges. 
(1)  Customers using this method of metering will be charged the nonresidential wastewater rate for water metered through the water meter supplying general water service. 
(2)  Customers installing a separate five-eighths inch water meter for irrigation purposes where reclaimed water is not available shall not be assessed initial flow-based water or wastewater connection charges. 
(3)  New installation of water meters for irrigation purposes are prohibited if reclaimed water is available to the customer from the city. 
(d)  Wastewater customers on private wells. Customers on private wells who are discharging wastewater into the city's wastewater system may pay for the installation of a water meter on their well and be billed for wastewater according to that water consumption. The water meter installation charge for this type of service is in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(Code 1960, § 28-37; Ord. No. 3087, §§ 2—4, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 3565, § 1, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 3962, § 1, 2-28-94; Ord. No. 000867, § 1, 2-26-01; Ord. No. 001871, § 1, 10-8-01)  
Sec. 27-126.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 160253 , § 4, adopted Sept. 15, 2016, repealed § 27-126.2 which pertained to meter testing and derived from § 28-42 of the 1960 Code; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, adopted Jan. 27, 1992; and Ord. No. 030278, § 16, adopted Sept. 8, 2003.  
Sec. 27-126.3. - Same—Tampering with, altering. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to meddle, tamper with, alter or change the piping system on any premises or to interfere in any way with a meter or meter connection. Should it appear that water has been stolen by altering the pipes, altering the meter or otherwise, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall have the right to discontinue the service until the defect is corrected and the service approved by the appropriate inspector. 
(b)  Diversion cut-back charge. When a water meter is found to have been tampered with, service shall be subject to immediate disconnection. Before service may be restored, the estimated consumption as defined in subsection (c) of this section shall be paid by cash, postal money order or cashier's check or equivalent, or satisfactory arrangements for payment shall be made. Upon payment of the diversion cut-back charge, service shall be restored. If the customer's deposit has been previously refunded, a new deposit may be required. 
(c)  Estimated consumption and billing. When a water meter is found to have been tampered with or water has been otherwise diverted, the consumer shall be billed for the estimated water consumed, based on the rate in effect at the time of such billing. The consumption shall be estimated on the basis of previous consumption, consumption after replacement of the meter, or any other method in accordance with generally accepted utility practices which produces a reasonable estimate. In addition, the consumer shall be billed for the actual cost of the investigation of the meter tampering, including cost associated with the estimation of consumption and the labor, supplies, materials and equipment used in connection with such investigation. The consumer shall also be liable to the city for the cost of collection, including agency, attorneys' fees and court costs if the account is placed in the hands of an agency or attorney for collection or legal action because of the customer's failure to pay any amount due. 
(d)  Prima facie evidence. The presence, on property in the actual possession of the consumer where the meter tampering has occurred, of any connection, pipe, meter alteration, or device whatsoever which affects the diversion or use of water so as to avoid the registration of such use by or on a meter installed or private provided by the city shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to violate this section if: 
(1)  The presence of such a device or alteration can be attributed only to a deliberate act in furtherance of an intent to avoid payment for utility services; 
(2)  The customer charged with the violation of this section has received the direct benefit of the reduction of the cost of such utility service; and 
(3)  The customer or recipient of the utility service has received the direct benefit of such utility service for at least one full billing cycle. 
(Ord. No. 3696, § 13, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-127. - Only city employees to make connections on supply side of meters. 
No person shall tap the city's water mains or make any other connection to pipes on the supply side of any meter except those persons duly employed by the city for that purpose. 
(Code 1960, § 28-35(a); Ord. No. 3697, § 7, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-128. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  Rates. The rates to be charged and collected for water furnished by the city to consumers shall be in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(b)  Surcharge for entities and consumers outside corporate limits. A surcharge equal to 25 percent shall be applied to the following: 
(1)  Connection charges, as defined herein, associated with new service connecting to the city's water system outside the corporate limits of the city; and 
(2)  The rates charged to customers of water furnished by the city to customers outside the corporate limits of the city. 
The United States of America, the State of Florida and all political subdivisions, agencies, boards, commissions and instrumentalities thereof and all recognized places of religious assembly of the State of Florida are hereby exempt from the payment of the surcharge imposed and levied hereby. 
(Code 1960, § 28-44; Ord. No. 3468, § 1, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 3565, § 4, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 3697, § 8, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 001622, § 1, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 140171, § 2, 9-18-14; Ord. No. 150246 , § 2, 9-17-15)  
Sec. 27-129. - Water connection charges. 
(a)  Identification of water connection charges. The water connection charges specified in this section shall consist of a transmission and distribution connection charge and a water treatment plant connection charge. The water connection charge shall be assessed prior to the meter installation. The following categories of applicants shall pay the minimum connection charge according to the schedule set out in Appendix A: single family connections without fire sprinkler system with three-quarters inch or smaller meter; single family residential connections with fire sprinkler system with one inch or smaller water meter; and/or nonresidential connections with an estimated annual average daily flow (ADF) of less than or equal to 280 gallons per day (GPD). All other applicants shall pay the flow based connection charges according to the schedule set out in Appendix A. Each applicant for water service shall pay to the city, prior to services being rendered, the applicable water connection charges in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. The connection charges shall not be applicable to any property that has been duly designated by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, as having had the city's relevant water connection costs recovered previously for such property. 
(b)  For water meters larger than one inches. The applicant shall provide the city a detailed estimate of the expected ultimate demand in gallons per day annual average daily flow (GPD-ADF) to be served by the water meter to be installed. It is the applicant's responsibility to coordinate the preparation of this estimate with the city so as to ensure the provision of sufficient detail and proper documentation of estimated demand. Such detail shall include an ultimate site plan for all properties served by the subject water meters. The city reserves the right to perform its own estimate of service demand, which shall take precedence for the purpose of calculating the charge. 
(c)  For nonresidential water meters one inch or smaller. The applicant shall provide the city an ultimate site plan or other documentation to substantiate building size for all properties served by the subject water meter(s). The expected ultimate demand in gallons per day annual average daily flow (GPD-ADF) will be determined by the city based on the site plan and the anticipated use of the facilities being served by the subject meter(s). Alternatively, the applicant may provide the city a detailed estimate of the expected ultimate demand. However, the city reserves the right to perform its own estimate of expected service demand, which shall take precedence for the purpose of calculating the charge. 
(d)  Meter sizing. The city reserves the right to select the most appropriate sized meter to best serve the applicant. 
(e)  Connection charge adjustment. The purpose of this subsection is to provide for adjustment of water connection charges when major and significant changes of water consumption patterns associated with an existing service occur. The purpose of this subsection is not to adjust for insignificant errors in estimates of annual average daily flow, flow changes due to weather variations, or other normal changes in consumptive use of water. The city may use building permits, water consumption records, and other reasonable information to enforce the provisions of this subsection. After meters are installed and whether or not any water connection charge were assessed at the time of installation, an adjustment in the water connection charges paid or a new charge may be assessed if one or more of the following conditions occur: 
(1)  Additional water meter installed. If an additional water meter is installed, the amount charged the applicant shall be calculated according to the schedule set forth in Appendix A. 
(2)  Actual demand exceeds estimated demand or change in use of facility. If the actual annual average daily flow (ADF) measured over a 12-month period should exceed the estimated demand on which a previous connection charge payment was based or if there is a change in use of the facility that is expected to result in a demand greater than the estimated demand on which a previous connection charge payment was based, the city reserves the right to review and revise the previous demand estimate and to assess an additional charge for the increased demand calculated according to the schedule set forth in Appendix A. 
(3)  Actual demand less than estimated. If within the 24-month period following meter installation, the applicant can demonstrate to the city's satisfaction that the applicant's average daily flow (ADF) has been and will continue to be less than the estimate, which estimate was used as a basis for assessing the connection charges, the applicant may request a refund. The request shall include the applicant's copy of the original service demand estimate which shall be annotated and accompanied by sufficient explanation of the lower than estimated demand. If the city approves the request, the city shall pay a refund to the applicant based on the difference between the original service demand estimate and the new service demand estimate, multiplied by the current charge(s) for that demand calculated according to the schedule set forth in Appendix A. 
(4)  Construction of new structures or facilities. If new structures or facilities are constructed causing additional demand for water services and these facilities were not included in or properly described in the applicant's original detailed service demand estimate and/or site plan of service demand, then additional water connection charges shall be assessed by the city based on the estimated additional demand calculated according to the schedule set forth in Appendix A. 
(f)  Irrigation meters. Connections used solely for irrigation purposes are exempt from paying water connection charges. 
(Code 1960, § 28-37.2; Ord. No. 3565, § 2, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 3697, § 9, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3740, § 4, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 3962, § 2, 2-28-94; Ord. No. 150246 , § 2, 9-17-15)  
Sec. 27-130. - Requirement for additional CIAC. 
In any instance where the city determines that the city's share of cost to construct new facilities prompted by an application for water service is greater than the city is willing and/or able to afford, the applicant may be allowed to pay a contribution in aid of construction (CIAC), which may be required by the city in order to reduce the city's share of cost to an amount acceptable to the city. The city shall determine the amount of CIAC which is necessary under this section. Water flow-based connection charges shall not be credited towards any required CIAC. 
(Code 1960, § 28-37.4; Ord. No. 3740, § 6, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-131. - Fire support and standby sprinkler line charges. 
Fire support and standby sprinkler line charges shall be in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(Code 1960, § 38-37.6; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-132. - Refunds of prepaid charges. 
Prepaid water meter installation charges, prepaid water transmission and distribution charges, prepaid water treatment plant connection charges, and prepaid standby fire sprinkler line connection charges which are paid prior to installation of the facilities at the site for which they are paid, may be refunded to the current owner of the property for which charges were prepaid upon application made, provided that the facilities for which payment was made have not been installed, and provided that all costs of the city incurred in connection therewith, including but not limited to administrative and engineering costs shall first be deducted prior to making any such refund. No interest shall be paid by the city on such refund for prepayments. The burden of proof of any such prepayments shall be the applicant's. 
(Code 1960, § 28-37.7; Ord. No. 3740, § 7, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-133. - Temporary service. 
(a)  Temporary service, such as service for circuses, fairs, carnivals, and construction projects that, when completed, will require a water line on the customer's side of the meter larger than one inch shall be rendered upon written application accompanied by a meter installation and removal charge and a deposit, in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A, which will be applied against the final bill. A five-eighths-inch by three-quarter-inch water meter shall be installed on all temporary construction meter installations. 
(b)  At the option of the city, temporary service, such as for circuses, fairs, carnivals, swimming pool filling and construction projects that, when completed, will require a water line on the customer's side of the meter larger than one inch may also be rendered by installing a meter on an existing fire hydrant at the site or very near to the site. Service may be rendered in this manner upon written application accompanied by a nonrefundable meter installation and removal charge and a deposit, in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A, which will be applied against the final bill, assuming the safe return of the meter. Water used through such a temporary meter shall be paid for at the prevailing general water service rate. This type of temporary connection shall be allowed for a maximum time period of 60 days, but may be extended at the discretion of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. It shall be illegal to utilize or in any manner tamper with any fire hydrant except for employees of the fire department in performing their duties, or an employee of the city engaged in testing, installing or maintaining fire hydrants, or for connecting or disconnecting temporary fire hydrant service as defined in this section. 
(Code 1960, § 28-36; Ord. No. 3696, § 14, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-134. - Oversized mains. 
The city reserves the right to require oversized water lines to serve any development. The city shall pay the oversizing costs based on the difference between the city's engineering estimates of the cost for the oversized line and the cost of the size line which is normally required to serve the development or an eight-inch line whichever is greater. 
(Code 1960, § 28-36.1; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-135. - Cross-connection control program. 
(a)  The "Manual of Cross-Connection Control," ("manual") promulgated by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, as amended from time to time is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this section. The purpose of the cross connection control program is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of those persons consuming potable water from the city water system through preventing waterborne diseases and contaminants from entering the distribution system. The program is intended to prevent water from private plumbing systems, which could contain water borne diseases and contaminants, from entering the public water system through backflow or cross connection. 
(b)  The prevailing "Manual of Cross-Connection Control" shall be deposited with and maintained by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee and copies thereof shall be available therein for public use, inspection and examination. This manual lists the type of facilities and plumbing devices that require backflow prevention. 
(c)  Under the rules of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Section 62-555.360, F.A.C., relating to cross connection, the city has the primary responsibility to prevent water from unapproved sources, or any other substances, from entering the water system. Therefore, upon detection of a prohibited cross-connection, the city is directed to either eliminate the cross-connection by requiring the installation of an appropriate backflow prevention or discontinue service until the contamination source is eliminated. 
(d)  The customer's responsibility starts at the water service connection from the city potable water system. The costs of installing, operating and maintaining backflow preventers shall be the responsibility of the customers required by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee to install and maintain backflow prevention. The customer shall maintain accurate records of the test and repairs made to the backflow prevention devices and provide the city with copies of such records as required in the manual. 
(e)  In the event of accidental contamination of the public or customer's potable water supply system due to backflow from the customer's premises, the customer shall promptly take steps to confine further spread of the contamination with the customer's premises and shall immediately notify the city of the hazardous condition. 
(f)  The provisions in subsections (a) through (c) notwithstanding, the requirements for the installation of a backflow preventer may be waived at the discretion of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, if such official finds that adequate protection against cross-connections is being provided by the customer. 
(g)  Service of water to any premise may be disconnected by the city if a required backflow prevention device is not installed, tested and maintained as required in the manual or has been removed or bypassed, or if unprotected cross-connections exist on the premises and there is inadequate backflow protection at the service connection. Water service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. All turn-off and turn-on service charges shall be paid by the consumer. 
(Code 1960, § 28-37.5; Ord. No. 3565, § 3, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 3696, § 15, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 030278, § 17, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 060457, § 5, 10-23-06)  
Secs. 27-136—27-165. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SEWERAGE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3754, §§ 53—57, adopted Jan. 27, 1992, repealed various sections of Div. 3, relative to sewerage, and § 80 of said Ord. No. 3754 renumbered the remaining sections of this division to read as herein set out. The history notation has been retained in the renumbered sections for reference purposes. The repealed provisions of this division derived from Code 1960, §§ 28-59.1(a)—(d), 28-63, 28-64.9, 28-65, 28-65.1; Ord. No. 3294, § 3, adopted Oct. 13, 1986; Ord. No. 3493, §§ 3, 4, adopted Nov. 21, 1988; Ord. No. 3644, § 3, adopted Aug. 20, 1990; Ord. No. 3696, §§ 17—19, adopted Feb. 18, 1991. Additionally, Ord. No. 3739, § 4, adopted Sept. 30, 1991, deleted former § 27-178, relative to off-site gravity line extension (CIAC), which derived form Code 1960, § 28-64.3 and Ord. No. 3697, § 14, adopted Feb. 18, 1991. See the Code Comparative Table for a specific enumeration of repealed and renumbered sections. 
 
Sec. 27-166. - Policy, purpose, enforcement. 
(a)  The present sanitary sewerage system of the city, together with any and all extensions thereof and replacements thereto, and the sanitary sewage disposal plant now operated by the city, and any and all such plants hereafter acquired and operated by the city, be and the same are hereby established and declared to be a public utility for the use and benefit of the city in the maintenance of public health, welfare and sanitation throughout the city. 
(b)  In keeping with this policy, uniform requirements are set forth in this division for the disposal of wastewater in the service area of the city wastewater treatment system, in order to: 
(1)  Protect the public health; 
(2)  Provide problem-free wastewater collection and treatment service; 
(3)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system, which will interfere with the system operation or will cause physical damage to the wastewater system; 
(4)  Provide for full and equitable distribution of the cost of the wastewater treatment system; 
(5)  Enable the city to comply with provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act, the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403), and other applicable federal and state laws and regulations; 
(6)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the wastewater treatment system. 
(c)  This section shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the municipal wastewater treatment system. Except as otherwise provided in this division, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions set forth in this division. 
(Code 1960, § 28-56; Ord. No. 3696, § 16, 2-18-91)  
Sec. 27-167. - Permit fee for plumbing and sewerage installation. 
Before a permit is issued for any plumbing, sewer or drainage work or installation for which a permit is required, a fee therefor shall be paid to the plumbing inspector in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(Code 1960, § 28-57)  
Sec. 27-168. - Sewer connection—New buildings. 
No building permit for the construction of any building or structure located on property abutting any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer shall be issued, unless all waste disposal from the sanitary facilities in the buildings or structures shall be directly connected with a public sanitary sewer or to a graywater disposal system approved pursuant to section 27-182(b). However, if there is no available sanitary sewer located within 200 feet of the nearest property line whereon the building or structure is to be constructed, the terms of this section shall not apply. 
(Code 1960, § 28-58)  
Sec. 27-168.1. - Same—Existing buildings generally. 
The owner of any house, building, or other improvement on any property used, or to be used, for human occupancy, employment, recreation, business, or other purpose which is or shall be served by a sewerage disposal system other than a direct connection to the city's public sanitary sewer system and located on property abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way, or easement on which a public sanitary sewer line is installed, and located within 200 feet of such sewer line, shall, within two years after the completed construction of such sewer line in operative condition, connect, or cause to be connected, all sanitary sewerage disposal facilities from the property and improvement to the public sanitary sewer line or to a graywater disposal system approved pursuant to section 27-182(b). 
(Code 1960, §§ 28-56.1(a), 28-59.1(a); Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-168.2. - Same—Existing buildings with inadequate, unsatisfactory, etc., individual sewage disposal system. 
The owner of any existing house, building or property used, or to be used, for human occupancy, employment, recreation, business or other purpose now served by an individual sewage disposal system other than a direct connection to a public sanitary sewer, and located on property abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which a public sanitary sewer is installed, or within 200 feet of the nearest available public sanitary sewer, shall be required, within 30 days after date of notice that the individual sewage disposal system is inadequate, unsatisfactory, causing a sanitary nuisance or endangering the water supply, to abandon the existing individual sewage disposal system and fill the same with suitable materials approved by the city health officer, and connect all waste from sanitary fixtures used by him/her directly with the public sanitary sewer or to a graywater disposal system approved pursuant to section 27-182(b). 
(Code 1960, § 28-59; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-169. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  Rates. There is hereby established a schedule of monthly rates and charges for the use of or availability for the use of wastewater collection, treatment and disposal services, including reclaimed water service, as set out in Appendix A, subject to the following: 
(1)  Wastewater collection service charges shall be billed to and be the responsibility of the customer responsible for paying the water bill at any specific location. Provided, however, no water customer of the city that is not connected to the wastewater collection system of the city and is not otherwise subject to wastewater collection service charges shall be charged for wastewater collection service. 
(2)  The Appendix A rates for reclaimed water service shall not apply where the terms and conditions of such service are otherwise provided by contract between the city and customer which is in existence at the time of adoption of Ordinance No. 001871. 
(b)  Surcharge for entities and customers outside corporate limits. A surcharge equal to 25 percent shall be applied to the following: 
(1)  Connection charges, as defined herein, associated with new service connecting to the city's wastewater system outside the corporate limits of the city; and 
(2)  The rates charged to customers for the use of wastewater collection, treatment and disposal services, including reclaimed water service, furnished by the city to customers outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Applicability. For any property required to be connected to the wastewater collection system, the owner and/or occupant of such property shall pay to the city the monthly fees, rates and charges for the use of the wastewater collection system in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A, regardless of whether an actual connection is made. The charges for wastewater collection shall commence on the date the property is connected, or required to be connected to the wastewater collection system as provided in sections 27-169 and 27-170, whichever date occurs first. 
(Code 1960, § 28-64; Ord. No. 3087, § 1, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 3467, § 1, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 3564, § 1, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 3697, § 11, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, §§ 18, 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 001622, § 1, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 001871, § 2, 10-8-01; Ord. No. 140171, § 3, 9-18-14; Ord. No. 150246 , § 3, 9-17-15)  
Sec. 27-169.1. - Winter maximum calculation; adjustments. 
(a)  Winter maximum. Calculation of the winter maximum for residential dwellings, including, but not limited to, single-family dwellings, mobile homes, and residential customers on metered private wells, shall be 30.4 days times the maximum of average daily water usage for the immediately preceding January or February billing periods. A customer that has not established an individual winter maximum shall use the wastewater system average residential winter maximum, provided, however, that the winter maximum shall never be less than 1,000 gallons. 
(b)  Adjustments. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may adjust the customer's winter maximum for water not returned to the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 030278, § 18, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 160253 , § 5, 9-15-16)  
Sec. 27-170. - Deferred payment of residential wastewater service connection charges. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 27-176 entitled "Wastewater Flow-Based Connection Charges," if the criteria listed below are met, each applicant for residential wastewater service shall have the option to defer payment of all wastewater flow-based connection charges during construction for a period of not more than six months from the date of application. 
(1)  Criteria for deferring payment: 
a.  All dwelling units to be served by the residential meter must be unoccupied at time of application and applicant must agree that no dwelling unit shall be occupied until all deferred charges have been paid. 
b.  Inspection for permanent electrical service must not have been made. 
c.  Permanent electric service must not have been installed. 
d.  Applicant must present service location addresses for all buildings at the time of application. 
e.  Application must be made pursuant to procedures established by the city and any required deposit must be paid. 
f.  Applicant must request payment deferral. 
(2)  Payment of deferred fees. No permanent electric power will be provided by the city to any single-family dwelling or to any unit in a residential building with multiple-dwelling units until all wastewater flow-based connection charges. 
(3)  Nonpayment. All fees and charges must be paid within six months of the meter application date. If the fees and charges are not paid within such period, service will be discontinued and the account will be closed. Service shall not be restored at such location until all applicable fees and charges have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 3428, § 3, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 3739, § 1, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-171. - Wastewater connection charges. 
(a)  Identification of wastewater connection charges. The wastewater connection charges under this section shall consist of a collection system connection charge and a treatment plant connection charge. The following categories of applicants shall pay the minimum connection charge according to the schedule set out in Appendix A: single family connections without fire sprinkler system with three-quarter inch or smaller meter; single family residential connections with fire sprinkler system with one inch or smaller water meter; and/or nonresidential connections with an estimated annual average daily flow (ADF) of less than or equal to 280 gallons per day (GPD). All other applicants shall pay the flow based connection charges according to the schedule set out in Appendix A. Wastewater flow-based connection charges shall be assessed prior to water meter installation. Each applicant for wastewater service shall pay to the city, prior to service being rendered, the applicable wastewater connection charges in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. The wastewater connection charges shall not be applicable to any property that has been duly designated, by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, as having had the city's relevant wastewater connection costs recovered previously for such property. 
(b)  For water meters larger than one inch. The applicant shall provide the city a detailed estimate of the expected ultimate water demand in annual average daily flow (GPD-ADF) to be served by the water meter to be installed. The wastewater service demand shall be deemed equal to the estimated water service demand. It is the applicant's responsibility to coordinate the preparation of this estimate with the city in order to ensure the provision of sufficient detail and proper documentation of estimated demand. Such detail shall include an ultimate site plan for the development indicating what properties are to be served by the subject water meter(s). The city reserves the right to perform its own estimate of service demand, which shall take precedence for the purpose of calculating the charge. 
(c)  For nonresidential water meters one inch or smaller. The applicant shall provide the city an ultimate site plan or other documentation to substantiate building size for all properties served by the subject water meter(s). The expected ultimate demand in gallons per day annual average flow (GPD-ADF) will be determined by the city based on the site plan and the anticipated use of the facilities being served by the subject meter(s). Alternatively, the applicant may provide the city a detailed estimate of the expected ultimate demand. However, the city reserves the right to perform its own estimate of service demand, which shall take precedence for the purpose of calculating the charge. 
(d)  Connection charge adjustment. The purpose of this subsection is to provide for adjustment of wastewater connection charges when major and significant changes of water consumption associated with an existing service occur. The purpose of this subsection is not to adjust for insignificant errors in estimates of annual average daily flow, flow changes due to weather variances, or other normal changes in consumptive use of water. The city may use building permits, water consumption records, and other reasonable information to enforce the provisions of this subsection. After water meters are installed and whether or not any connection charges were assessed at the time of installation, an adjustment in the connection charges already paid or new charges may be assessed if one or more of the following conditions occur: 
(1)  Additional water meter installed. If an additional water meter is installed, the amount charged the applicant shall be calculated according to the schedule set forth in Appendix A. 
(2)  Actual demand exceeds estimated or change in use of facility. If the actual annual average daily flow (ADF) measured over a 12-month period should exceed the estimated demand on which a previous connection charge payment was based or if there is a change in use of the facility that is expected to result in a demand greater than the estimated demand on which a previous connection charge payment was based, the city reserves the right to review and revise the previous demand estimate and to assess additional charges for the increased demand calculated according to the schedule set forth in Appendix A. 
(3)  Actual demand less than estimated. If within the 24-month period following meter installation, the applicant can demonstrate to the city's satisfaction that the applicant's average daily flow (ADF) has been and will continue to be less than that estimated and used as a basis for assessing the wastewater connection charges, the applicant may request a refund. The request shall include the applicant's copy of the original service demand estimate which shall be accompanied by sufficient explanation of the lower than estimated demand. If the city approves the request, the city shall pay a refund to the applicant based on the amount of excess service demand originally assessed and the current charge for that demand calculated according to the schedule set forth in Appendix A. 
(4)  Construction of new structures or facilities. If new structures or facilities are constructed causing additional demand for wastewater services and these facilities were not included or properly described in the applicant's original detailed estimate (and site plan) of service demand, then additional wastewater connection charges shall be assessed by the city based on the estimated additional demand calculated according to the schedule set forth in Appendix A. 
(f)  Greywater disposal systems. The city is authorized to adjust wastewater connection charges assessed at the time of original water meter installation or assessed thereafter, as set forth in Appendix A, to reflect reduced wastewater loadings from approved individual graywater disposal systems. These adjustments shall be determined by procedures and engineering calculations contained in policies approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 28-64.1; Ord. No. 3087, § 5, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 3564, § 2, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 3581, § 1, 12-4-89; Ord. No. 3697, § 12, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3739 § 2, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 951541, § 2, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 150246 , § 3, 9-17-15)  
Sec. 27-172. - Plan review fee and inspection service fee. 
Applicants shall pay to the city a plan review fee according to the schedule set forth in Appendix A, prior to submitting plans for review by the city. No on-site facilities will be accepted by the city for connection to the city's wastewater system unless the design and construction of such facilities meet all standards and specifications of the city. The facilities shall be inspected by the city prior to connection to the city's wastewater system to ensure such compliance. For such inspection, the developer shall pay to the city an inspection service fee as set out in Appendix A, to be assessed on the amount of developer installed mainline collection piping. 
(Code 1960, § 28-64.2; Ord. No. 3564, § 3, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 3697, § 13, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3739, § 3, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 150246 , § 3, 9-17-15)  
Sec. 27-173. - Pump station (primary). 
(a)  Where a pumping station is constructed to receive the gravity wastewater flow from a development, the developer shall pay all costs associated with pump station design and construction required to serve the proposed development including all future phases. The city may elect to pay oversizing costs, if required, to serve existing or future customers outside of the proposed development. 
(Code 1960, § 28-64.4; Ord. No. 3087, § 6, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 3564, § 4, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 951541, § 3, 6-10-96)  
Sec. 27-174. - Force main extension (CIAC). 
Where force mains are constructed by the city to extend wastewater service to a lot or development, the applicant for such wastewater service shall pay to the city a contribution in aid of construction (CIAC) prior to the commencement of construction of the force main. The force main CIAC shall be calculated as the cost as estimated by the city of constructing a force main sized (the smallest possible to serve the project, four inches minimum) and routed at the shortest practicable length to the closest point in the existing wastewater system capable of providing service to the applicant's development only. Sizing and routing of the force main will be determined by the city. 
(Code 1960, § 28-64.5; Ord. No. 3739, § 5, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-175. - Requirement for additional CIAC. 
In any instance where the city determines that the city's share of cost to construct new facilities (including oversizing costs) prompted by an application for wastewater service is greater than the city is willing and/or able to afford, the applicant may be allowed to pay an additional contribution in aid of construction (CIAC), which may be required by the city in order to reduce the city's share of cost to an amount acceptable to the city. The city shall determine the amount of CIAC which is necessary under this section. Wastewater flow-based connection charges shall not be credited towards any required CIAC. 
(Code 1960, § 28-64.6; Ord. No. 3739, § 6, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-176. - Gravity line or pump station/force main construction. 
In the instance where it is physically feasible to construct either gravity line or a pump station/force main to serve a development, the facilities to be constructed shall be determined by the city. The applicant shall pay the lesser of: 
(1)  CIAC for gravity line extensions; or 
(2)  Pump station (primary) CIAC plus force main extension CIAC plus any additional CIAC that may be assessed by the city. 
(Code 1960, § 28-64.7; Ord. No. 3739, § 7, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-177. - Refunds of prepaid charges. 
Prepaid wastewater connection charges which are paid prior to installation of the facilities at the site for which they are paid, may be refunded to the current owner of the property for which the charges were paid upon application made, provided that the facilities for which payment was made have not been installed, and provided that all costs of the city incurred in connection therewith, including but not limited to administrative and engineering costs shall first be deducted prior to making any such refund. No interest shall be paid by the city on any such refund for prepayments. The burden of proof of any such prepayments shall be the applicant's. 
(Code 1960, § 28-64.8; Ord. No. 3739, § 8, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-178. - Maintenance of laterals. 
The customer is responsible for the operation, maintenance and repair of any wastewater lateral facilities connecting the customer's home or business to the city's wastewater facilities. The customer's responsibilities include the removal of any and all blockages within the customer facilities, including the removal of root intrusion, and the repair and replacement of any piping or connection failures associated with the customer's facilities. The customer is responsible for any and all damage to persons or property caused by the customer's ownership, operation, maintenance, repair and/or replacement of these facilities. The city is responsible for operating, maintaining, repairing and/or replacing the city's wastewater facilities located within the public right-of-way or a public utility easement. 
(Code 1960, § 28-60; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 030278, § 19, 9-8-03)  
Sec. 27-179. - Oversized facilities. 
The city reserves the right to require oversizing of any wastewater facility (gravity wastewater lines, lift stations, force mains and package treatment plants) and shall pay the developer for such oversizing on the basis of additional costs incurred because of the oversizing. The city shall pay oversizing costs based on the difference between the engineering estimates for the cost of oversized facility and the cost of the facility which is required to serve the development. 
(Code 1960, § 28-60.1; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-180. - Pretreatment program—Generally. 
(a)  The objectives of this section are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater treatment system that will cause interference with its operation or pass through inadequately treated into receiving waters or biosolids. 
(2)  Provide protection for the general public and city personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment. 
(3)  Ensure compliance of the city with applicable federal and state laws including Section 402 of the Clean Water Act (specifically 40 CFR Part 403), and Chapter 62-625 and Chapter 62-640 of the Florida Administrative Code. 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of reclaimed water, biosolids, and industrial wastewater from the wastewater system. 
(5)  To provide for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the wastewater system. 
(b)  Compliance with this division may not under some circumstances constitute compliance with the Alachua County Hazardous Material Management Code. Industrial users should contact the Alachua County Environmental Protection Department for further information on compliance with the Hazardous Material Management Code. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the general manager for utilities shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this section. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the general manager for utilities may be delegated by the general manager for utilities to a duly authorized city employee. 
(Code 1960, § 28-61; Ord. No. 3602, § 2, 3-5-90; Ord. No. 3696, § 20, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3735, § 2, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 980894, § 2, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 120211, § 1, 9-20-12)  
Sec. 27-180.1. - Same—Prohibited substances. 
(a)  No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the wastewater system any pollutant or wastewater, which either singly or by interaction with other pollutants causes pass through or interference. This general prohibition applies to all users of the wastewater system whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or with culpable negligence to discharge or cause to be discharged into the wastewater system of the city any substance which: 
(1)  Is harmful to the wastewater system, or is hazardous to the wastewater system because it contains flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases, which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the wastewater system or to the operation of the wastewater system. No substance may be discharged with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 60° C (140° F) using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent, nor any single reading over ten percent, of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Such materials shall include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the city determines to be a fire hazard, health hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)  Has a temperature which would have adverse effects on the wastewater system. In no case shall discharges cause the temperature of influent to the wastewater treatment plant to exceed 40° C (104° F). 
(3)  May cause stoppages in the wastewater system because of size, quantity, volume or any other characteristic. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in the sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities shall not be discharged into the wastewater system. 
(4)  Has corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the wastewater system. 
(5)  May cause the wastewater system's effluent or any other product of the wastewater system, such as residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or to interfere with the reclamation process. 
(6)  Contains any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference or pass through in the wastewater system. No user shall discharge flow at a rate that will be disruptive to the wastewater system or cause interference or pass through in the wastewater system. 
(7)  Results in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes in any part of the wastewater system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Contains pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, which constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater system. 
(9)  Contains waste exceeding the local discharge limit of any pollutant for which a limit has been established by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee using standard procedures, calculations and methods acceptable to the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) to protect against pass through, interference, protection of wastewater system employees, and adverse effects on wastewater biosolids disposal. Such limits shall be included as permit conditions and attached to each industrial wastewater discharge permit issued. The established local discharge limits, incorporated by reference herein, are subject to change and may be modified as needed based on regulatory requirements and standards, wastewater system operation, performance and processes, the industrial user base, potable water quality and domestic wastewater characteristics. Modifications to the established local discharge limits must be reviewed and approved by FDEP prior to implementation. Implementation shall be effective 30 days from notice of acceptance of the modified discharge limits by FDEP. Permitted significant industrial users shall also be issued an addendum to their wastewater discharge permit containing the revised local discharge limits. A copy of the approved local discharge limits shall be kept on file in the office of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee and made available on request. 
(10)  Discharge limits for sulfate, sulfide, and organic pollutants shall be determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee with considerations for acceptable worker exposure levels or prevention of damage, interference or pass through in the wastewater system, whichever provides the lower discharge limit. 
(11)  Local discharge limits shall apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the wastewater system. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal. 
(c)  No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment, to achieve compliance with a local discharge limit, prohibited discharge standard, or categorical pretreatment standard. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may impose mass limitations when appropriate. 
(d)  No user shall discharge petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through in the wastewater system. 
(e)  No user shall discharge trucked or hauled wastes to the wastewater system except at points designated by special agreement with the city. 
(f)  The city may establish, by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements or standards for substances not contained in this section for discharges to the wastewater system consistent with the purpose of this division. 
(g)  The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subpart N and Chapter 62-660, F.A.C., as may be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(h)  When wastewater subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with Rule 62-625.410 F.A.C. 
(Ord. No. 980894, § 3, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 060457, § 2, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 120211, § 2, 9-20-12)  
Sec. 27-180.2. - Same—Conditional requirements for specific discharges. 
(a)  Fats, oils and grease. Wastewater containing such amounts of fats, oils or greases as may be determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee to be detrimental to the wastewater system shall not be discharged into the wastewater system. An efficient grease trap, grease interceptor or oil/water separator shall be utilized prior to discharge to the wastewater system and maintained as required in this section. Wastewater from restaurants or places where cooking is done shall be presumed to contain grease and grease traps or grease interceptors shall be required at all such locations. Automotive-related facilities including but not limited to car-washes and automobile repair shops, which may contribute petroleum-based oil to the collection system, are required to have an approved oil/water separator. 
(1)  All nonresidential facilities that prepare, process or serve food as determined by the assistant general manager for water/wastewater utilities or his/her designee are required to have a grease interceptor discharge permit issued by GRU and an approved grease interceptor or approved grease trap. The grease interceptor discharge permit for any facility shall be renewed whenever there is a significant change in operation including facility expansion, remodeling that requires a plumbing permit, or change in ownership. 
(2)  Grease interceptors, grease traps, and oil/water separators shall be installed solely at the customer's expense. Proper operation, maintenance, and repair of grease interceptors, grease traps, and oil/water separators shall be done solely at the customer's expense. 
(3)  The "Oil and Grease Management Manual" promulgated by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, as amended from time to time is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this section. Copies of the "Oil and Grease Management Manual" shall be available upon request. 
(4)  Grease traps, grease interceptors and oil/water separators shall be designed, installed, and maintained as required in the "Oil and Grease Management Manual." The owner or operator shall maintain a maintenance log for the grease interceptors, grease traps, or oil/water separators on site that includes the previous 12-months activity. The log shall be available upon request by the city and include the date, time, maintenance performed, volume removed each pump out, and the name, signature, and contact information of the person who performed the maintenance. 
(5)  If grease accumulates in the wastewater collection system lines or damage to the wastewater system is caused by the discharge of fats, oils, or greases, the owner or operator will be billed for cleaning the collection lines or any other expense incurred by the city. 
(b)  Private wells. Where private wells are used, disposal into the wastewater system shall be done only by special agreement with the city. 
(c)  Storm water, air-conditioners and similar wastes. Storm water, air-conditioning water, condenser waters, swimming pool waters or other similar type wastes shall be discharged into the wastewater system only by special agreement with the city. 
(d)  Septic tank and portable toilet waste. Septic tank and portable toilet waste shall be introduced into the city's wastewater system only when specifically authorized and only at the time, place and manner prescribed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 980894, § 3, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 030278, § 20, 9-8-03)  
Sec. 27-180.3. - Same—Permitting. 
(a)  Industrial wastes shall not be discharged into the wastewater system without written permission of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. All significant industrial users who are proposing to connect or contribute to the wastewater system shall obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the wastewater system. Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall contain but are not limited to the following conditions: 
(1)  Duration. The duration shall not exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. 
(2)  Renewal. The user shall apply for permit renewal a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(3)  Transferability. The permit may not be sold, transferred, or reassigned. 
(4)  Limits. Effluent limits, including best management practices, shall be specified based on applicable pretreatment standards. 
(5)  Monitoring. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping shall be specified, including identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on applicable federal, state, and local laws. 
(6)  Penalties. Applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule shall be stated. Such schedule shall not extend the compliance date beyond applicable state or federal deadlines. 
(7)  Slug discharges. The permit shall contain requirements to control slug discharges if determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee to be necessary. 
(8)  Monitoring waiver. The permit shall include any grant of a monitoring waiver and shall specify the process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant either not present or not expected to be present in the industrial user's wastewater discharge in accordance with section 27-180.4(r). 
(b)  Significant industrial users, and any other user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, shall be required to complete an industrial wastewater discharge application as provided by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee prior to receiving a permit. 
(c)  Industrial users shall be required to submit a waste minimization plan when submitting either an industrial wastewater discharge application or an application for permit renewal. The waste minimization plan must include but is not limited to the following items: 
(1)  A detailed description of the components and estimated volume of all waste streams that comprise the industrial wastewater discharge. 
(2)  Practices currently employed or future plans to minimize the amount of waste in the industrial wastewater discharge. 
The plan will be forwarded to the Alachua County Environmental Protection Department for comment. Any comments received within 14 days of delivery of the plan to the Alachua County Environmental Protection Department shall be considered by the general manager or his/her designee when making waste minimization plan approval decisions. 
(d)  The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may require an industrial user to perform self-monitoring as a prerequisite to being granted an industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
(e)  The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may require other users, who are not significant industrial users, to obtain industrial wastewater discharge permits. 
(f)  Modifications. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may modify any industrial wastewater discharge permit. The industrial user shall be informed of any substantive modifications to the permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. 
(g)  Approval decisions. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee will review and evaluate the application and waste minimization plan and determine whether or not to issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may deny any application for an industrial wastewater discharge permit. Industrial users shall comply with the standards set forth in Chapter 62-625, Florida Administrative Code, as amended from time to time. 
(h)  Appeals. Any person, including the user, may petition the general manager for utilities or his/her designee to reconsider the terms of an industrial wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the industrial wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the industrial wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the general manager for utilities or his/her designee fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider an industrial wastewater discharge permit, not to issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(i)  The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may require any user connected prior to the effective date of this division to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 980894, § 3, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 120211, § 3, 9-20-12)  
Sec. 27-180.4. - Same—Monitoring, reporting, and notification. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination request under Rule 62-625.410(2)(d), F.A.C., whichever is later, industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to, or scheduled to discharge to the wastewater system, shall submit to the general manager for utilities or his/her designee a report which contains information as required in Rule 62-625.600(1)(a)—(g). At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources that become subject to categorical standards, shall submit to the general manager for utilities or his/her designee a report which contains the information listed in Rule 62-625.600(1)(a)—(e). 
(b)  Categorical compliance report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards under Rule 62-660, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater to the city wastewater system, any industrial user subject to the pretreatment standard shall submit a report containing the information as required in Rule 62-625.600(1)(d)—(f). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration discharge limits established by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee in accordance with the procedures in Rule 62-625.410(4), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production or other measure of operation, this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. This report shall also meet the requirements of section 27-180.4(g). 
(c)  Semiannual compliance report. Any significant industrial user discharging to the city wastewater system is required to submit by January 31st and July 31st each year a report detailing the nature and concentration of pollutants in their wastewater discharge, a record of the wastewater flow for the period, and a summary of any changes to pretreatment equipment. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may require these reports more frequently to ensure industrial user compliance. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may reduce the reporting frequency to a minimum of once per year, unless required more frequently in any applicable pretreatment standard or unless required more frequently by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, provided that the industrial user meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed 0.01 percent of the design dry weather hydraulic capacity of the water reclamation facility to which it discharges, or 5,000 gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as measured by a continuous flow monitoring device unless the industrial user discharges in batches. 
(2)  The industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed 0.01 percent of the design dry weather organic treatment capacity of the water reclamation facility to which it discharges. 
(3)  The industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed 0.01 percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by any applicable categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local limits have been developed for the water reclamation facility to which it discharges in accordance with 62-625.400(3), F.A.C. 
(4)  The industrial user has not been in significant noncompliance in the past two years and the industrial user does not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so much that decreasing the reporting requirement would result in data that are not representative of conditions occurring during any reporting period pursuant to 62-625.400(6)(c), F.A.C. 
If changes occur at the industrial user's facility which cause it to no longer meet the conditions of section 27-180.4(c)(1)—(4), the industrial user must immediately notify the general manager for utilities or his/her designee and the industrial user must immediately begin reporting semiannually or more frequently as determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
(d)  Unpermitted user reports. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may require any unpermitted user to submit reports relating to the wastewater discharge as specified by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
(e)  Self-monitoring. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may require self-monitoring reports from industrial users as are deemed necessary to assess and ensure compliance by industrial users with pretreatment standards and requirements including but not limited to the reporting requirements set forth in Rule 62-160 and the test procedures for wastewater analyses found in 40 CFR Part 136, which are incorporated by reference as part of this section. All self-monitoring reports shall be based on data obtained through sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report. These data shall be representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(f)  Sample collection. All wastewater samples shall be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement equipment shall be properly operated and maintained. The failure of an industrial user to maintain its monitoring equipment in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are not representative of its discharge. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds shall be obtained using grab collection techniques. Using methods specified in 40 CFR Part 136, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. All other samples shall be collected using flow proportional composite techniques. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring (section 27-180.4(a)) and 90-day compliance reports (section 27-180.4(b)), a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for industrial users for which historical sampling data do not exist; for industrial users for which historical sampling data are available, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee may authorize a lower minimum. 
(g)  Compliance monitoring. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall conduct compliance monitoring to ensure that the industrial user's discharge is in compliance with the industrial wastewater discharge permit and shall have the right to enter the premises of any industrial user for the purpose of such monitoring. 
(h)  Notification of changed discharge. All industrial users shall notify the general manager for utilities or his/her designee in writing of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days prior to the change. 
(i)  Prohibited discharge notification. Any industrial user discovering in the course of self-monitoring that any prohibited discharge limit has been exceeded shall notify the general manager for utilities or his/her designee within 24 hours of learning of the discharge. This notification shall be followed within 30 days of the date of discovery of the violation by resampling of the parameter, reanalysis, and submittal of a certified monitoring report. Such notification and resampling will not relieve the industrial user of liability for any penalties or corrective action required due to the prohibited discharge. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the general manager for utilities or his/her designee performs sampling at the industrial user's facility at least once per month, or if the general manager for utilities or his/her designee performs sampling at the industrial user's facility between the time when the initial sampling was performed and the time when the industrial user or the general manager for utilities or his/her designee receives the results of this sampling, or if the general manager for utilities or his/her designee has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user. 
(j)  Accidental discharge notification. Any person causing or suffering from any accidental discharge shall immediately notify the general manager for utilities or his/her designee by telephone to enable countermeasures to be taken to minimize damage to the wastewater system, the health and welfare of the public, and the environment. This notification shall be followed within five days of the date of occurrence by a detailed written statement submitted by the industrial user describing the cause of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification will not relieve the industrial user of liability of any expense, loss, or damage to the wastewater system. 
(k)  Hazardous waste discharge notification. Any industrial user shall notify the general manager for utilities or his/her designee in writing of any discharge into the wastewater system of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be hazardous waste under Chapter 62-730, F.A.C. Such notification shall comply with the requirements of Rule 62-625.600(15), F.A.C. 
(l)  Signatory and certification requirements. Documents submitted by any industrial user for the purposes of compliance with an industrial wastewater discharge permit or any requirement of this section shall be signed by a duly authorized representative and contain the appropriate certification statement determined as follows: 
(1)  Any industrial user submitting permit applications, baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with any categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic compliance or monitoring reports, and any industrial user submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the basis of section 27-180.4(r) shall submit the certification statement found in Rule 62-625.410(2)(b)2, F.A.C. 
(2)  Any industrial user determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee to be a non-significant categorical industrial user shall submit the certification statement found in Rule 62-625.600(17), F.A.C. 
(3)  Any industrial user that has a monitoring waiver approved by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee in accordance with section 27-180.4(r) shall submit each report with the certification statement found in Rule 62-625.600(4)(c)5. F.A.C. 
(m)  Recordkeeping. All industrial users shall keep, for a minimum of three years, any documents that are required by or developed to comply with this section or with an industrial wastewater discharge permit including but not limited to monitoring data, notices of violation, documentation associated with best management practices, and compliance reports. The record retention period shall be extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the industrial user or the city, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention time by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. Monitoring records shall include the following information: date and time of sampling, sampling location, sampling method, name of the person collecting the sample, analysis date, analyst name, analytical method, and results of analysis. 
(n)  Public records access. Documents submitted by industrial users to the general manager for utilities or his/her designee are open to inspection by the public in accordance with city policy, state, and federal law. Documents claimed as proprietary information must meet the criteria outlined in Rule 62-625.800. Under no circumstances will effluent data be treated as confidential. 
(o)  Costs. All costs associated with monitoring, reporting, and notification shall be borne solely by the industrial user. 
(p)  Slug discharge. All significant industrial users shall notify the general manager for utilities or his/her designee immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(q)  Best management practice documentation. In cases where an industrial user is required to meet compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the industrial user must submit documentation as required by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee to determine the compliance status of the industrial user. 
(r)  Monitoring waiver of a categorical pretreatment standard. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is not present or not expected to be present in the wastewater discharge, or present only at background concentrations from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to the activities of the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The waiver may be authorized if a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to the sanitary wastewater discharged from the industrial user's premises provided that the sanitary wastewater of the industrial user is not regulated by any applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater. 
(2)  The waiver is valid only for the duration of the wastewater discharge permit. The industrial user must submit a new request for a waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The industrial user shall demonstrate that a pollutant is not present by submitting data to the general manager for utilities or his/her designee from at least one sample of the industrial user's process wastewater prior to any pretreatment and which is representative of all wastewater from all processes. 
(4)  Non-detectable sample results may be used as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present only if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection limit for that pollutant was used in the analysis. 
(5)  Any grant of a monitoring waiver by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall be included as a condition in the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the industrial user in its request for the waiver shall be maintained by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee for three years after expiration of the waiver. 
(6)  In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present due to changes that occur in the industrial user's operations, the industrial user shall immediately notify the general manager for utilities or his/her designee and shall comply with the minimum monitoring requirements found in section 27-180.4(c) or more frequent monitoring as required by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
(7)  No waiver shall be granted by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee unless the industrial user's applicable categorical pretreatment standards allow such waivers. 
(Ord. No. 980894, § 3, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 120211, § 4, 9-20-12)  
Sec. 27-180.5. - Same—Pretreatment facilities and monitoring equipment. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities and/or monitoring equipment shall be required for any waste that may be harmful to equipment or the wastewater collection system, cause pass through or interference in the wastewater system or cause nuisance, odor, or stoppage problems in the wastewater system. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 27-180.1 within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, or the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, whichever is more stringent. 
(b)  The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may require monitoring equipment including but not limited to flow monitoring and sampling devices. 
(c)  The owner shall be responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance of any pretreatment facilities or monitoring equipment required by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the general manager for utilities or his/her designee for review, and shall be acceptable to the general manager for utilities or his/her designee before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the general manager for utilities or his/her designee under the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with discharge standards contained in this division upon reduction, loss, or failure of the user's treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. 
(Ord. No. 980894, § 3, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 120211, § 5, 9-20-12)  
Sec. 27-180.6. - Same—Accidental discharge/slug prevention. 
(a)  All industrial users shall provide such facilities and such procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the potential for accidental discharge into the wastewater system. Areas with the potential for release include but are not limited to liquid or raw material storage areas, truck and rail car loading and unloading areas, in-plant transfer or processing and materials handling areas, diked areas or holding ponds. 
(b)  The general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall evaluate at least every two years whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan and may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. This plan shall include but is not limited to the following items: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges. 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals and containment areas. 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the general manager for utilities or his/her designee of any accidental or slug discharge that would constitute a violation of any part of this division with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days as required by the reporting and notification section of this division. 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. 
(c)  The industrial wastewater discharge permit of any industrial user shall be subject on a case by case basis to a special permit condition or requirement for the construction of facilities or the establishment of procedures which will prevent or minimize the potential for accidental/slug discharges. Facilities to prevent accidental/slug discharge shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the general manager for utilities or his/her designee for approval before the facility is constructed. The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 980894, § 3, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 120211, § 6, 9-20-12)  
Sec. 27-180.7. - Same—Enforcement. 
(a)  Inspection. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may enter the premises of any industrial user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this section and any industrial wastewater discharge permit. Industrial users shall allow the general manager for utilities or his/her designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, and copying and the performance of any additional duties. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. Unreasonable delays in allowing the general manager for utilities or his/her designee access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this division. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may remove records for the purposes of copying if copying facilities are not available on the premises. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the general manager for utilities or his/her designee has been refused access to the premises and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of sections 27-180 and 27-180.1 through 27-180.7, or that there is a need to inspect and or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with sections 27-180 and 27-180.1 through 27-180.7 or any industrial wastewater discharge permit or to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the general manager for utilities or his/her designee may seek issuance of search warrant from the appropriate court of law. 
(c)  Notification of violation. Whenever the general manager for utilities or his/her designee finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this division, industrial wastewater discharge permit, compliance schedule, or any order issued in association with this division, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee may serve on the user a written notice of violation. Within 15 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of the violation shall be submitted by the user to the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. Nothing in this provision shall be interpreted to require the general manager for utilities or his/her designee to issue a notice of violation before taking any action including emergency actions or any other enforcement action. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this division are not exclusive. Generally, enforcement action procedures will be conducted in accordance with the city industrial pretreatment program enforcement response plan ("enforcement plan") on file in the office of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, incorporated by reference herein, copies of which are available upon request. However, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee may take other action against any user when circumstances warrant and may take more than one enforcement action against any user in noncompliance with this section including, but not limited to, action under the provision chapter 2, article III, division 8. 
(e)  Publication of users in significant noncompliance. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the city, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. An industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all the wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all the measurements for any pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for conventional pollutants such as, BOD, TSS, total oil and grease; TRC = 1.2 for all other pollutants except %LEL and pH). For %LEL, any reading in excess of the industrial wastewater discharge permit or limit set forth in this division shall be significant noncompliance. 
(3)  Any violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement (daily limit, long term average limit, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the general manager for utilities or his/her designee determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of city employees or the general public). 
(4)  Any discharge that has resulted in the general manager for utilities or his/her designee's exercise of emergency authority (under 62-625.500(2)(a)5.b. F.A.C.) to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations, including a violation of best management practices, which the general manager for utilities or his/her designee determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program, except when the state department of environmental protection is acting as the control authority. 
(f)  Compliance schedules. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may issue a compliance schedule to any industrial user that has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this section or an industrial wastewater discharge permit, directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. Such schedules shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to schedule completion and compliance with documentation being required upon completion of each major event. No increment of progress shall exceed nine months and the time interval between progress reports to the general manager of utilities or his/her designee shall not exceed nine months. The user shall submit a progress report to the general manager of utilities or his/her designee no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule including the final date of compliance. Progress reports shall include whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate the steps being taken by the user to return to the established compliance schedule. Compliance schedules may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance including additional self-monitoring and management practices. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities are installed and properly operated. Compliance schedules shall not relieve the user of liability for any violation nor preclude the general manager for utilities or his/her designee from taking further action against the user. 
(g)  Liability. Any user who discharges a substance prohibited by this section shall be responsible for the payment of all costs incurred by the city to stop the discharge, remove the unlawful substance from the wastewater system, and make necessary repairs to the system. The existence of an affirmative defense as provided herein shall not relieve the user of the obligations in this subsection (g). 
(h)  Fines. In accordance with Rule 62-625.500(2)(a)5., F.A.C. as amended, a fine of up to $1,000.00 per violation per day determined in accordance with the enforcement plan shall be assessed against the user for violations of any provision of this section, industrial wastewater discharge permit, compliance schedule, or any order issued in association with this section. Assessment of a fine does not relieve a user of any applicable charges contained in Appendix A, including excess strength charges. 
(i)  Permit revocation. Any industrial user who commits the following offenses is subject to having his/her industrial wastewater discharge permit revoked, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section: 
(1)  Failure of an industrial user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his/her discharge; 
(2)  Failure of an industrial user to report changes in operations which significantly affect wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to an industrial user's premises for the purposes of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(j)  Enforcement action hearing. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may require any user who has violated or is violating this division, an industrial wastewater discharge permit or any prohibition or requirement contained therein, to attend an enforcement action hearing. A notice shall be served on the customer specifying the time and place of the hearing, which will be held by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, regarding the violation and the proposed enforcement action, and directing the customer to show cause before the general manager for utilities or his/her designee why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the customer or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 20 days before the hearing. Service may be made on a duly appointed authorized representative of the user. 
At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony taken must be under oath and tape-recorded. The transcript so recorded will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing, upon payment of the usual charges therefor. 
After the general manager for utilities or his/her designee has reviewed the evidence, he/she may issue an order to the customer responsible for the discharge, directing that following a specified time period sewer service and/or the industrial wastewater discharge permit may be discontinued, unless and until adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall be installed and are properly operating on existing treatment facilities, devices and other related appurtenances. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may also be issued by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
Any customer aggrieved by an order issued by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee may appeal the order to a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days from the date the order is reduced to writing and delivered by certified or registered mail (return receipt requested) to the user. 
(k)  Injunctive relief. If any user discharges wastes to the wastewater system contrary to the provisions of this division, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, the city attorney may commence any action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate court. 
(l)  Emergency suspension of service. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or an industrial wastewater permit when necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of the public or the environment or cause damage or interference to the wastewater system. Any user notified of a need to sever wastewater treatment service and/or suspend the industrial wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge in question. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with a suspension or severance notice, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize danger to the health or welfare of the public or the environment or to prevent damage or interference to the wastewater system. Such steps may include immediate severance of the sewer connection and/or suspension of the industrial wastewater permit. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may reinstate wastewater treatment service upon satisfactory demonstration of the elimination of the non-compliant discharge and of adequate measures taken to prevent non-compliant discharges in the future. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the non-compliant discharge and measures taken to prevent a future occurrence shall be submitted to the general manager for utilities or his/her designee within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(m)  Criminal prosecution. Criminal violations of this division may subject the user to prosecution under applicable state, federal, and local laws. 
(n)  Affirmative defense. Affirmative defenses shall be available to an industrial user as provided in F.A.C. 62-625.400(1)(b), 62-625.840 and 62-625.860, which by this reference are incorporated herein. 
(o)  Consent order. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee may enter into a consent order, assurance of compliance, or other similar document establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such document shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such document shall have the same force and effect as the requirements of section 27-180.7(f) and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(p)  Cease and desist order. When the general manager for utilities or his/her designee finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any part of this division, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to immediately comply with all requirements and to take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be necessary to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not bar, or be a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. Such order shall have the same force and effect as the requirements of section 27-180.7(f) and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 980894, § 3, 6-14-99; Ord. No.031205, § 8, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 060457, § 3, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 120211, § 7, 9-20-12)  
Sec. 27-180.8. - Same—Regulation of wastewater received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  Inter-jurisdictional agreement. If another municipality or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater which is transmitted by pipe directly into the City of Gainesville wastewater collection system, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall enter into an inter-jurisdictional agreement with the contributing municipality 
(b)  Contents of inter-jurisdictional agreement. The inter-jurisdictional agreement shall contain the following: 
(1)  A requirement that the contributing municipality adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this division including wastewater discharge limits and monitoring and reporting requirements. 
(2)  A requirement that the contributing municipality revise its ordinance and wastewater discharge limits as necessary to reflect changes made to the city ordinance or wastewater discharge limits. 
(3)  A requirement that the contributing municipality provide access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities including a list of users which is updated at least annually. 
(4)  A provision specifying which pretreatment program activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, and inspection, sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality, which of these activities will be conducted by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
(5)  A provision specifying limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the city wastewater collection system. 
(6)  A provision specifying requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's wastewater discharge. 
(7)  A provision ensuring that the general manager for utilities or his/her designee has access to the facility of any user located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
(8)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the inter-jurisdictional agreement. Such provision shall also ensure the right of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee to enforce the terms of the contributing municipality's ordinance or to impose and enforce any applicable pretreatment standards and requirements directly against users within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries in the event the contributing municipality is unable or unwilling to take such action. 
(Ord. No. 120211, § 8, 9-20-12)  
Sec. 27-181. - Graywater disposal facilities. 
(a)  Conditions for approval. The general manager for utilities or his/her designee is authorized to approve, on a limited and experimental basis, the installation of individual graywater systems as feasible and practicable under the following conditions: 
(1)  Graywater flows shall include only domestic wastes carried off by bath, lavatory, sink, (but not kitchen sink) and laundry drains and sewers or wastes of similar nature not normally containing urine, fecal matter, food particles or any other harmful or noxious matter. 
(2)  Blackwater flows would include all wastes not described in paragraph (a)(1) above and otherwise allowed by this Code for introduction into the wastewater system. No blackwater flows shall be introduced into a graywater disposal system. 
(3)  An individual graywater system shall consist of a system of piping, a septic tank or pretreatment device, and a subsurface absorption bed or drainfield, for handling or treating graywater where blackwater is treated by the central wastewater system. 
(4)  All applicable plumbing codes, the general requirements of Chapter 10D-6 of the Florida Administrative Code, as administered by the county health department, the requirements of section 17-183 and any other applicable provisions of this Code shall apply for the approval and installation of individual graywater disposal systems. 
(5)  Approved individual graywater systems are subject to the provisions of this Code for special wastewater facilities related to maintenance and inspection. If approved graywater systems should fail or prove hazardous to public health, or blackwater wastes are introduced into the graywater system, the city may require that graywater flows be connected to the central wastewater system. The requirements of section 27-171 shall apply when any wastes previously connected to an approved graywater system are connected to the central wastewater system. Rates and charges in effect at the time of connection shall be applicable. Connection of any portion of an approved graywater system to the central wastewater system without a written permit issued by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall be unlawful and subject to the provisions of section 27-1. 
(b)  Maintenance. The owner shall be responsible for the construction, operation, and maintenance, of approved graywater disposal systems. 
(c)  Inspection. Duly authorized representatives of the city shall have access to, and the right to inspect approved graywater disposal systems and to take samples of the wastewater before or after flowing through an approved graywater disposal system. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all wastewater discharge related parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, inspecting or copying records, or to perform any of their duties. Duly authorized representatives shall have the right to remove records for the purposes of copying facilities are not available on the premises. 
(Code 1960, § 28-62.1; Ord. No. 3345, § 2, 6-15-87; Ord. No. 3602, § 3, 3-5-90; Ord. No. 3735, § 3, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 980894, § 4, 6-14-99)  
Sec. 27-181.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 980894, adopted June 14, 1999, repealed § 27-181.1 which pertained to prohibited substances—reporting of discharges and derived from Ord. No. 3602, § 4, adopted Mar. 5, 1990; Ord. No. 3696, § 21, adopted Feb. 18, 1991; and Ord. No. 3754, § 80, adopted Jan. 27, 1992.  
Sec. 27-181.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 980894, adopted June 14, 1999, repealed § 27-181.2 which pertained to notification of changed discharge and derived from Ord. No. 3602, § 5, adopted Mar. 5, 1990 and Ord. No. 3754, § 80, adopted Jan. 27, 1992.  
Sec. 27-181.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 980894, adopted June 14, 1999, repealed § 27-181.3 which pertained to noncompliance assessment and derived from § 28-66.1 of the 1960 Code, Ord. No. 3602, § 6, adopted Mar. 5, 1990; Ord. No. 3735, § 4, adopted Aug. 19, 1991; and Ord. No. 3754, § 80, adopted Jan. 27, 1992.  
Sec. 27-182. - Private wastewater disposal system—Approved by county; compliance with state standards required. 
If any building or structure is to be constructed upon property, the nearest property line of which is more than 200 feet from an available public wastewater line, no building permit therefor shall be issued unless an official representative of the county health department shall have first issued a permit to construct a private wastewater disposal system for the building or structure. Before any such permit, the health department representative shall investigate the soil conditions, drainage, size of lot and any other factors, bearing thereon in the interest of public health and shall afterward inspect the construction of the private wastewater disposal system to determine that the same has been built in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C., entitled, "Standards for Onsite Sewage Treatment And Disposal Facilities," which is by this reference made a part of this section, a copy of which shall be retained in the office of the clerk of the commission as required by law. 
(Code 1960, § 28-62; Ord. No. 3696, § 22, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 3735, § 5, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 980894, § 6, 6-14-99)  
Sec. 27-182.1. - Same—Permits; inspection. 
(a)  Permits for the construction of private sewage disposal systems shall be obtained from the general manager for utilities or his/her designee before construction thereon is begun. Applicants for such permits shall pay a fee in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A to cover the cost of inspection as required in this section. 
(b)  No private sewage disposal system not provided for under the terms of this division shall be hereafter constructed in the city nor shall any private sewage disposal system constructed under the terms of this division be covered or backfilled until the same has been inspected and approved by the city health officer. 
(Ord. No. 980894, § 7, 6-14-99)  
Sec. 27-182.2. - Same—Discharges. 
No person shall maintain any privy, sewage disposal system, pipe or drain so as to dispose or discharge the contents or other liquid or matter therefrom to the atmosphere or on the surface of the ground, or so as to endanger any source of drinking water; nor shall any person discharge into any watercourse, storm sewer, drain or body of water any sewage or sewage effluent unless a permit for such discharge shall have been issued therefore by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee upon approval of the city health officer. 
(Ord. No. 980894, § 7, 6-14-99)  
Sec. 27-183. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8 of Ord. No. 980894, adopted June 14, 1999, repealed § 27-183 which pertained to private wastewater disposal system—approved by county; compliance with state standards required, and derived from § 28-67 of the 1960 Code and Ord. No. 3754, § 80, adopted Jan. 27, 1992.  
Secs. 27-183.1, 27-183.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8 of Ord. No. 980894, adopted June 14, 1999, repealed §§ 27-183.1 and 27-183.2 which pertained to private wastewater disposal system—permits; inspection and discharges, respectively, and derived from §§ 28-68, 28-69 of the 1960 Code; Ord. No. 3696, §§ 23, 24, adopted Feb. 18, 1991; and Ord. No. 3754, § 80, adopted Jan. 27, 1992.  
Sec. 27-184. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8 of Ord. No. 980894, adopted June 14, 1999, repealed § 27-184 which pertained to emergency suspension of service and industrial wastewater permits, and derived from § 28-69 of the 1960 Code; Ord. No. 3696, § 24, adopted Feb. 18, 1991; and Ord. No. 3754, § 80, adopted Jan. 27, 1992.  
Sec. 27-185. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8 of Ord. No. 980894, adopted June 14, 1999, repealed § 27-185 which pertained to industrial users—accidental discharges, and derived from § 28-61.1 of the 1960 Code; Ord. No. 3696, § 25, adopted Feb. 18, 1991; and Ord. No. 3754, § 80, adopted Jan. 27, 1992.  
Sec. 27-185.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8 of Ord. No. 980894, adopted June 14, 1999, repealed § 27-185.1 which pertained to industrial users—violation; revocation of permits, and derived from § 28-66.2 of the 1960 Code; and Ord. No. 3754, § 80, adopted Jan. 27, 1992.  
Sec. 27-186. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8 of Ord. No. 980894, adopted June 14, 1999, repealed § 27-186 which pertained to violation—notification and derived from § 28-66.3 of the 1960 Code; and Ord. No. 3754, § 80, adopted Jan. 27, 1992.  
Sec. 27-186.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8 of Ord. No. 980894, adopted June 14, 1999, repealed § 27-186.1 which pertained to violation—enforcement action hearing and derived from § 28-66.4 of the 1960 Code; Ord. No. 3602, § 7, adopted March 5, 1990; Ord. No. 3696, § 26, adopted Feb. 18, 1991; and Ord. No. 3754, § 80, adopted Jan. 27, 1992.  
Secs. 27-187—27-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT AREAS 
 
Sec. 27-201. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this division that the city will designate infrastructure improvement areas for water and wastewater gravity collection improvements, and impose infrastructure improvement area user fees to fund water and wastewater gravity collection improvements which benefit a new structure, in whole or in part, and/or the construction of additional square footage to an existing structure, within the geographic boundaries of the designated infrastructure improvement areas. 
(Ord. No. 110541 , § 1, 4-7-16)  
Sec. 27-202. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Commercial establishment shall mean any structure used for or intended for the exchange of commercial goods or services for compensation. Such uses may include, but are not limited to, retail sales, office establishments that are not used for professional services, eating and/or drinking establishments, light assembly, and/or any other similar commercial uses. 
Hotel establishment shall mean any structure used for or intended for use as a public lodging establishment containing sleeping room accommodations for 25 or more guests, providing the services generally provided by a hotel, and/or recognized as a hotel in the community in which it is located or by the industry. 
Infrastructure improvement area shall mean the geographic boundaries for each area within the city that is designated by the city and delineated by the map(s) depicted in figure(s) within this division. 
Infrastructure improvement area fee shall mean the user fee charged pursuant to this division to support the funding of infrastructure improvements to the water and wastewater gravity collection systems within an infrastructure improvement area. 
Institutional establishment shall mean a structure that is used for the educational or cultural needs of the community, including, but not limited to, learning institutions or places of religious assembly. 
Laboratory (dry) establishment shall mean a structure that is used for conducting computer simulations or data analysis. 
Laboratory (wet) establishment shall mean a structure that is used for testing and analyzing chemicals, drugs, and/or any other material or biological matter requiring water, direct ventilation, and/or specialized piped utilities. 
Motel establishment shall mean any structure used for or intended for use as a public lodging establishment which offers rental units with an exit to the outside of each rental unit, daily or weekly rates, offstreet parking for each unit, a central office on the property with specified hours of operation, a bathroom or connecting bathroom for each rental unit, with at least six rental units, and/or is recognized as a motel in the community in which it is located or by the industry. 
Multi-family residential establishment shall mean a structure that is used for two or more dwelling units, including apartments, duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes and/or townhomes. 
Parking garage establishment shall mean a structure that is either above ground or underground where vehicles can be parked. 
Professional office establishment shall mean a structure used for professional business services, which may include, but is not limited to, professional consultancy, medical or legal profession practices. 
(Ord. No. 110541 , § 1, 4-7-16)  
Sec. 27-203. - Areas. 
The city may, subject to the availability of city funds and resources, designate infrastructure improvement areas for water and wastewater gravity collection systems in areas the city determines feasible and beneficial for economic development. Some of the factors that may be considered in determining feasibility include, but are not limited to: instances where multiple developers are preparing for high-density/high-intensity redevelopment of an existing urban area, instances where large infrastructure improvements are needed to serve multiple high-density/high-intensity redevelopment projects, instances where the city has the ability to master plan multiple high-density/high-intensity utility improvements, and/or instances where the required improvements can be cost-effectively implemented. Within the geographic boundaries of each designated infrastructure improvement area, the city will design and construct capacity improvements to its water and wastewater gravity collection systems, as the city deems necessary or advisable to meet the demands of the infrastructure improvement area. 
(Ord. No. 110541 , § 1, 4-7-16)  
Sec. 27-204. - Designated infrastructure improvement areas. 
The following areas are designated as infrastructure improvement areas: 
(1)  The Innovation District Infrastructure Improvement Area. This area is depicted in Figure 1. 
 
(Ord. No. 110541 , § 1, 4-7-16) 
_____ 
Sec. 27-205. - User fees. 
(1)  Each new or existing customer who constructs a new commercial establishment, institutional establishment, hotel establishment, laboratory (wet) establishment, laboratory (dry) establishment, professional office establishment, motel establishment, multi-family residential establishment, a parking garage establishment and/or constructs additional square footage to any such existing establishment within an infrastructure improvement area shall pay infrastructure improvement area user fees based on the rates set forth in Appendix A of this Code. Infrastructure improvement area user fees for the water system will be assessed based on the gross building square footage or number of hotel rooms, motel rooms or bedrooms of the new structure and/or the addition to an existing structure. Infrastructure improvement area user fees for the wastewater gravity collection system will be assessed based on total heated and cooled building square footage or number of hotel rooms, motel rooms, bedrooms of the new structure, and/or the addition to an existing structure. Infrastructure improvement area user fees shall not apply if a structure is destroyed by fire or other unforeseen casualty and the new structure is reconstructed in substantially the same square footage and with the same use (type of establishment) as the structure that was destroyed. The infrastructure improvement area user fees shall be paid on or before the date a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of completion is issued by the city. 
(2)  The infrastructure improvement area rates set forth in Appendix A are established based on a master plan of future water distribution and wastewater gravity collection system infrastructure capacity improvements for the area, that includes the estimated capital construction costs for such improvements and the estimated square footage of anticipated future establishments in the area that will receive the benefit of the infrastructure improvements. The user fees collected by the city in any designated infrastructure improvement area shall be used by the city to fund the water and wastewater gravity collection services infrastructure in that area and shall not be used for any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 110541 , § 1, 4-7-16)  
Secs. 27-206—27-235. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3444, § 1, adopted July 25, 1988, adding Ch. 30.2, §§ 30.2-1—30.2-9, to the 1960 Code, has been codified herein as Art. V, §§ 27-236—27-244, at the editor's discretion. Ord. No. 001335, § 1, adopted June 25, 2001, changed the title of Art. V from "Stormwater Management Utility Program" to "Stormwater Management Utility". 
Cross reference— Stormwater management, § 30-270. 
 
Sec. 27-236. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article that the city will establish stormwater management as a city utility enterprise in accordance with F.S. § 403.0893 and shall establish a program of user charges for stormwater management service to be charged to all developed property within the city that contributes stormwater runoff to the city's stormwater management systems to accomplish the functions of such utility. These functions include, but are not limited to, maintenance, planning, design, construction, regulation, surveying, and inspection as they relate to stormwater management facilities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 1, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 980174, § 1, 9-14-98; Ord. No. 001335, § 1, 6-25-01)  
Sec. 27-237. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Adjusted impervious area shall mean the stormwater basin area(s) multiplied by the stormwater management facility impervious area factor plus the impervious area(s) plus one-half of the partial impervious area(s). 
City shall mean the City of Gainesville, Florida, and its staff and elected officials. 
Department shall mean the city public works department. 
Developed property shall mean any parcel of land that has been modified by the action of persons to reduce the land's natural ability to absorb and hold rainfall. These modifications include, but are not limited to, clearing, grading, cementing, filling, or compacting the natural ground, or erecting or constructing buildings, parking lots, driveways, patios, decks, walkways, and athletic courts. 
Drainage area shall mean the watershed (acreage) contributing surface water runoff to the city's storm drainage system. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) shall mean the basic unit for the computation of stormwater service charges and is defined as 2,300 square feet of impervious area, which represents the estimated average impervious area for all developed, detached single-family properties in the city. 
Impervious area shall mean any part of any parcel of land that has an impermeable cover caused to be erected or constructed by the action of persons, and such covers include, but are not limited to, buildings, parking lots, driveways, patios, decks, walkways, and athletic courts. 
Manager shall mean the city manager or designee. 
Multifamily residential properties shall mean and include all duplex, condo, trailer, apartment and other properties containing more than one dwelling unit. Common areas associated with such properties shall be included in the charge to the multifamily units on such properties. 
Nonresidential/commercial properties shall mean and include all property zoned or used for commercial, industrial, retail, governmental, or other nonresidential purposes and shall include all developed real property in the city not classified as single-family or multifamily as defined in this section. 
Partial impervious area shall mean any part of any parcel of land that has been modified by the action of persons to reduce the land's natural ability to absorb and hold rainfall. This includes areas which have been cleared, graded, graveled, filled, or compacted, and typically involve unpaved parking, unpaved vehicle and equipment storage, and material storage. Excluded are all lawns, landscape areas, and gardens or farming areas. 
Receiving water shall mean those creeks, streams, rivers, lakes, sinkholes, and other bodies of water into which surface waters are directed, either naturally or in manmade ditches, pipes, or open systems. 
Retention credit factor shall mean the numeric value generated by dividing the stormwater retention volume by the standard retention volume, but the value cannot exceed 1.0. 
Single-family property shall mean and include all single-family detached housing units. 
Standard retention volume shall mean the quantity of stormwater runoff generated by multiplying 7.9 inches by the adjusted impervious area. 
Stormwater basin area shall mean the horizontal area occupied by stormwater detention, retention, and/or detention/retention basins at the design maximum water surface elevation. 
Stormwater detention basin shall mean a facility, either natural or manmade, that collects and contains stormwater runoff and allows the release of the stormwater through a structure that is designed to control the rate of the release of the stormwater, as acknowledged by the city manager or designee. 
Stormwater detention/retention basin shall mean a facility, either natural or manmade, that performs a combination of both a stormwater detention basin and a retention basin, as acknowledged by the city manager or designee. 
Stormwater management facility impervious area factor shall mean the amount that the stormwater retention basin area(s) is adjusted; the factor is derived by dividing 4.2 inches (which is the amount of rainfall generated by the 25-year, 24-hour rain storm event between the 11th and 13th hours) by 7.9 inches (which is the amount of rainfall generated by the 25-year, 24-hour rain storm event) which quotient is 0.53. 
Stormwater management system shall mean and include all natural and manmade elements used to convey stormwater from the first point of impact with the surface of the earth to a suitable receiving water body or location internal or external to the boundaries of the city. The stormwater management system includes all pipes, channels, streams, ditches, wetlands, sinkholes, detention/retention basins, ponds, and other stormwater conveyance and treatment facilities. 
Stormwater retention basin shall mean a facility, either natural or manmade, that collects and contains stormwater runoff and only allows the release of the stormwater runoff by one or more of the following: evaporation, percolation into the natural ground and/or percolation into a manmade filtration system that may convey the stormwater runoff to a stormwater management system, as acknowledged by the city manager or designee. 
Stormwater retention volume shall mean the maximum capacity of a stormwater retention basin(s). 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 1, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 3571, § 1, 10-2-89; Ord. No. 3724, § 1, 5-20-91; Ord. No. 980174, § 1, 9-14-98; Ord. No. 001335, § 1, 6-25-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 27-238. - Stormwater management utility—Established. 
There is hereby created and established in the city a stormwater management utility in accordance with section 403.0893 of the Florida Statutes. This utility shall be responsible for the city's stormwater management system and shall have equal status with the other utility services provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 1, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 980174, § 1, 9-14-98)  
Sec. 27-239. - Same—Directors. 
Directors of the stormwater management utility shall be the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 1, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 980174, § 1, 9-14-98)  
Sec. 27-240. - Same—Duties and powers. 
The stormwater management utility shall have all powers necessary for the exercise of its responsibility for the drainage from all properties within the city, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Preparation of plans for improvements and betterments to the stormwater management system. 
(2)  Construction of improvements and betterments to the stormwater management system. 
(3)  Promulgation of regulations for the use of the stormwater management system, including provisions for enforcement of such regulations. 
(4)  Review and approval of all new development permits within the city for compliance with stormwater management regulations included in present city ordinances or ordinances later adopted. 
(5)  Performance of routine maintenance and minor improvement to the stormwater management system. 
(6)  Establishment of charges for the city's stormwater management system. 
(7)  Evaluation of water quality concerns for discharges to the stormwater management system. 
(8)  Performance of all normal utility functions to include construction, operation, and maintenance of the city's stormwater management system, including, but not limited to, the hiring of staff, the selection of special consultants, the entering into contracts for services and construction of facilities, and the handling of purchase, lease, sale or other rights to property for the stormwater management system. 
(9)  Issuance of revenue bonds for the purpose of performing those duties as described herein. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 1, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 3514, § 1, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 980174, § 1, 9-14-98; Ord. No. 001335, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 002679, § 1, 5-20-02)  
Sec. 27-241. - Authority for service charges. 
(a)  Authorization. The stormwater management utility is empowered by this article to establish charges for the use and discharge to the city's stormwater management system. Such charges shall be based on the cost of providing stormwater management services to all properties within the city and may be different for properties receiving different classes of service. 
(b)  Rates for stormwater management service. There is charged to all owners or occupants of real property in the city, with improvements or uses thereon which contribute stormwater runoff to the city's stormwater management system, a monthly fee as established by separate ordinance in accordance with the following definitions: 
(1)  Single-family property service charges. Each single-family property shall be considered one ERU for billing purposes. Monthly service charges for each single-family dwelling unit shall be identical, provided that the ratio of impervious area to total area of the lot does not exceed 50 percent and the total area of the lot exceeds 10,000 square feet. If the ratio of impervious to total area exceeds 50 percent and the total area of the lot exceeds 10,000 square feet, the rates established in subsection (b)(3) shall apply. 
(2)  Multifamily property service charges. The monthly service charge for all multifamily properties shall be: 
Duplex units = One ERU/dwelling unit 
Condominium units = One ERU/dwelling unit 
Apartment units = 0.6 ERU/dwelling unit 
Mobile homes = 0.6 ERU/dwelling unit 
Definition of dwelling unit shall be those living areas served by individual electric and/or water meters. 
(3)  Nonresidential/commercial property service charge. Nonresidential/commercial property service charge shall be: 
No. Base ERU's = 
Impervious Area (sq. ft.) + 0.5 (Partial Impervious Area (sq. ft.)) / 2,300 sq. ft. 
No. Billable ERU's = No. Base ERU's × (1 - Retention Credit Factor) 
Monthly Service Charge = (No. Billable ERU's) × (Rate/ERU) 
A minimum value of 1.0 ERU shall be assigned to each nonresidential/commercial property unless such property has earned a 100-percent retention credit, in which case, the property will be assigned a value of 0.0 ERU. The impervious area of each nonresidential/commercial property shall be determined by the city manager or designee. 
(4)  Application to all developed properties. Service charges shall apply to all developed properties within the city using the city's stormwater management system, including those properties classified as nonprofit or tax-exempt for ad valorem tax purposes. Service charges shall apply to all government properties, including properties of the city, including the city-owned buildings, parks, and other properties. 
(5)  Undeveloped property. Stormwater management service charges shall not be charged to undeveloped property that has not been altered from the natural state as defined under section 27-237, "impervious area" and "partial impervious area." Farmland, gardens, and landscaped areas shall also be exempt except for any roads, parking, or structures associated therewith. 
(c)  Billing. The fees imposed by this article shall be billed on a monthly basis and may be billed in conjunction with the property owner or property user's monthly electric bill issued by the city through Gainesville Regional Utilities. Such fees shall be due and payable at the same time and in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as other utility fees. In the event a developed property does not have other city utility service(s), a new account shall be developed and that property shall be billed separately for the stormwater management charges. The city manager or designee may create a new account for stormwater utility billing purposes only for a property owner or a property user that may also have a valid city electric and/or water utility account. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 1, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 3514, § 2, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 3515, § 1, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 3570, § 1, 10-2-89; Ord. No. 3571, § 2, 10-2-89; Ord. No. 3724, § 2, 5-20-91; Ord. No. 3737, § 1, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3790, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 950602, § 1, 9-25-95; Ord. No. 980174, § 1, 9-14-98; Ord. No. 980362, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 990371, § 1, 9-27-99; Ord. No. 000362, § 1, 9-25-00; Ord. No. 001335, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 002679, § 2, 5-20-02)  
Sec. 27-242. - Trust fund. 
(a)  A stormwater management utility trust fund is hereby established into which all revenues from user fees, grants, or other funding sources shall be deposited and from which all expenditures related to the city's stormwater management utility shall be paid. Accounting and reporting procedures shall be consistent with state law and reported to the city commission by the city manager or designee annually. 
(b)  Expenditures from the fund for activities that are not related to the city's stormwater management utility shall not be permitted, except for a prorated charge for general city government services as is in effect for other city utility funds. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 1, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 980174, § 1, 9-14-98; Ord. No. 001335, § 1, 6-25-01)  
Sec. 27-243. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any customer or property owner who feels that the stormwater management service charge for their property has been assigned or computed incorrectly may petition in writing to the city manager or designee for a review of such charges. 
(b)  If not satisfied with the determination of the city manager or designee, the petitioner may ask for a hearing before the city commission, whose decision shall be final. Any credits authorized by the appeal process shall only be effective against billings subsequent to the date of authorization. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 1, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 980174, § 1, 9-14-98)  
Sec. 27-244. - Delinquent charges. 
(a)  All charges not paid within 30 days after the bill is due, or that are not under active appeal, shall be considered delinquent. 
(b)  All charges billed by Gainesville Regional Utilities shall be subject to the same penalties for delinquencies as other city utility fees. 
(c)  All charges billed by Gainesville Regional Utilities to users of property which are not paid within 60 days of billing may be billed to the owner of the property. When the property owner is billed pursuant to this subsection, the provisions of subsection (a) shall attach, and a late fee of $1.00 or two percent of the delinquent amount, whichever is greater, shall be assessed on all balances of more than $15.00 on each monthly statement reflecting a delinquent amount. 
(d)  All charges remaining delinquent after 60 days may be: 
(1)  Referred to a collection agency; or 
(2)  Referred to the city attorney to file suit thereon and collect all unpaid charges, fees, and interest, including reasonable attorney's fees and charges. 
(e)  These provisions are supplemental and in addition to the provisions of section 27-14. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 1, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 3514, § 3, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 3724, § 7, 5-20-91; Ord. No. 3790, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 980174, § 1, 9-14-98; Ord. No. 001335, § 1, 6-25-01)  
Secs. 27-245—27-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NATURAL GAS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3754, §§ 58—69, adopted Jan. 27, 1992, repealed various sections of Art. VI, relative to natural gas, and § 80 of said Ord. No. 3754 renumbered the remaining sections of this article to read as herein set out. The history notation has been retained in the renumbered sections for reference purposes. The repealed provisions of this article derived from Ord. No. 3664, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 1990 and Ord. No. 3606, § 4, adopted March 18, 1991. See the Code Comparative Table for a specific enumeration of repealed and renumbered sections. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; gas code, § 6-116 et seq.; construction trades regulations, § 6-176 et seq.; public service tax, § 25-16 et seq. 
 
Sec. 27-271. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Billing period. An interval between successive meter reading dates, which interval may be 30 days, more or less. 
Consumer. Any natural or liquid propane gas customer whose application for service has been accepted by the city and classified either "residential service," "general service," "large volume service," or "liquid propane gas service." 
General service. Service to a consumer supplied on a firm, non-interruptible basis for any purpose other than residential purposes set forth in section 27-271(m). 
General service, small commercial. Under the same criteria as general service, consumers may elect this alternate nonresidential rate category that includes a lower customer charge but higher non-fuel energy charge. 
House piping. All piping and fittings installed beyond the meter and/or regulator setting. 
Large volume service. Interruptible service for commercial and/or industrial purposes to a consumer who meets the following conditions: 
(1)  Consumer shall subscribe to the delivery of a minimum of 30,000 therms of natural gas per month for a minimum of 12 consecutive months and agree to all terms and conditions of this rate classification as contained in this chapter and related Appendix A. This rate will be qualified based on a single metered point of delivery only. 
(2)  Consumer will be billed for a minimum of 30,000 therms per month or the actual number of therms delivered per month, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Consumer agrees to be served on an interruptible basis under this classification and specifically understands that the gas service may be interrupted as provided in section 27-277 and Appendix A. 
(4)  Natural gas requirements are for the use of a single business or establishment. 
(5)  Consumer's natural gas distribution system extends only to the consumer's property. 
(6)  Service under this rate is subject to annual volume review by the city or any time at the consumer's request. If reclassification to another rate is appropriate and timely, such classification will be prospective. 
(7)  A responsible legal entity is established to which the city can render its bills for said service. 
Mains. Pipes installed to transport natural gas within a service area to points of connection with the service lines. 
Meter and/or regulator setting. All piping and fittings between the service line and the outlet of the meter. 
Meter tampering. A natural gas meter is tampered with when any person shall willfully alter, injure, or knowingly suffer to be injured any natural gas meter or meter seal or other apparatus or device belonging to the city in such a manner as to cause loss or damage or to prevent any such meter installed for registering the quantity which otherwise would pass through same; or to alter the index or break the seal of any such meter; or in any way to hinder or interfere with the proper action or just registration of any such meter or device in such a manner as to use, without the consent of the city, any natural gas without such service being reported for payment or such natural gas passing through a meter provided by the city and registering the quantity of natural gas passing through the same. 
Off-system sales. All firm and interruptible gas sales not classified as retail sales. 
Purchased gas adjustment. A monthly fuel charge per therm consisting of the estimated fuel costs for the month, the true-up correction factor, and taxes and fees. 
Residential service. Service to a consumer supplied on a firm, non-interruptible basis for residential purposes of domestic heating, cooking, air-conditioning and housekeeping in a single-family dwelling, a multiple-family dwelling, or in separately metered apartment units. Also, for gas used in commonly owned facilities of condominium associations, cooperative apartments, and homeowner associations, subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  One hundred percent of the energy is used exclusively for the co-owners' benefit. 
(2)  None of the energy is used in any endeavor which sells or rents a commodity or provides service for a fee. 
(3)  Each point of delivery will be separately metered and billed. 
(4)  A responsible legal entity is established as the consumer to whom the city can render its bills for said service. 
Retail sales. Residential, general, large volume and liquid propane gas service. 
Service line. All piping between the main tap up to and including the first valve or fitting of the meter and/or regulator setting. 
Standard delivery pressure. The pressure measured at the outlet of the meter and/or regulator setting which shall not be less than three inches nor more than 12 inches water column. 
Technical terms: 
(1)  Atmospheric pressure. Fourteen and seventy-three hundredths pounds per square inch, irrespective of the actual elevation or location of the point of measurement above sea level or variations in actual atmospheric pressure from time to time. 
(2)  British thermal unit (Btu). The quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of one pound (avoirdupois) of pure water from 58.5 degrees Fahrenheit to 59.5 degrees Fahrenheit at a constant pressure of 14.73 pounds per square inch absolute. 
(3)  Cubic foot. For purposes of measurement when natural gas is metered, the volume of natural gas which, at a temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit and at an absolute pressure of 14.73 pounds per square inch, occupies one cubic foot. 
(4)  Therm. One hundred thousand British thermal units. 
Total heating value. The number of British thermal units per cubic foot of natural gas. For the purposes of determining the number of therms delivered to the consumer, the city's utilities department will utilize the average heating value, reported by the transporter or supplier, of the natural gas received from the transporter or supplier. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3738, § 1, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 030278, § 21, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 120170, § 1, 9-20-12; Ord. No. 120597, § 1, 3-21-13; Ord. No. 130222, § 2, 9-19-13) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 27-272. - Rates for retail service. 
(a)  Rates. The rates to be charged and collected for natural gas furnished by the city to retail consumers shall be in accordance with the schedule set out in appendix A. 
(b)  Taxes. An amount equal to all applicable taxes imposed against the sale or consumption of natural gas energy shall be added to the rates hereinabove set forth. The United States of America, the State of Florida, and all political subdivisions, agencies, boards, commissions, and instrumentalities thereof, and all recognized places of religious assembly are exempt from the city's utility tax. 
(c)  Availability. This service is available to consumers in the natural gas service area both within and outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Manufactured gas plant cost recovery factor. The manufactured gas plant cost recovery factor shall be in place until September 30, 2032. The cost recovery factor shall include costs associated with the assessment, remediation, clean up and monitoring activities, to the extent deemed appropriate by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, related to contamination resulting from the manufactured gas plant operated by Gainesville Gas Company, a substantial portion of the assets of which were acquired by the city in January, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 020268, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 120597, § 1, 3-21-13)  
Sec. 27-272.1. - Surcharge for consumers outside city limits. 
The rates to be charged and collected by the city for natural gas furnished by the city to consumers of natural gas service outside of the corporate limits of the City of Gainesville shall be the base rates as set forth above, plus a surcharge equal the amount of the city utility tax charged consumers inside the city limits; provided, however, that the United States of America, the State of Florida, and all political subdivisions, agencies, boards, commissions, and instrumentalities thereof and all recognized places of religious assembly of the State of Florida are exempt from the payment of the surcharge imposed and levied thereby. 
(Ord. No. 050328, § 1, 9-26-05)  
Sec. 27-273. - Purchased gas adjustment. 
(a)  A purchased gas adjustment shall be added to the base rate for natural gas service to all retail rate classifications as specified in the schedule set out in appendix A of the Gainesville Code of Ordinances. The purchased gas adjustment shall be computed to the nearest 0.001¢ per therm of energy consumed in accordance with the formula specified in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. The purposes of the purchased gas adjustment are to allocate to each retail customer rate classification the appropriate amount of system fuel cost associated with the natural gas service to such customer classification; to specify the amount of such costs that have resulted from increases in the cost of fuel subsequent to October 1, 1973; and, to segregate that portion of charges that are exempt from utility tax. For the purposes of this section, system fuel costs shall be the cost of fuel delivered to the system, which may include adjustments to reflect extraordinary fuel related expenses or credits. Retail fuel cost shall be system fuel cost less the fuel cost portion of off-system sales. Off-system sales include all non-retail firm and interruptible sales to customers not specified under the provisions of this article. Off-system fuel cost shall be the cost of fuel delivered. 
(b)  The purchased gas adjustment for retail sales each month shall be based on retail fuel cost and energy sales in therms which are estimated by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. When applicable, a levelization amount and a true-up correction factor, which shall be based on the actual system performance in the second month preceding the billing month, as certified by independent certified public accountants, shall be applied to the purchased gas adjustment before applying to customer(s) bills. 
(c)  The following formula shall be used in computing the purchased gas adjustment for all retail sales: 
1. 	Projected Fuel Cost for the billing month 	= $___ 
2. 	Projected therms of Gas Sales for the billing month 	= ___ therms 
3. 	"True-up" Calculation from Second Month Preceding the Billing Month 	
	a. 	Fuel Revenue from the second month preceding the billing month 	
		(1) Purchased Gas Adjustment Revenue 	= $___ 
		(2) Embedded Fuel [c] 	= $___ 
		$0.06906 × therms of firm sales 	
		(3) Total Fuel Revenue 	= $___ 
		Item 3a(1) + Item 3a(2) 	
	b. 	Fuel Cost for Sales from the second month preceding the billing month 	
		(1) Fuel Cost [a] 	= $___ 
		(2) Plus taxes and fees [b] 	= $___ 
		Item 3a(3) *0.1919% 	
		(3) Total Fuel Cost 	= $___ 
	c. 	True-Up in the second month preceding the billing month 	= $___ 
	d. 	Levelization in the second month preceding the billing month 	= $___ 
	e. 	True-Up for the billing month 	= $___ 
		Item 3b(3) + Item 3c - Item 3a(3) + Item 3b(3) + Item 3d 	
4. 	Calculation of Purchased Gas Adjustment for the billing month 	
	a. 	Projected Purchased Gas Adjustment Revenue Required 	
		(1) Projected Fuel Cost 	= $___ 
		Item 1 	
		(2) True-Up 	= $___ 
		Item 3e 	
		(3) Embedded Fuel [c] 	= $___ 
		$0.06906 × therms 	
		(4) Levelization Amount 	= $___ 
		(5) Total Purchased Gas Adjustment Revenue Requirement 	= $___ 
		Item 4a(1) + Item 4a(2) - Item 4a(3) + Item 4a(4) 	
	b. 	Purchased Gas Adjustment for the billing month 	= $___ per therm 
		Item 4a(5)/Item 2 	
 
Footnotes: 
[1] Fuel costs and therms of gas sales are to be estimated for the billing month by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
[a] Special assessment factor of 0.1919% for the Florida Public Service Commission. 
[b] $0.0609 per therm was the fuel cost embedded within base rates for gas service, on October 1, 1973. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3606, §§ 1—3, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 3750, § 2, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 950733, § 2, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 070379, § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 080216, § 1, 9-18-08; Ord. No. 120597, § 1, 3-21-13)  
Sec. 27-274. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 080216, § 2, adopted Sept. 18, 2008, repealed § 27-274 which pertained to true-up correction factor and derived from Ord. No. 3664, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 1990 and Ord. No. 070379, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 2007.  
Sec. 27-275. - Resale of natural gas prohibited. 
Except for natural gas delivered to entities duly franchised for the sale of compressed natural gas, natural gas received under either residential gas service, general gas service or large volume gas service provisions shall be used for the consumer's direct use only. No other resale of such natural gas shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3738, § 2, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 120597, § 1, 3-21-13)  
Sec. 27-276. - Choice of rates. 
If, at any time, more than one rate classification is applicable to the consumer's service, the general manager for utilities or his/her designee shall, at the consumer's request, assist in determining the rate believed to be most favorable to the consumer. Another rate, if applicable to the service, may at any time be substituted, at the consumer's option, for the rate under which service is rendered, provided that not more than one substitution of a rate may be made within a year and that such change shall not be retroactive. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-277. - Large volume service. 
(1)  Character of service. Natural gas sales on an interruptible basis are subject to the large volume gas service terms and conditions contained within this chapter and Appendix A, and according to the following: 
(a)  Natural gas supply. The city will endeavor to satisfy the consumer's requirements for natural gas within this classification to the extent that sufficient quantities are available from its supplier and within the interruption framework set forth in this Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Agreement to interrupt. The city in its sole discretion has the right to interrupt the delivery of natural gas to large volume gas service consumers at any time due to a) constraints or reductions that affect the ability to deliver natural gas and b) constraints or reductions that affect the volume of natural gas available for delivery. The consumer agrees to interrupt the consumption of gas in the manner, at the time and to the extent directed by the city. The consumer agrees that the city shall not be liable in any manner to the consumer or any person or entity for any interruption of the supply of gas, for the interference with the operations of the consumer or loss of use resulting from such operations or interference as provided for herein. Resumption of service shall be in reverse order of interruption. 
(c)  Interruption provisions. 
(1)  Interruption notice shall be given as early as possible and notice shall be provided at least one hour in advance of the effective time and such notice may be verbal or written. 
(2)  If a consumer fails to discontinue the use of natural gas when requested by the city, the consumer's gas service may be shut off at the city's sole discretion. In addition, all natural gas taken during the interruption period will be billed at the rate prescribed in Appendix A. 
(3)  The consumer's failure to comply with an interruption notice, in part or in entirety, shall be considered sufficient cause for immediate cancellation of the consumer's large volume service rate. 
(4)  Interruption provisions are subject to modification by higher governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 120597, § 1, 3-21-13)  
Sec. 27-278. - Approval of premises required. 
No gas service shall be rendered by the city to any consumer at any premises until such time as the appropriate gas inspector, or his/her designee, shall have approved such premises for services as follows: 
(1)  All customer classes. Approval of the premises for gas service must be obtained prior to initial provision of gas service and/or change of equipment, new or modified. 
(2)  Copy of approval. Each applicant for service must submit a copy of the approval where required as part of the application for service. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-279. - Appliance installation, service and repair. 
Gas appliance and/or piping installation charges shall be based on written estimates determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee for each specific project. Gas appliance and/or piping service and repair charges shall be in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 19, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-280. - Meters—City to install and maintain; protection by consumer; negligent, etc., damage; right to designate locations and specifications; conformance with local, state, federal or National Fire Protection Association requirements. 
The city will install and properly maintain at its own expense such meters and metering equipment as may be necessary to measure the natural gas service used by the consumer. The city will provide each consumer with a meter or meters for each applicable rate classification. The city may furnish and install such regulating and/or flow control equipment and devices as deemed necessary by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee to be in the best interest of the consumer served, or of the natural gas system as a whole. All service lines, curb cocks, meters and regulators furnished by the city shall remain the property of the city and the consumer shall properly protect the city's property on the consumer's premises. In the event of any loss or damage to property of the city caused by or arising out of carelessness, neglect or misuse by the consumer, or other unauthorized parties, the cost of making good such loss or repairing such damage shall be paid by the consumer. 
The city reserves the right to designate the locations and specifications for the main line taps, service lines, and curb cocks, and to determine the amount of space which must be left unobstructed for the installation and maintenance of meters and the aforementioned facilities. The consumer shall provide a satisfactory location to the city for its metering equipment. This location shall be convenient and accessible at all reasonable times to the city's duly authorized employees. This location shall conform with all local, state, or federal requirements which are applicable, and with the rules of the National Fire Protection Association. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 950733, § 3, 10-9-95)  
Sec. 27-280.1. - Same—Altering prohibited; discontinuation of service; billing estimated consumption. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to meddle, tamper with, alter or to interfere in any way with a meter or meter connection. Should it appear that natural gas has been stolen, the general manager for utilities shall have the right to discontinue the service until the defect is corrected and the service approved by the appropriate gas inspector. The consumer shall be charged with and billed for the stolen natural gas on an estimated billing calculated by reference to the previous meter consumption. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 950733, § 3, 10-9-95)  
Sec. 27-280.2. - Same—Testing. 
Before installation and periodically thereafter, each meter shall be tested and shall be considered commercially accurate if it measures not more than one (1) percent fast and not more than two (2) percent slow when installed. Meters in use shall be tested at the request of the consumer, and in his/her presence if desired, provided the consumer shall make a meter testing deposit in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. If the meter is shown to be inaccurate in excess of five (5) percent slow or two (2) percent fast for residential customers' meters or two (2) percent, fast or slow, for non-residential customer's meters, the bills will be adjusted as specified in section 27-14.4. If the meter is more than two (2) percent fast, the meter testing deposit shall be refunded, otherwise it may be retained by the city as a service charge for the test. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 950733, § 3, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 160253 , § 6, 9-15-16)  
Sec. 27-280.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 160253 , § 7, adopted Sept. 15, 2016, repealed § 27-280.3 which pertained to meter billing adjustments and derived from Ord. No. 3664, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 1990; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, adopted Jan. 27, 1992; and Ord. No. 950773, § 3, adopted Oct. 9, 1995.  
Sec. 27-281. - House piping—Consumer to install and maintain; right of city to inspect and approve; city not liable for loss or damage; conformance with local, state, federal and National Fire Protection Association requirements; refusal of and/or discontinuance of service. 
(a)  All house piping and equipment beyond the city's meter and/or regulator setting shall be installed by and belong to the consumer and be maintained at his/her expense. The consumer shall bring his/her piping to a point for connection to the city's meter and/or regulator setting at a location satisfactory to the city. The consumer, acting jointly with the city, may install, maintain and operate at his/her expense such check measuring equipment as desired, provided that such equipment shall be so installed as not to interfere with the operation of the city's equipment and that no gas shall be re-metered or sub-metered for resale to another or others. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to inspect and approve the installation of all pipe and equipment to utilize the city's natural gas; provided, however, that such inspection by the city, failure to make such inspection, or the fact that the city may connect to such installation shall not constitute assumption of liability by the city for any loss or damage which may be occasioned by the use of such installation or equipment used therefrom or of the city's service. 
(c)  The piping fixtures, fixtures and appliances for which the consumer is responsible shall be maintained in conformity with all applicable local, state or federal requirements, and with the rules of the National Fire Protection Association. The nature and condition of these piping fixtures, fixtures and appliances shall be such as not to endanger life or property, interfere with the service to other customers or permit the passage of natural gas without meter registration, and it shall not be used for any illegal purpose. If in the opinion of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, the consumer is in violation of these conditions, the city may refuse service or discontinue service without notice until such violations are remedied by the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 950733, § 3, 10-9-95)  
Sec. 27-282. - Relocation, modification or removal of existing facilities. 
If the city is required to relocate, modify or remove existing gas facilities because of either a utility customer's request or because changes in the customer's facilities and/or operations necessitate relocation, modification or removal of gas facilities in order to comply with local, state or federal requirements which are applicable, and with the rules of the National Fire Protection Association, all costs of any such relocation, modification or removal shall be borne exclusively by such customer. All costs of relocation, modifying or removing gas utility facilities that are attributable to city initiated renewal or reconstruction projects shall be borne exclusively by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 950733, § 3, 10-9-95)  
Sec. 27-283. - Availability of service—Gas main extension, installation, improvement or modification; installation of service lines and connections; enlargement of existing service; temporary or part-time service; gas mains. 
(a)  Gas main extension, installation, improvement or modification. The city will endeavor to supply gas service to any prospective customer within the corporate limits of the City of Gainesville, within the unincorporated areas of Alachua County, and/or within the corporate limits of any other requesting municipality, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Should gas main extension, installation, improvement or modification of facilities be required, either on-site or off-site, the city will pay the cost of such facilities if in the opinion of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, the immediate or potential revenues justify the full cost of the facilities. 
(2)  Gas main extensions to the extent delineated below will be provided by the city at no cost to the customer: 
      Footage 
Gas Appliance     Credited 
Heating ..... 15 feet 
Water heater ..... 35 feet 
Heating and water heater ..... 75 feet 
Space heating, clothes dryer, pool heater, and/or range/oven in any combination ..... 10 feet 
In addition, for each natural gas heating unit and natural gas water heater installed pursuant to the city's energy conservation plan, a credit equal to the cost of the service extension will be granted. In no instance will credits granted exceed the actual cost of any gas main or service extension. 
(3)  In those cases where estimated revenues are inadequate to cover the full cost of the extension, installation, improvement or modification, the customer shall make a contribution in aid of construction (CIAC). Revenue adequacy of the gas main extension, installation, improvement or modification shall be elevated based on the internal rate of return (IRR). CIAC is required unless the IRR is 14 percent or greater. Where multiple customers are involved, contributions in aid of construction may be shared on a pro-rata basis. 
(4)  If the city installs a service line at the consumer's request and such service is not used or utilized for the intended purpose within six months of installation, the consumer may, at the discretion of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, be held responsible for the charges associated with that service line installation. 
(b)  Installation of service lines and connections. Upon application for connection between a natural gas main and a building to be supplied with natural gas, the entire installation of the natural gas service line and connections from the main to the meter shall be made by the city. All consumer owned obstacles that lie underground within ten feet of a proposed gas service line installation will be marked or identified by the consumer. These obstacles may include but are not limited to septic and sewer systems, irrigation systems, underground tanks and buried electrical wiring. The consumer accepts all responsibility for damages, claims, and/or injuries arising from, out of, or in any way connected with the striking of any such underground obstacle which was not marked by the owner or marked incorrectly. No service line shall be used to supply more than one meter location, nor shall any service line be installed across private property other than the premises of the building to be supplied with natural gas, except after special investigation and approval by the city. When, in the opinion of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, an existing service line is insufficient to supply new demands put upon it, the city will enlarge the facilities as necessary at no cost to the consumer. When it is necessary to establish a special service connection or a service connection for temporary or part-time use, the cost of the entire connection and removal of same, less the salvage value of the returned material, may be charged to the consumer requesting same. 
(c)  Extension of mains. Upon application for natural gas service, extension of mains will be made by the city in accordance with the provisions of this section. All extensions will be of the size and type prescribed by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. When the required extension is of unusual character, in the opinion of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, the city may require a deposit equal to the applicable cost of the extension in excess of the free extension cost specified above, except that the free extension cost does not apply to extensions of a temporary character. These provisions shall not require the city to extend its mains across private property or in the streets that are not at established grade, nor prohibit the city from making extension of mains of greater length than required herein. 
(d)  Accessibility and inspection. Upon completion of the installation of the natural gas facilities, the city shall, at all reasonable times, have the right to access the private property for the purposes of inspecting, maintaining, disconnecting, or removing said property and for examining and inspecting all pipes, tubing, equipment or other connections thereto. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3606, § 5, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 950733, § 3, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 120597, § 1, 3-21-13; Ord. No. 140171, § 4, 9-18-14)  
Sec. 27-284. - Discontinuance of service. 
(a)  Consumer initiated. When a consumer desires to discontinue service, he/she shall give notice to the city at least two (2) days in advance. The consumer may be held responsible for all natural gas consumed for forty-eight (48) hours after date of such notice, provided that the meter shall not have been removed within that time by the city. 
(b)  City initiated. The city may, after notifying the consumer, discontinue service for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure of a consumer to make a deposit or to increase a deposit as required, or failure to comply with requirements of the city with respect to signing a service application. 
(2)  Failure of a consumer to pay any bill for natural gas service within the time period specified. 
(3)  Refusal of legitimate access to premises or damage or loss of city property on the consumer's premises for which the consumer is liable. 
(4)  Improper character, condition, or use of consumer's piping or appliances as specified in section 27-281. 
(c)  Medical waiver. Discontinuance of service may be temporarily waived in specific cases when, in the opinion of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, the service is medically essential and interruption will endanger life or require hospitalization to sustain life. Prior to granting a medical waiver, the consumer will be required to furnish the general manager for utilities or his/her designee written notice from a competent physician suitable to the city that the service is required for life support. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-285. - Gas leaks; notice to city; billing adjustments; actions by consumer. 
The consumer shall give immediate notice to the city of leakage of natural gas. In case of leakage or fire, the stop-cock at the meter should be closed without delay and remain closed until service is reinstated by appropriate gas personnel. No source of ignition should be used in the vicinity of the leak until such leak is corrected. No deduction on account of leakage shall be made from the consumer's bill unless such leakage occurs as a result of fault or neglect of duly authorized employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-286. - Temporary discontinuance of supply for repairs, emergencies. 
The city reserves the right to temporarily shut off the supply of natural gas to the consumer's premises after reasonable notice for the purpose of making repairs or adjustments to mains or supply pipes and reserves the right to shut off the supply of gas without notice in case of an emergency. The city's supply of gas is derived from sources over which the city has no control. In addition, force majeure circumstances may arise which render the city unable to deliver the services found within this chapter. It is understood and agreed to by the consumer that in the event of a failure, curtailment or interruption of such supply or in the event of shortage or interruption of gas due to an event of force majeure, including but not limited to, an act of God, the elements, labor troubles, fires, accidents, breakage, necessary repairs or other causes beyond the city's control, the city cannot and does not guarantee a constant supply of gas and it shall not be held liable for any claims or damages arising from, out of, or in any way connected with the interruption or curtailment of the supply or services. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 120597, § 1, 3-21-13)  
Sec. 27-287. - Oversized gas mains. 
The city reserves the right to require oversized gas mains to serve any development. The city shall pay the oversizing costs based on the difference between the city's engineering estimates of the cost for the oversize line and the cost of the size line which is normally required to serve the development. 
(Ord. No. 3606, § 6, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 3754, § 80, 1-27-92)  
Sec. 27-288. - Liquid propane gas distribution systems—Use; availability. 
Upon application for natural gas service by a development outside existing natural gas system boundaries, liquid propane (LP) gas distribution systems may be used in lieu of natural gas system extension. Liquid propane gas distribution systems will be made available by the city if, in the opinion of the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, the provision of such service is deemed to be consistent with future natural gas system expansion plans. 
(Ord. No. 3854, § 1, 4-19-93)  
Sec. 27-288.1. - Same—Rates; taxes. 
(a)  Rates. The rates to be charged and collected for liquid propane gas furnished by the city to retail customers shall be in accordance with the schedule set out in Appendix A. 
(b)  Taxes. An amount equal to all applicable taxes imposed against the sale or consumption of liquid propane gas energy shall be added to the rates hereinabove set forth. The United States of America, the State of Florida, and all political subdivisions, agencies, boards, commissions and instrumentalities thereof, and all recognized places of religious assembly are exempt from the city's utility tax. 
(Ord. No. 3854, § 2, 5-19-93)  
Sec. 27-288.2. - Same—Liquid propane purchased gas adjustment. 
(a)  A liquid propane purchased gas adjustment shall be added to the base rate for liquid propane gas service as specified in the schedule set out in Appendix A. The liquid propane purchased gas adjustment shall be computed to the nearest one/one-thousandth of a cent (0.001¢) per gallon consumed in accordance with the formula specified in subsection (b) of this section. The purpose of the liquid propane purchased gas adjustment is to allocate the appropriate amount of system fuel cost associated with the liquid propane gas service; to specify the amount of such costs that have resulted from increases in the cost of fuel subsequent to October 1, 1973 (1) ; and, to segregate that portion of charges that are exempt from utility tax. For the purposes of this section, system fuel costs shall be the cost of fuel delivered to the system, which may include adjustments to reflect extraordinary fuel-related expenses or credits. 
(b)  The liquid propane purchased gas adjustment for retail sales each month shall be based on retail fuel cost and quantities of fuel purchased. The estimated billing month purchased gas adjustment is equal to the rolling average of the preceding consecutive 12 months' actual fuel cost, less the amount of fuel subject to utility tax. 
Footnote: 
(1) $0.15882 per gallon, was the cost of fuel, embedded within base rates on October 1, 1973. 
(Ord. No. 3854, § 3, 5-19-93; Ord. No. 950733, § 4, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 160253 , § 8, 9-15-16)  
Chapter 28 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 2-376 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 23; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 26; city manager to designate public carrier stops and stands, § 26-99; stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated, § 26-100; restricted use of bus and taxicab stands, § 26-101. 
 
ARTICLE I. - MOTORIZED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 2015, repealed Art. I and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. I, §§ 28-1—28-8, 28.5, 28-9—28-14, 28-14.5, and 28-16—28-21, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 950601, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 1995; Ord. No. 970576, § 1, adopted March 9, 1998; Ord. No. 050120, § 9, adopted Sept. 26, 2005; Ord. No. 060198, §§ 1—5, adopted Sept. 25, 2006; Ord. No. 070022, § 12, adopted June 25, 2007; Ord. No. 070676, §§ 1—5, adopted Dec. 10, 2007; Ord. No. 080456, § 2, adopted April 2, 2009; Ord. No. 091038, § 1, adopted Oct. 21, 2010; Ord. No. 100940, § 1, adopted July 7, 2011; and Ord. No. 100941, § 1, adopted July 7, 2011. 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated unless the text indicates otherwise: 
Background check means a nationwide criminal history check (including, without limitation, the National Sex Offender Registry database) and driver record check performed by a company accredited by the National Association of Professional Background Screeners or comparable accreditation group deemed acceptable by the VFH administrator. 
Company means a natural person or legal entity in the business of employing or contracting with drivers to provide vehicle for hire services in accordance with this article. 
Company license means the written authority granted by the city to a company to operate within the city limits pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
Compensation means remuneration or anything of economic value that is provided, promised, or donated primarily in exchange for services rendered. 
Driver means a natural person authorized to operate a vehicle for hire in accordance with this article. 
Driver authorization means the authority granted by a company for a driver to operate a vehicle for hire within the city limits in accordance with this article. 
Passenger means an individual who is transported in a vehicle for hire. 
Taximeter means an instrument or device attached to a vehicle and designed to measure mechanically or electronically the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the times said vehicle travels or is in waiting, and to indicate the base fare to be obtained. 
Vehicle for hire (VFH) means any motor vehicle used to transport passengers for compensation within the city limits. The term vehicle for hire excludes: 
(1)  School and church buses; 
(2)  Sightseeing cars and buses; 
(3)  Ambulances; 
(4)  Funeral home vehicles; 
(5)  Any vehicle engaged in operations under a certificate or permit issued by the Interstate Commerce Commission; 
(6)  Horse drawn carriages; 
(7)  Shuttle vehicles (a vehicle that is used for courtesy transportation without compensation); 
(8)  Passenger and transit vehicles owned, operated, leased or controlled by a governmental agency; 
(9)  Transportation services for the Transportation Disadvantaged provided pursuant to F.S. ch. 427, pt. I; and 
(10)  Transportation network companies as defined and regulated by F.S. § 627.748. 
VFH administrator means the city manager or his designee authorized to administer this chapter regulating vehicles for hire. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15; Ord. No. 170066 , § 1, 7-6-17)  
Sec. 28-2. - Company license. 
It shall be unlawful for any company to provide VFH service in the city without obtaining an annual license issued by the VFH administrator. A company shall pay the annual license fee set forth in Appendix A at the time of application for the license and thereafter each year. A company license is valid for one year from the date of issue and is non-transferable. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15)  
Sec. 28-3. - Application for company license. 
(a)  Application for the issuance or renewal of a company license shall be made in writing to the VFH administrator on a form provided by the VFH administrator and signed and sworn to by the owner or by its authorized agent. Each application for issuance or renewal of a company license shall include: 
(1)  Proof of the insurance coverage required in section 28-11, if provided by the company. 
(2)  Information on the third party provider responsible for completion of driver background checks as required in section 28-5. 
(3)  If the applicant is a natural person: the applicant's full name, social security number, residence address, business address, business e-mail address, business telephone number and proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(4)  If the applicant is a legal entity: the entity name, business address, business email address and business telephone number; the date and state of formation; proof of active status with the Florida Division of Corporations authorizing it to do business under the laws of the State of Florida; and the full names, titles, residence addresses, personal e-mail addresses and personal telephone numbers of its officers, partners or members. 
(5)  The name, mailing, physical and email addresses and telephone number of a natural person(s) located within the State of Florida that the company has authorized to be its agent and a point of contact for the city with regards to: 
a.  Filing applications and paying rates and charges on behalf of the company; and 
b.  Receiving and accepting all legal process, correspondence and notices from the city pertaining to the company, or drivers operating for the company. 
(6)  An illustration of the distinctive company signage that will be displayed on its vehicles for hire as required by section 28-7. 
(7)  A copy of the company adopted policy of non-discrimination in service and rates on the basis of destination, race, color, national origin, religion, disability, gender, gender identity, or sexual orientation with respect to passengers and potential passengers. 
(8)  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the VFH Administrator for purposes of administration and enforcement of this article. 
(b)  If the applicant knowingly provides false statements of material facts or information on the license application, in addition to any criminal charges, the applicant will automatically be denied the company license and will be ineligible for a company license for a period of five years. If the company license has been issued prior to the discovery of the false statements or information, the company license shall be revoked and the company will be ineligible for a company license for a period of five years. 
(c)  As a condition of maintaining its company license, each company: 
(1)  Shall keep accurate records of the company VFH operations for a minimum of the past three years. Such records shall be submitted or made available for inspection or audit as required in section 28-12. 
(2)  Shall notify the VFH administrator in writing within 15 days of any change to the information provided in the license application. 
(3)  Shall not employ or contract with any driver who does not have a valid driver authorization issued by the company. 
(4)  Shall provide each of its drivers with a copy of this article and inform each driver of the driver and company obligation to comply with this article. 
(5)  Shall on its website or digital platform and its receipt (either written or electronic) provide passengers with a phone number provided by the VFH administrator where the passenger may file a complaint regarding a potential criminal act or violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15)  
Sec. 28-4. - License, verification and issuance. 
Upon receipt of an application for the issuance or renewal of a company license, the VFH administrator may verify all information provided in the application for compliance with all applicable provisions of this article. The city will issue a company license if the company has met the requirements set forth in this article and has paid the company license fee set forth in Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15)  
Sec. 28-5. - Company issued driver authorization. 
(a)  Prior to operating a VFH within the city, each driver is required to obtain an annual driver authorization from the company. The company shall not issue a driver authorization unless the company has verified that the driver meets all of the following requirements. If the company issues a driver authorization and later determines the driver does not meet the following requirements, the company shall immediately revoke the driver authorization and suspend the driver from operating a VFH for the company. 
(1)  The driver possesses a valid Florida driver's license or a valid driver's license issued by another state, if the driver is not otherwise required to obtain a Florida driver's license. 
(2)  The driver is at least 18 years old. 
(3)  The background check obtained by the company covers the preceding seven years and shows that: 
a.  The driver has not been convicted, pled nolo contendere, nor had adjudication withheld for any violent felony or sexual battery. 
b.  The driver has not been convicted, pled nolo contendere, or had adjudication withheld for a felony or misdemeanor in the last seven years for any crime involving the use or threat of use of force, prostitution, indecent exposure, stalking, loitering, prowling, or any sexually related criminal offense, or any felony offense involving the possession or sale of a controlled substance. 
c.  The driver is not under any form of community control, probation or under any status as a sex offender in any state. 
d.  The driver has not been convicted, pled nolo contendere, nor had adjudication withheld in the last five years for any of the following offenses involving injury or death: leaving the scene of an accident, driving under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or drug, reckless or careless driving. 
e.  The driver has not been convicted, pled nolo contendere, nor had adjudication withheld in the last three years for leaving the scene of an accident, driving under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or drug, reckless or careless driving. 
(4)  The driver does not have a physical or mental disability that would prevent him/her from safely operating a VFH and performing the normal duties of a VFH driver. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15)  
Sec. 28-6. - Display of driver authorization. 
Each driver shall display, either in the vehicle in a printed format readily visible to a person of average visual acuity sitting in the rear passenger seat or electronically on the passenger's mobile device during a VFH ride, a photograph of the driver taken within one year and the driver's first name, the license plate number of the vehicle that the driver is authorized to operate, and the make and model of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15)  
Sec. 28-7. - VFH inspections and identification requirements. 
(a)  Within 45 days of beginning service, and annually thereafter, a company or a driver shall have each VFH inspected by an automobile mechanic certified by the National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence (ASE) or a person supervised by an ASE certified mechanic. Such inspection shall, at a minimum, evaluate and confirm the working condition of the vehicle's brake system, lights, steering, suspension, tires, and seat belts. 
(b)  The company or driver shall maintain complete documentation of the current inspection in the VFH at all times and shall provide a copy of such documentation to the VFH administrator or a law enforcement officer upon request. 
(c)  The VFH administrator or law enforcement officer has the authority to place a VFH out of service if it is deemed unsafe or hazardous, until an automobile mechanic certified by the National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence (ASE) or a person supervised by an ASE certified mechanic has corrected the unsafe or hazardous conditions and completed a safety inspection. 
(d)  Each VFH shall display consistent and distinctive signage at all times while engaged in VFH services. Acceptable forms of distinctive signage include, but are not limited to, symbols or signs on vehicle doors, roofs, windshields, or grills. Magnetic or other removable signage is acceptable. The distinctive signage shall be sufficiently large and color contrasted so that it is readable during daylight hours at a distance of at least 50 feet; and reflective, illuminated or otherwise patently visible so as to be seen sufficiently at all times from a distance of at least 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15)  
Sec. 28-8. - Operating regulations. 
(a)  In addition to all other applicable legal requirements, it shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To operate a VFH without a company issued driver authorization; 
(2)  To operate a VFH while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances, other than medication prescribed by a physician, provided that such prescribed medication does not warn that the user not operate machinery while taking the medication or that the prescribed medication does not impair the normal faculties of the driver; 
(3)  To operate, or cause to be operated, a VFH in any area where the operation of such vehicle is prohibited by an applicable law; or 
(4)  To operate, or cause to be operated, a VFH that does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  No person may possess an open alcohol beverage container while such person is operating a VFH. 
(c)  Each company and driver shall comply with all applicable laws and company policies regarding non-discrimination against passengers or potential passengers on the basis of destination, race, color, national origin, religion, disability, gender, gender identity, or sexual orientation. 
(d)  Each company and driver shall comply with all applicable laws relating to the Americans with Disabilities Act, including the accommodation of service animals. 
(e)  A driver shall at all times carry in the VFH proof of the insurance policies required by this article. 
(f)  Drivers shall not: 
(1)  Provide false information to or refuse to obey or to comply with any lawful order or direction of the VFH administrator, law enforcement officer, or traffic-control officer; 
(2)  Take a circuitous route to a destination, or any route other than the most direct route, without the express consent of the passenger; 
(3)  Drop a passenger at any location other than the location requested, unless prohibited by law; 
(4)  Refuse to convey an orderly passenger once the passenger is in the VFH; 
(5)  Operate, be on duty, or be on call for more than 12 hours within any 24-hour period; or 
(6)  Transport passengers that exceed the designed capacity of the VFH, as determined by the number of factory installed seatbelts. 
(g)  No VFH shall be parked on any public way for a time longer than is reasonably necessary to board passengers. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15; Ord. No. 150994 , § 1, 9-15-16; Ord. No. 170066 , § 2, 7-6-17)  
Sec. 28-9. - Service charges and fare rates. 
(a)  Each company or driver: 
(1)  Shall have rate cards setting forth the rates of fare and minimum fares, displayed both on the inside of the front windshield at the roof line of the passenger side, on the inside of the right rear window at the eye level of a seated passenger measuring at least five inches wide by five inches in height. All rate cards shall state the base rates of fare, including any minimum fares, and any additional charges, such as for bags and luggage. Additionally, the same information shall be displayed on a sign outside the VFH consisting of lettering not less than one inch in size for all information. 
(2)  Shall be equipped with taximeters fastened in a manner so that the face shall be visible and readable to passengers at all times both day and night. The face of the taximeter shall be set so that it will register and compute on a mileage basis while the VFH is moving and on a time basis while the VFH is standing, and while the service is being rendered the base fare to be charged. The taximeter shall be used for all trips and the fare charged shall be that shown on the taximeter, plus any posted extra passenger or other charges. 
(3)  May establish a minimum fare per call for service or per trip. If such a minimum fare is established and utilized, it shall be posted on the company rate cards. When a minimum fare is established and utilized, the taximeter shall still be used for the trip, but the minimum fare may be charged when the minimum fare exceeds the amount on the taximeter. 
(4)  May utilize an alternative fare calculation other than that set forth in paragraphs (a)(1), (2) and (3), provided the passenger affirmatively acknowledges and agrees to the alternative fare structure in writing, before the trip commences or any fare is charged to the prospective passenger. If a written form is used, a copy of the form shall be given to the passenger and a copy shall be retained by the VFH company. 
(b)  Upon payment for any VFH ride, a company or driver shall immediately provide to the rider a written receipt that may be delivered in hard copy or electronically. The receipt shall include the following: 
(1)  Point of origin and destination of the ride; 
(2)  Total distance and duration of the ride; 
(3)  Total fare paid including the base fare and any additional or alternative charges; 
(4)  The driver's first name; 
(5)  A customer service telephone number or email address; and 
(6)  The phone number provided by the VFH administrator where the passenger may file a complaint regarding a potential criminal act or violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15; Ord. No. 170066 , § 3, 7-6-17)  
Sec. 28-10. - Operation on private property. 
Nothing in this article shall limit any natural person or legal entity who owns or controls real property from prohibiting VFH operation on its property or developing its own rules, regulations, and fees when allowing a VFH to operate on its property. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15)  
Sec. 28-11. - Liability insurance required. 
(a)  While transporting a passenger or traveling to pick up a passenger, the company or driver or both, shall have in full force and effect a liability insurance policy for the VFH in not less than the minimum amounts required under Florida law. But in no event shall the coverage be less than: no fault personal injury protection (PIP) in the minimum required of a private passenger automobile, if required by Florida law, and automobile liability coverage for bodily injury liability coverage of at least $125,000.00 per person and $250,000.00 per occurrence and $50,000.00 for property damage liability (PDL) coverage, or with a combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 for death, bodily injury, or property damage. 
(b)  For the period of time when a driver is on duty but is not transporting a passenger or traveling to pick up a passenger, the company or driver or both shall have in full force and effect a liability insurance policy for the VFH in not less than the minimum amounts required under Florida law. But in no event shall the coverage be less than: no fault personal injury protection (PIP) in the minimum required of a private passenger automobile, if required by Florida law, and automobile liability coverage for bodily injury liability coverage of at least $50,000.00 per person and $100,000.00 per occurrence, and $25,000.00 for property damage liability (PDL). 
(c)  In any instance where insurance coverage maintained by a driver to meet the requirements of this section has lapsed, been cancelled or the drivers insurance denies coverage or fails to provide coverage, the company shall provide the coverage required by this section beginning with the first dollar of a claim. Nothing in this article shall prohibit or limit the right of the company to later seek reimbursement from the driver's insurance through any civil process. 
(d)  Insurance required by this section shall be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in Florida. 
(e)  Insurance required by this section may be placed with an authorized insurer or surplus lines insurer eligible under the Florida Surplus Lines Law, F.S. §§ 626.913—626.937, if otherwise allowed under state law. 
(f)  In any claims coverage investigation involving a VFH, a company shall cooperate with a liability insurer that insures the driver. 
(g)  The existence of the insurance required by this section shall be disclosed on the company's website, and no contractual provisions required in the company's terms of service shall be used to waive or otherwise evade the insurance requirements of this chapter or state law. 
(h)  Each company and driver shall provide, upon demand, to any authorized law enforcement officer or the VHF administrator, digital or written proof of the insurance policies required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15)  
Sec. 28-12. - Enforcement, rules and regulations, complaints. 
(a)  The VFH administrator is authorized to enforce this article, and to adopt rules and regulations for the proper administration and enforcement of this article. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers and remedies provided by law, the VFH administrator or law enforcement officer shall have the right to inspect the company records as necessary to investigate and resolve a complaint received or when the VFH administrator has a reasonable suspicion of a violation of this article. 
(c)  The VFH administrator shall have the right to audit the records of the company VFH operations including, but not limited to, driver background checks, for purposes of verifying compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15)  
Sec. 28-13. - Violations and penalties. 
Violations of the provisions of this article by a company or driver may be enforced by a suspension or revocation of any company license issued hereunder, civil citation pursuant to section 2-339 and/or by criminal citation pursuant to section 1-9 of this Code. Each violation shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense and shall be penalized as a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15)  
Sec. 28-14. - License revocation. 
(a)  The city may revoke the company license which grants the privilege of any company to conduct VFH services on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  If the company and/or any company driver fails to follow any requirements of this article; 
(2)  If the original application or any other required documentation are found to contain any false statements of material fact; or 
(3)  If the company and/or company driver fails to pay any fees or fines as specified in this article Appendix A of this code. 
(b)  Violations occurring within a one-year period shall result in progressive penalties as follows: 
(1)  First and second violations by a company or driver (if the violation is capable of correction): Written warnings. The company or driver must correct the violation within ten calendar days. 
(2)  Third and subsequent violations or any violation not capable of being corrected, by a company or driver: One year revocation of the company license, or as otherwise expressly provided in this article. 
(c)  A company license may be revoked for acts of a driver in violation of this section, if the company fails to take the action requested by the city with respect to the driver violations, including and up to the company revoking the drivers authorization issued by the company. In instances where a company had knowledge of a violation and took corrective action on its own or as requested by the city, the company shall maintain written documentation of such actions for a minimum period of one year from the date that the corrective action was taken. 
(d)  The procedure for revoking a company license is as follows: 
(1)  The VFH administrator shall provide written notice to the company by hand delivery or by certified or registered mail at least 15 calendar days prior to the effective date of the revocation. The written notice shall contain notice that the company may contest the revocation by requesting a hearing as provided below. Service shall be deemed complete if personally delivered upon the owner, agent or employee of the company, as applicable, by any officer authorized by law to serve process or a duly appointed law enforcement officer. The person serving process shall make proof of service within the time during which the person served must respond to the process. If service cannot be personally made within the city, then service may be made by notice to a registered agent of the company or driver as applicable. 
(2)  The company may file a written request for a hearing prior to the effective date of the revocation with the city manager or his designee. Failure to timely request a hearing shall constitute a waiver by the company of any rights to a hearing. Upon request for a hearing, the revocation shall be stayed until final administrative action has been effected. 
(3)  At the hearing, the company or driver (if the violations were committed by a driver) shall have the opportunity to present evidence (consisting of testimony and/or written documentation) they believe negates or mitigates the revocation. 
(4)  In conducting the hearing, the city manager or designee shall have the power to take testimony under oath, require the production of books, paper, and other documents, and receive evidence. Should a party refuse to provide documents as directed by the city manager or designee, then there may be an adverse inference against the party who failed to produce said documents. All parties shall have an opportunity to respond, to present evidence and argument on all issues involved, to conduct cross-examination and submit rebuttal evidence, and to be represented by counsel. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. Any party desiring the hearing be recorded shall be responsible for arranging and paying the cost of a court reporter's attendance and services. 
(5)  If the city manager or designee finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the company meets the requirements for license revocation, then the city manager or designee shall uphold the revocation of the company and set the revocation date to begin 15 days from the date of the final administrative order, subject to a writ of certiorari being filed pursuant to paragraph (8) below. 
(6)  If the city manager or designee finds that the company does not meet the requirements for license revocation, then the city manager or designee shall rescind the revocation of the company license. 
(7)  The city manager or designee shall provide written notice of the final order to the company. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be the final administrative action. 
(8)  The final administrative order of the city is subject to certiorari review in a court of competent jurisdiction in Alachua County, Florida by the timely filing of a petition. Upon the filing of a petition in the Circuit Court, the revocation of the permit shall be stayed pending final disposition of the civil case. 
(e)  Any company whose company license has been revoked shall not be eligible to obtain a company license until such revocation period has expired. 
(Ord. No. 140741 , § 1, 9-3-15)  
Secs. 28-15—28-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 28-30. - Definitions. 
The definitions in article I, section 28-2, and any subsequent amendment thereto are hereby made applicable, in whole or in part, where appropriate to this article. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Non-motorized vehicle means any vehicle propelled by human power which is used for transporting passengers if the driver receives direct or indirect compensation for providing such transportation and includes any vehicle to which a medallion has been issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Street means any public street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, public park, sidewalk, or other public place located in the City of Gainesville, except as prohibited in this article. 
(Ord. No. 080456, § 3, 4-2-09)  
Sec. 28-31. - Establishment of prohibited streets. 
The vehicles for hire administrator shall establish a list of streets upon which travel by non-motorized vehicles is prohibited. Such list shall be provided to each driver along with the driver's permit. Should changes be made to the list at any time, a corrected copy of the list will be furnished to each driver by registered mail. Enforcement of any newly added prohibited streets will not be effective until ten business days after the new list has been mailed. 
(Ord. No. 080456, § 3, 4-2-09)  
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 28-32. - Non-motorized vehicle medallion. 
(a)  It shall be a violation for any person to operate any non-motorized vehicle upon any street within the City of Gainesville unless the owner of that non-motorized vehicle has first obtained a non-motorized vehicle medallion issued by the vehicles for hire administrator. 
(b)  Such medallion shall, at all times during the period for which it is valid, be securely attached to a conspicuous place on the left rear portion of the non-motorized vehicle for which it is issued. 
(c)  Each medallion shall be valid for two years from the beginning of the month issued, unless sooner revoked as provided in this article. A fee shall be paid in advance for each medallion. The fee shall be as set forth in Appendix A of this Code of Ordinances and shall reasonably represent the costs, work, time, and process necessary to perform such administrative task. 
(Ord. No. 080456, § 3, 4-2-09)  
Sec. 28-33. - Liability insurance. 
The owner of each medallion shall maintain a liability and property damage insurance policy insuring the non-motorized vehicle, in the amount of $500,000.00 combined single limit for each accident, or bodily injury, death, and/or property damage written by a company authorized to transact business in the State of Florida and be rated A VII or higher by A.M. Best. Such policy indicating the liability amounts and the policy period must be provided to the vehicles for hire administrator prior to issuance or renewal of any permit. Each separate part of the non-motorized vehicle shall have a serial number affixed thereto and shall be listed on the insurance certificate. All such policies shall be kept in full force and effect at all times while any non-motorized vehicle is operated within the city, and must cover a minimum period of 12 months. Proof of such insurance must be maintained within the vehicle at all times when operated within the City of Gainesville. 
(Ord. No. 080456, § 3, 4-2-09)  
Sec. 28-34. - Rates to be displayed. 
Each non-motorized vehicle operated within the City of Gainesville shall prominently display, in a frame covered with clear plastic, a card or sign, printed in plain, legible letters or numbers which shall state whether gratuities or donations are accepted or contain the schedule of rates for the transportation services furnished by the driver; the city medallion number of such non-motorized vehicle, and the name and work address of both the medallion owner and the driver of such vehicle. No driver of any non-motorized vehicle may charge a fee which is not so posted. 
(Ord. No. 080456, § 3, 4-2-09)  
Sec. 28-35. - Vehicle safety and equipment standards. 
(a)  Non-motorized vehicles shall be not operated within the City of Gainesville except in compliance with all laws of the State of Florida in F.S. ch. 316 applicable to bicycles. 
(b)  The vehicles for hire administrator and any law enforcement officer shall have the right to inspect or cause to be inspected any non-motorized vehicle as often as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any unsafe or unsanitary conditions or any violations of this article. 
(c)  No driver shall operate a non-motorized vehicle on any street unless the vehicle meets the following safety and equipment standards: 
(1)  Tires. Tires shall be of the size appropriate for the non-motorized vehicle-for-hire and with no mismatched tires. There shall be no cuts into the tire or localized worn spots that expose the ply. No tire is permitted when the tire has tread wear indicators that are visible. 
(2)  Operational horn. The vehicles for hire shall be equipped with an operational horn or bell. 
(3)  Brakes. Each non-motorized vehicle shall be equipped with an operational brake or brakes which will enable its driver to stop the vehicle within 15 feet from a speed of ten miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement. The brake systems shall demonstrate a reasonable total braking force when tested, using the "quick stop method." 
(4)  Headlights, tail lights, mirrors, turn signals and other requirements. Every vehicle-for-hire shall be equipped with the following operational equipment: 
a.  A headlight capable of projecting a beam of white light for a distance at a minimum of 500 feet, which shall be clearly visible between the hours of sunset and sunrise and which must be illuminated at all times during operation; 
b.  A red taillight affixed to the rear of the passenger compartment, which shall be clearly visible between the hours of sunset and sunrise from a distance of 600 feet to the rear of the non-motorized vehicle and which must be illuminated at all times during operation; 
c.  A side mounted mirror affixed to the non-motorized vehicle to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of the non-motorized passenger vehicle; 
d.  A slow moving vehicle triangle on the rear of the vehicle or reflective tape which outlines the rear of the non-motorized vehicle from edge to edge; 
e.  Turn signals lamps which indicators must be visible for a distance of at least 500 feet from the rear of the vehicle indicating right and left turns and which must be utilized when turning; 
(5)  Company name. The company or trade name and unit number shall be conspicuously displayed on the exterior of each non-motorized passenger vehicle; 
(6)  Trailer or sidecar. No more than one trailer or sidecar may be attached to any vehicle. Any such trailer or sidecar must be attached in a manner that meets the requirements of F.S. § 316.530(2). 
(Ord. No. 080456, § 3, 4-2-09)  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER REGULATION 
 
Sec. 28-36. - Driver permit. 
(a)  It shall be a violation for any person to operate a non-motorized vehicle in or upon any street within the City of Gainesville unless such person has first obtained from the vehicles for hire administrator a driver's permit and has a valid Florida driver's license or complies with F.S. § 322.04 and is, at a minimum 18 years of age. 
(b)  The driver permit shall be issued in duplicate. One shall be prominently displayed in the non-motorized vehicle so as to be readily visible to a person of average visual acuity sitting in the rear passenger seat. The duplicate driver permit shall be worn on the exterior garment of the driver for identification purposes when the driver is outside of the non-motorized while on duty. 
(c)  Each driver shall maintain a current mailing address on file at all times with the vehicles for hire administrator. 
(d)  Each permit shall be valid for one year from the beginning of the month issued, unless sooner revoked as provided in this article. A fee shall be paid in advance for each permit. The fee shall be as set forth in Appendix A of this Code of Ordinances and shall reasonably represent the costs, work, time, and process necessary to perform such administrative task. 
(Ord. No. 080456, § 3, 4-2-09)  
Sec. 28-37. - Prohibited conduct. 
The following acts by any driver are prohibited: 
(a)  To operate a non-motorized vehicle: (a) while carrying a number of passengers that exceeds the number of passenger seats which such vehicle was designed to accommodate, or (b) while any passenger is standing or while any passenger is sitting anywhere other than in the passenger seat thereof; provided, however, that children aged five years old or younger, may be seated in the lap of another passenger and will not count as an additional passenger. 
(b)  To collect fares, make change, or embark or debark passengers while the non-motorized vehicle is in motion. 
(c)  To operate, park, stand, or stop the non-motorized vehicle in a manner which violates any city ordinance or state law or disrupts the flow of vehicular traffic on any street. 
(d)  To operate, maneuver, incline, spin, tilt, tip, slope, or position a human-powered non-motorized vehicle in any manner that would unnecessarily place a passenger in other than an upright, seated position. 
(e)  To operate a non-motorized vehicle upon the sidewalk portion of a public right-of-way, except at the direction of a law enforcement officer. 
(f)  To operate a non-motorized vehicle on any street listed on the prohibited streets list established by the vehicles for hire administrator or on any street posted at a speed greater than 30 miles per hour. 
(g)  To operate a non-motorized vehicle with sound produced by a radio, tape player, CD player, DVD player, or other mechanical sound making device or instrument from the non-motorized vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet or more from such vehicle, Non-motorized vehicles shall not be eligible for a loudspeaker permit. 
(h)  To operate or ride more than two abreast, except when overtaking and passing a bicycle or vehicle proceeding in the same direction. 
(i)  To allow any passenger or occupant of the non-motorized vehicle to drink or consume alcoholic beverages or to possess an open container of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 080456, § 3, 4-2-09; Ord. No. 150580 , § 1, 2-4-16)  
Sec. 28-38. - Receipt provided upon demand. 
If requested by the passenger, the driver of a non-motorized vehicle shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of the same, at the time of such payment, a receipt in legible writing containing the name of the driver, the vehicle medallion number, the total amount paid, and the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 080456, § 3, 4-2-09)  
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 28-39. - Revocation; appeal. 
(a)  The city may revoke the non-motorized vehicle medallion and/or the driver permit to operate a non-motorized vehicle on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  If the registration contains a false statement of material fact; 
(2)  If the service owner and/or driver charges rates in excess of those required to be posted pursuant to this article. 
(3)  If the non-motorized vehicle driver fails to display the driver's permit while operating the non-motorized vehicle as required by this article. 
(b)  Three violations of the provisions of this article by any owner and/or driver of a non-motorized vehicle service within a one-year period shall result in the revocation of the non-motorized vehicle medallion and/or the driver's permit. A non-motorized vehicle medallion shall not be revoked for acts of an employee/driver in violation of this section unless the owner of the medallion actively participated in or had knowledge of the violation and took no corrective action against the employee/driver or unless repeated violations by an employee did not result in progressive discipline. The owner of the medallion shall maintain written documentation of all corrective action taken against an employee/driver for a minimum period of one year. In addition to the corrective action taken, the documentation shall detail the type and date of the specific ordinance/statutory violation. A driver permit may be revoked notwithstanding that the driver's violations may not be applicable against the owner of the medallion for purposes of the medallion's revocation. 
To revoke a permit: 
(1)  The vehicle-for-hire administrator shall inform the owner of the motorized vehicle medallion and/or the holder of the driver permit in person or by U.S. mail at least ten days prior to the effective date of the revocation. 
(2)  The owner and/or driver may file a written request for a due process hearing prior to the effective date of the revocation with the vehicle for administrator. Failure to request a hearing prior to the effective date of the revocation shall constitute a waiver by the owner and/or driver of any rights to a hearing and shall result in the revocation of the medallion or permit. 
(3)  At the due process hearing, the non-motorized vehicle service owner and/or driver shall have the opportunity to present any testimony and/or documentation he/she believes negates or mitigates the revocation. 
(4)  Upon a review of the evidence presented at the hearing, the vehicle for hire administrator may revoke the non-motorized vehicle medallion and/or driver's permit to engage in the business of non-motorized vehicle for hire service for the following time periods: 
a.  First revocation ..... Three 
months 
b.  Second and third revocations ..... Six months 
c.  Fourth and subsequent revocation ..... One year 
(c)  Any non-motorized vehicle owner and/or driver whose medallion or permit to engage in non-motorized vehicle service has been revoked shall not be eligible to again obtain a medallion or permit from the vehicle for hire administrator for non-motorized vehicle service or operation until such revocation period has expired. 
(d)  Any non-motorized vehicle service owner and/or driver whose medallion or permit to engage in the business of non-motorized vehicle service or operation has been revoked by the towing administrator may file an appeal within 15 days of the date of revocation pursuant to the appeals process specified below. The revocation shall become effective 15 days from the date of the final order of the city manager. The timely filing of an appeal shall stay the revocation of a permit. 
(e)  Right of appeal. Any non-motorized vehicle service owner and/or driver whose medallion or permit to engage in non-motorized vehicle service has been revoked by the towing administrator may appeal such decision to the city manager or designee. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice with the chief of police or designee within 15 days after the decision by the police chief to revoke such privilege. The notice of the appeal shall contain the grounds for the appeal and shall contain information showing that either the finding is contrary to the law or is not supported by competent substantial evidence. The chief of police or designee shall transmit copies of the appeal to the city manager along with papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is based. The filing of a notice of appeal will not delay the effectiveness of any revocation. The city manager may decide to uphold or reverse the decision of the vehicle-for-hire administrator. The decision of the city manager shall be the final administrative action of the city. 
(Ord. No. 080456, § 3, 4-2-09)  
Sec. 28-40. - Violation of ordinance; penalties; civil citation. 
It is unlawful to engage in the non-motorized vehicle for hire service without compliance with requirements of this article. Law enforcement officers may issue a civil citation to non-motorized vehicle owners and/or drivers for violations of any section of this article. 
(Ord. No. 080456, § 3, 4-2-09)  
Sec. 28-41. - Criminal enforcement. 
Any person who willfully refuses to sign or accept a notice of violation issued for any violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty provided in section 1-9 of this Code of Ordinances. Nothing herein shall prohibit the enforcement of any provision of state law which may apply to non-motorized vehicles or their drivers, including any provision of the state traffic laws. 
(Ord. No. 080456, § 3, 4-2-09)  
Chapter 29 - LOBBYIST REGISTRATION ACT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of Ch. 29 by Ord. No. 070688, adopted July, 28, 2008, section 4 of Ord. No. 3777, adopted June 10, 1992, repealed former Ch. 29, which pertained to zoning and was derived from Ord. No. 2650, adopted Oct. 26, 1981, as amended. For a detailed listing of amendments to Ord. No. 2650 see the Code Comparative Table for Ordinances at the end of this volume. 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Intent and purpose. 
The city commission of the City of Gainesville, Florida, hereby determines and declares that the operation of responsible government requires that the fullest opportunity be afforded to the people to petition their municipal government for the redress of grievances and to express freely to the elected officials their opinions on legislation and other actions and issues; and that to preserve and maintain the integrity of the governmental decision-making process, it is necessary that the identity and activities of certain persons who engage in efforts to influence city commissioners or board members of the community redevelopment agency (CRA), on matters within their official jurisdictions, either by direct communication or by solicitation of others to engage in such efforts, be publicly and regularly disclosed. 
(Ord. No. 070688, § 1, 7-28-08)  
Sec. 29-2. - Definitions. 
Agency means any federal, state, regional, county, local, or municipal government entity of this state, whether executive, judicial, or legislative; any department, division, bureau, commission, authority, or political subdivision of this state therein; or any public school, community college, or state university. 
Employer means any person providing compensation of any kind to a lobbyist in consideration for his or her performance of lobbying activities. 
Lobbying means communicating directly or indirectly, either in person, by telephone or by letter, or any other form of communication, with any city commissioner or board member of the CRA, where the lobbyist seeks to encourage the passage, defeat, modification, or repeal of any item which may be presented for a vote before the city commission or the CRA. 
Lobbyist means any person who is employed and receives payment, or who contracts for present or future economic consideration of any kind, for the purpose of lobbying. 
Person means any individual, business, corporation, association, firm, partnership, not-for-profit organization, or other organization or group. 
(Ord. No. 070688, § 1, 7-28-08)  
Sec. 29-3. - Registration of lobbyists required; registration statements. 
(a)  Required information. Prior to engaging in lobbying, every lobbyist shall file with the clerk of the commission a registration statement containing the following information: 
(1)  The lobbyist's full name, residence address, business address, and nature of business. 
(2)  The full name and address of his or her employer, if any. 
(3)  The general and specific subject matters which the lobbyist seeks to influence. 
(4)  The extent of any direct business association by the lobbyist with any current elected or appointed official or employee of the City of Gainesville. For the purposes of this article, the term "direct business association" shall mean any mutual endeavor undertaken for profit or compensation. 
(5)  A lobbyist representing a group, association, or organization shall, prior to engaging in lobbying, receive appropriate authorization from said group, association, or organization to lobby on its behalf upon a particular subject matter. A copy of the applicable minutes, motion, or other documentation of action shall be attached to the statements required by paragraph (a) of this section, 
(b)  List of employers. A lobbyist shall file, on an annual basis, a registration statement for each employer on whose behalf he or she lobbies before the city commission or the CRA. 
(c)  List of current lobbyists. The clerk of the commission shall maintain a current list of registered lobbyists and the registration statements required under this section, all of which shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 070688, § 1, 7-28-08)  
Sec. 29-4. - Exceptions. 
The following persons are not required to register as a lobbyist pursuant to this chapter: 
(1)  Any employee, public officer or appointee of an agency, acting in the normal course of his or her duties; 
(2)  An attorney, or any person, who represents a client in a quasi-judicial hearing before an agency, board, CRA or commission; 
(3)  Those persons who, in their individual capacity and without compensation of any kind, merely communicate with the city commission or board members of the CRA for the purpose of self representation; 
(4)  Any person who appears as a representative of a not-for-profit community based organization for the purpose of requesting a grant, funds or in-kind services. 
(Ord. No. 070688, § 1, 7-28-08)  
Sec. 29-5. - Penalties. 
(a)  If the clerk of the commission, or their designee, becomes aware of any person engaged in lobbying who has failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, he or she shall mail a notice of violation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person informing them of the requirements of this chapter, outlining the process by which they may comply with the chapter, and providing them with the right to contest the violation. 
(b)  There shall be no penalty assessed against a lobbyist the first time any registration statement for which the lobbyist is responsible is not filed. However, to receive the one-time penalty waiver, the registration statement must be filed within 14 days of receipt of the notice of violation. 
(c)  If the required registration statement is not filed within 14 days of receipt of the notice of violation, the matter will be brought before the commission for a hearing after reasonable notice. The lobbyist will be afforded notice of the hearing and an opportunity to be heard regarding the failure to comply with this chapter. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city commission may warn, reprimand, or censure the violator or may suspend or prohibit the violator from appearing on behalf of any employer before the commission or the CRA for a period of time not to exceed one year. The city commission may also rescind the notice of violation if it deems appropriate. 
(d)  The intentional failure or refusal of any lobbyist to comply with any order of the commission suspending or prohibiting the lobbyist from lobbying shall subject the lobbyist to such civil remedies as the city may pursue, including the issuance of a civil citation and/or injunctive relief. 
(e)  The validity of any action taken by the city commission or the CRA shall not be affected by the failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 070688, § 1, 7-28-08)  
Chapter 30 - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Printed herein is the Land Development Code of the city, Ordinance No. 140818 , as adopted on July 20, 2017. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Department of community development, § 2-211 et seq.; city beautification board, § 2-261 et seq.; code enforcement board, § 2-376 et seq.; downtown redevelopment agency, § 2-406 et seq.; tree board of appeals, § 2-430.16 et seq.; tree advisory board, § 2-430.31 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; waiting period for demolition permit for historic structures, § 6-19; downtown minimum property standards, § 6-231 et seq.; housing, Ch. 13; miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 14.5; nuisances, Ch. 16; parks and recreation, Ch. 18; credit and transferable development rights for park and open space dedication, § 18-2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 23; repair of vehicles on residential property, § 26-138; utilities, Ch. 27. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-1.1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Gainesville Land Development Code."  
Sec. 30-1.2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter apply within the entire corporate area of the city to the use of all lands within such area by any person, corporation, other entity or public agency, including the city itself. Property outside the corporate city limits, but adjacent to the city limits, shall be provided protection from the impacts of development in the city as if it were in the city.  
Sec. 30-1.3. - Purpose. 
This chapter implements the City of Gainesville Comprehensive Plan (Comprehensive Plan) to secure an environment for present and future generations that is environmentally sustainable, socially just and desirable, and economically sound through the scientific, aesthetic, and orderly disposition of land, resources, facilities and services.  
Sec. 30-1.4. - Objectives. 
This chapter is prepared in accordance with and for the promotion of the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. The regulations herein are designed to conserve the value of land, building and natural resources; protect the character and maintain the stability of residential, commercial and industrial areas; and provide for efficiency and economy in the process of development through: 
A.  Preservation, protection and conservation of significant natural features of land, creeks, lakes, wetlands, uplands and air; 
B.  Appropriate use of land; 
C.  Regulation of the use and occupancy of buildings, land and water; 
D.  Healthful and convenient distribution of population; 
E.  Provision of convenient circulation of people and goods and the control of traffic congestion; 
F.  Provision of adequate public facilities and utilities; 
G.  Protection, enhancement and perpetuation of specific community areas with special character, interest or value representing and reflecting elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political, historical and architectural heritage; 
H.  Establishment of zoning districts regulating the location and use of buildings and other structures, and the use of water and land for trade, industry, residence and other purposes, by regulating and limiting the height, bulk and access to light and air of building and structures, the area of yards and other open spaces and density of use; and 
I.  Provision of low cost, efficient and expeditious development review process.  
Sec. 30-1.5. - Rules for construction of language. 
For the purpose of the administration and enforcement of this chapter, and unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this chapter: 
A.  The terms "code," "chapter," "article," "section" and "subsection" shall refer to the Code of Ordinances, City of Gainesville, Florida, and the referenced provisions thereof. 
B.  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any other chapter or any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text of this chapter shall control. 
C.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
D.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
E.  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "maintained for," "provided for" or "occupied for." 
F.  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either/or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
2.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singularly or in any combination. 
3.  "Either/or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singularly but not in combination. 
G.  The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to the specified examples but is intended to extend its meaning to all instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
H.  Any numerical calculations that yield a fraction of a number will be rounded either up or down to a whole number based on standard half-round-up method. For example, 4.25 will be rounded to 4; 4.75 will be rounded to 5; 4.5 will be rounded to 5.  
Sec. 30-1.6. - Engineering Design and Construction Manual. 
The City of Gainesville Engineering Design and Construction Manual, which may be cited as the design manual, is intended to provide detailed design guidelines and specifications for the construction of physical improvements in the city. The design manual shall be adopted by ordinance of the city commission and kept on file in the public works department. The design manual shall address the following: 
A.  Selection of environmentally sound practices for the management of stormwater and control of erosion and sedimentation; 
B.  Construction specifications for stormwater management facilities, streets, bridges, bikeways, sidewalks, and other physical improvements; 
C.  Design criteria for wet and dry detention basins; and 
D.  Local rainfall information.  
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 30-1.7. - Generally. 
A.  Enforcing officials. The city manager shall designate such person or persons as may be necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Authority to enter private property. Those persons designated to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter may, in the performance of such functions and duties, enter upon any land and make such inspections, examinations and surveys as are required for the proper administration and enforcement hereof and may obtain any necessary warrants therefor. 
C.  Violations deemed public nuisance. The provisions of this chapter are deemed to be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare and for the protection of the peaceful use and enjoyment of any lands by the owners thereof, and any violation of the terms of this chapter is declared by the city commission to constitute a public nuisance. 
D.  Means of enforcement. The enforcing officials may enforce the terms of this chapter by any or all of the following methods: 
1.  By initiating criminal prosecution of any violation through the office of the state attorney; 
2.  By seeking the assistance of the city attorney in initiating an action to enjoin a public nuisance or obtain other civil relief; 
3.  By revoking a certificate of occupancy as provided by ordinance; or 
4.  By using any other means specified in any particular article of this chapter or otherwise provided by law or ordinance.  
Sec. 30-1.8. - Compliance with chapter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any use of any land, water or building, or part thereof, except in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; to fail to obtain any inspection, approval, permit, certificate or license required by this chapter; or to violate any conditions or requirements lawfully applied to any inspection, approval, permit or license issued hereunder.  
Sec. 30-1.9. - Violations and penalties. 
The city may employ enforcement powers and seek penalties and remedies as provided by Florida law or the City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances, including as provided by section 1-9, for violations of the Land Development Code or related provisions.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 30-2.1. - Definitions. 
Throughout this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated unless the text of the article or section in which used clearly indicates otherwise. Any word or phrase used in this chapter that is not defined in this chapter shall have the common dictionary meaning most appropriate to the context in which such word or phrase is used. 
Abused person means a person in need of and seeking refuge from actual or threatened physical or mental violence or abuse. 
Abut means to physically touch or border upon, or to share a common property line. 
Accent lighting means lighting of predominately non-horizontal surfaces, including facades, fountains, displays and statuary. 
Accessory dwelling unit means a subordinate living unit added to, created within, or detached from a single-family dwelling (but within the same lot) that provides basic requirements for independent living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Accessory structure means a subordinate structure (not exceeding 50 percent of the building square footage of the principal structure), the use of which is incidental to that of the principal structure on the same lot. 
Accessory use means an activity, or function that is incidental to, and on the same lots as, a principal use. 
Adjacent means when two properties, uses or objects are not abutting but are separated only by a right-of-way, street, pathway or similar minimum separation. 
Administered parking service means a procedure where the parking of patron or employee vehicles is conducted by, and is the responsibility of, the owner or operator of the subject establishment. Administered parking, and designated drop off areas shall meet all vehicle circulation requirements of the city. The acceptable procedure for administered parking requires the patron to leave the vehicle with the owner, operator or representative of the establishment who then moves the patron's vehicle to a designated lot and returns the vehicle to the original location for vehicle pickup at the time the owner of the vehicle needs to depart. Designated arrival and departure areas and the location for storing vehicles shall be clearly marked in accordance with all city requirements. 
Adult day care home means an occupied dwelling in which one or more of the residents provide care or supervision for more than three natural persons, other than residents requiring such care or supervision and other than children provided for within the definition of a family day care home. Such homes shall be licensed by the state and shall not include nursing and personal care facilities, schools, rehabilitation centers, social service homes or halfway houses, or other similar activities or facilities that are not customarily incidental to a residential use. 
Adverse impact means any direct or indirect effect likely to cause, or actually causing, a decline in the stability, natural function or natural diversity of any environmental feature, or in the quiet, peaceful, safe or healthful use or occupancy of any on-site or off-site property. 
Adversely affected person means any person who is suffering or will suffer an adverse effect to an interest protected or furthered by the Comprehensive Plan, including but not limited to: interests related to health and safety; densities or intensities of development; transportation facilities; recreational facilities; educational facilities; health care facilities, or services; and environmental or natural resources. The alleged adverse effect may be shared in common with other members of the community at large, but shall exceed in degree the general interest in community good shared by all persons. 
Alcoholic beverage means all beverages containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight. 
Alcoholic beverage establishment means any use located in any structure or building or portion thereof that: 
A.  Involves the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. This phrase does not include: 1) uses that involve a de minimus retail sale of alcoholic beverages; or 2) an accessory use that involves the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on-premises if the principal use is: 
1.  Civic, social, or fraternal organizations. 
2.  Amusement and recreation services. 
3.  Motion picture theaters. 
4.  Hotels and motels when the alcoholic beverage establishment is operated by the management of the hotel or motel. 
5.  Restaurants, as defined below. 
6.  Grocery stores with an accessory use that includes prepared foods for onsite consumption; however, this does not include convenience stores. 
B.  Is a bottle club as defined below. 
Alley means a right-of-way providing access to parking, service areas, and outbuildings at the rear or side of the property. 
Amateur radio towers means structural facilities used to support amateur radio antennas as licensed and operated by federally licensed amateur radio station operators. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for sending and/or receiving intelligence without physical connection. 
Applicant means a landowner, developer, builder or other person who files a petition for a development order and/or a development permit. 
Application for development permit means an application submitted to the city requesting the issuance of a development permit. 
Appropriate reviewing board means the board responsible for reviewing or rendering a decision on a particular subject, zoning, development plan, variance, or any other action provided for in this chapter. The boards include the city plan board, development review board, and historic preservation board. 
Apron means the paved area between the back edge of the sidewalk and the back of the curb. 
Arcade means a private frontage typically used in conjunction with a retail use where the façade includes a colonnade supporting habitable space. 
Archaeological site means a property or location that has yielded or may yield information on the city's history or prehistory, as generally evidenced by the presence of archaeological resources. 
Archaeological resources means physical evidences of past human activity, as well as evidences of the effects of that activity on the environment, including but not limited to: monuments, memorials, Indian habitations, ceremonial sites, abandoned settlements, sunken or abandoned watercraft, engineering works, treasure troves, artifacts, or other sites, landforms, properties, objects or features with intrinsic archaeological value. Generally, this term applies to physical evidences equal to, or greater than, 50 years in age. 
Area means a clear or open space of land or right-of-way, or the enclosed space or location on which a building stood, stands, or could stand, a definitely bounded part or section of a district, site, building, structure or object set aside for a specific purpose. 
Area lighting means lighting of predominately horizontal surfaces, including parking areas, recreational areas and building entrance walkways. 
Arterial or arterial street means any street: 
A.  Designated as arterial on the roadway map on file in the public works department; 
B.  Functionally classified by the state department of transportation as an urban principal arterial street or an urban minor arterial street; or 
C.  Designated by the city commission as an arterial street based on its physical design, moderately long trip length, and existing or anticipated traffic characteristics. 
Assessed value means the total value of a tax parcel, excluding the value of the land, as determined by the Alachua County Property Appraiser and shown on the most recent property tax bill sent to the owner of record by Alachua County. In the absence of such information, applicants may submit an assessment prepared by a professional appraiser. 
Assisted living facility (ALF) means a facility that provides housing, meals, and one or more personal services for a period exceeding 24 hours to one or more adults who are not relatives of the owner or administrator. 
Attached dwelling means two or more dwelling units that are attached horizontally, where each unit has its own front yard and direct entrance from the ground level. This term includes townhouses and rowhouses, and dwelling units that may be on one combined lot or individual lots. 
Automotive detailing means establishments engaged in providing any of the following services: washing, waxing and polishing by hand, pinstriping, window tinting, interior cleaning and carpet shampooing, sales and installation of basic car accessories such as car covers and car masks. 
Average daily traffic means the number of vehicles traveling in all directions over a given section of roadway during a 24-hour period. 
Avigation easement means the permanent grant of airspace rights over and above the surface of property in order to permit airport operations and operation of aircraft, despite the associated nuisance effects on the underlying surface property, such as but not limited to, noise, vibration, fumes, and fuel particles. 
Awning means a light roof-like structure, supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building. Awnings extend over doors, windows, and/or show windows with the purpose of providing protection from sun and rain and/or embellishment of the façade. 
Awning sign. See "marquee sign." 
Banner sign means a banner or other flexible sign characteristically suspended along or across any of the public streets of the city. 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any single year (i.e., the 100-year flood). 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Bed and breakfast establishment means a dwelling unit personally and physically operated and occupied by the owner or manager in which, as a use subordinate to and included in the residential dwelling unit, transient guests, in return for payment, are provided an overnight sleeping room and only breakfast. 
Bicycle lane means a dedicated lane for cycling within a street, demarcated by striping. 
Bikeway means any road, street, path or way that in some manner is specifically designated as being open to bicycle travel, regardless of whether the facility is designed for the exclusive use of bicycles or is to be shared with other transportation modes. 
Block means a group of lots existing within well-defined and fixed boundaries, usually being an area surrounded by streets or other physical barriers. 
Bona fide agriculture and/or silviculture means the good faith commercial agricultural and/or silvicultural use of the land determined by using the factors outlined in F.S. § 193.461. 
Bottle club means a business establishment not licensed to sell alcoholic beverages providing facilities for the consumption of alcoholic beverages by its patrons on the premises, but without regard as to whether the patrons are required to be members of the bottle club. A bottle club does not include a social, fraternal or civic association or organization not licensed to sell alcoholic beverages that only incidentally, as opposed to primarily, provides facilities for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages by its members and their guests. A bottle club can be a private club or a public business establishment in which the principal revenue would be derived from the sale of setups, mixers, ice and water and charges for any entertainment provided. 
Broadcast means to transmit information without physical connections to two or more receiving devices simultaneously. Information can be transmitted over local television or radio stations, satellite systems or wireless data communications networks. 
Buffer matrix means a matrix showing the required width of a buffer strip and amount of plant material to be located in a buffer strip based on the proposed relationship between land uses. 
Buffer strip means the area reserved along the boundary of a parcel in which landscaping and/or walls, fences or berms provide a separation for uses of differing type and intensity as well as providing an attractive boundary between parcels, particularly ensuring landscaping between multiple-family complexes. 
Buffering means the use of any man-made or natural materials or open space in any fashion designed to limit the effects of one land use upon adjoining land uses. 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, except a fence or as otherwise provided in this definition, used or built for the enclosure or shelter of persons, vehicles, goods, merchandise, equipment, materials or property generally. This definition shall include tents, dining cars, trailers, mobile homes, sheds, garages, carports, animal kennels, storerooms, jails, barns or vehicles serving in any way the function of a building as described herein. This definition shall not include individual doll houses, play houses, and animal or bird houses. 
Building envelope means the outermost surfaces forming the complete enclosure of a building. 
Building frontage means the total length in linear feet of a building façade(s) within a development that fronts directly on a required street or urban walkway. Building frontage is regulated as a required percentage of the total length of the development frontage along the street or urban walkway. For corner lots, the building frontage calculation shall exclude the widths of the required landscape zone, sidewalk zone and building frontage areas. 
Building frontage zone means the area between the edge of the sidewalk opposite to the travel lane and the building façade. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade to the top plate of the highest story. 
Building official means the person designated as building official by the city manager. 
Building permit means an official document or certificate issued by the building official, as provided for in the Standard Building Code as adopted in chapter 6 of the City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances, authorizing performance of construction or alteration of a building or structure. 
Building setback line means a line, established at the minimum setback line as set forth by the applicable zoning district, within a lot or other parcel of land so designated on the plat. 
Business service means a business where the provision of services is focused on support to professional office establishments, including copy, printing and binding centers, secretarial services, and computer rental-repair services. 
Camouflaged facility means any wireless communication facility that is designed to blend into the surrounding environment or that camouflages or conceals the presence of the wireless communication facility. Examples of camouflaged towers include, but are not limited to, man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, flag poles, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures. Examples of camouflaged antennas include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing structure, and antennas integrated into architectural elements. 
Canopy (in reference to landscaping) means the uppermost layer of vegetation in a forest consisting of the tops of trees forming a kind of ceiling. 
Canopy (in reference to buildings) means a covered structure open for pedestrian and/or vehicular access. This definition shall include, but shall not be limited to, canopies associated with drive-throughs of retail and financial establishments and fueling stations. 
Canopy sign. See "marquee sign." 
Capacity means the maximum lawful level of designed use of any structure, or part thereof, as determined by the city's adopted building code and expressed in terms of occupants, seats, persons, employees or other units specified by the building code. 
Capital improvements element means the capital improvements element of the Comprehensive Plan as it may be amended from time to time. 
Carwash means a facility for the cleaning and washing of motor vehicles including interior cleaning, vacuuming, waxing and detailing, by means of self-service, automated mechanical equipment, manual labor or a combination thereof. Any carwash facility dispensing gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels shall be considered a gasoline or alternative fuel station. 
Certificate of appropriateness means the permit that is required to be issued by the historic preservation board prior to any action as set forth in this chapter. 
Certificate of concurrency exemption means a certificate issued by the city manager or designee pursuant to this chapter, evidencing that a project is exempt from concurrency review. 
Certificate of conditional concurrency reservation means a certificate issued by the city manager or designee, in conjunction with a development agreement that is approved by the city manager or designee, evidencing that: 
A.  All available public facility capacity to serve a proposed project has been reserved, but such capacity is not adequate to serve the proposed project; 
B.  The additional public facility capacity needed for the proposed project may be assured by an executed development agreement; and 
C.  A request by the applicant has been made for consideration and approval by the city commission of a development agreement concurrent with an application for a final development order. 
Certificate of final concurrency means a certificate issued by the city manager or designee, pursuant to the terms of this chapter, evidencing that required public facility capacity is available so that levels of service shall be adequate for the project when the impacts of development occur for which the certificate of final concurrency is issued. This certificate shall expire when the approval of a final development order expires. This certificate shall reserve capacity, except in cases where a deferral of capacity reservation for water/wastewater treatment plant capacity is signed, for the time period that the approval of a final development order is valid and unexpired. If the final development order does not have an expiration date, this certificate shall be valid for 12 months from date of issue. If the certificate of final concurrency lapses, a new application shall be made and a new fee for application and review shall be incurred. A certificate of final concurrency only shall apply to a specific project with specific densities and/or intensities of use. Any alteration of a project that changes the densities and/or intensities of use shall require a new certificate of final concurrency. 
Certificate of occupancy means certification by the city manager or designee that any development or change of use of any building, lands, water or portion thereof has been found to meet the requirements of this Code and the applicable final development order pertaining to development of the lot, parcel or tract of land. 
Certificate of preliminary concurrency means a certificate issued by the city manager or designee, pursuant to the terms of this chapter, evidencing that required public facility capacity is available so that levels of service shall be adequate for the project when the impacts of development occur for which the certificate of preliminary concurrency is issued. This certificate shall expire when the approval of a preliminary development order expires or when a final development order is approved, whichever occurs first. This certificate shall reserve capacity, except in cases where a deferral of capacity reservation for water/wastewater treatment plant capacity is signed, for the time period that the approval of a preliminary development order is valid and unexpired. If the preliminary development order does not have an expiration date, this certificate shall be valid for 12 months from date of issue. If the certificate of preliminary concurrency lapses, a new application shall be made and a new fee for application and review shall be incurred. A certificate of preliminary concurrency only shall apply to a specific project with specific densities and/or intensities of use. Any alteration of a project that changes the densities and/or intensities of use shall require a new certificate of preliminary concurrency. 
Champion tree means those trees that are the largest of their species as listed in the Florida Champion Tree Register maintained by the State of Florida Division of Forestry. 
Change of use means a change in the activity, function or purpose to which or for which a lot or building is put from one category to another category as listed herein and described in the Standard Building Code: assembly, business, educational, hazardous, factory-industrial, institutional, mercantile, residential and storage. 
Child care center. See "day care center." 
City plan board or plan board means the local planning agency designated by the city commission. 
City tree mitigation fund means a separate city fund that holds funds collected as tree mitigation pursuant to this. 
Civic means not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, or municipal parking. 
Clearing or grubbing means any grading of land, cutting of trees, or removal or relocation of existing vegetation or other existing site features for the purpose of installing or laying out site improvements. The term does not include sight trails necessary for the surveying of the subject parcel. 
Cluster subdivision means a residential subdivision of a tract of land where, instead of subdividing an entire tract into lots of prescribed size, a like number of housing units may be clustered on lots of reduced dimensions. A minimum of 75 percent of the remaining land in the tract not built upon is reserved for common area to be held in a form of ownership or easement that will prevent it from ever being subdivided. 
Cluster open space means any portion of a tract of land in a cluster subdivision set aside as a result of the modified dimensional requirements and designed and intended for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents of the cluster subdivision or the community at large. 
Collector or collector street means any street: 
A.  Designated as collector on the roadway map on file in the public works department; 
B.  Functionally classified by the state department of transportation as a collector; or 
C.  Designated by the city commission as a collector street based on its physical design, moderate trip length, and existing or anticipated traffic characteristics. 
Collocation means the situation when a second or subsequent wireless provider uses an existing structure to locate a second or subsequent antenna. The term includes the ground, platform, or roof installation of equipment enclosures, cabinets, or buildings, and cables, brackets, and other equipment associated with the location and operation of the antennae. 
Colonnade or arcade means a covered, open-air walkway at standard sidewalk level attached to or integral with the building frontage; the structure overhead is supported architecturally by columns or arches along the sidewalk. 
Commercial message means a message (including but not limited to text, copy, pictures, symbols, or figures) that proposes a commercial transaction or is related primarily to the economic interests of the speaker. Commercial messages include, but are not limited to, the name of the business, business or brand identification, trademark, logo, or offer of service or product. 
Common area means any part of a development designed and intended to be used in common by the owners, residents or tenants of a development. 
Common wall means a solid wall in a single vertical plane joining two dwelling units but completely separating such units. 
Communication tower means a guyed or self-supporting tower, constructed as a free standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, containing one or more antennas intended for transmitting and/or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication. References in this ordinance to "tower," unless otherwise qualified, shall mean "communication tower." 
Community gardens means land used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers or herbs by multiple users. 
Community residential home means a dwelling unit licensed to serve clients of the state department of health and rehabilitative services, which provides a living environment for residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care by supportive staff as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional and social needs of the residents. Community residential homes are further defined by F.S. Ch. 419, and regulated by the state department of health and rehabilitative services. This definition shall not include foster family homes for children, rooming or boarding homes, clubs, dormitories, fraternities, sororities, monasteries or convents, hotels, residential treatment facilities (Levels I, III or V), nursing homes, emergency shelters, social service homes or halfway houses, or residences for destitute people. 
Completely enclosed building means a building having a complete, permanent roof and continuous walls on all sides, either party walls or exterior walls, including any customary windows and doors. 
Comprehensive Plan means the City of Gainesville Comprehensive Plan adopted by the city commission, as may be amended from time to time. 
Concurrency means the necessary public facilities and services to maintain the level of service standards adopted in the plan are available when the impacts of development occur. 
Concurrency determination means a document issued by the city manager or designee stating that there appears to be sufficient public facility capacity so that designated levels of service shall be adequate for the project for which the concurrency determination is issued. A concurrency determination reserves no public facility capacity and is in no way binding on the city. 
Concurrency management system means the procedures and processes used by the city to determine that development orders, when issued, will not result in the reduction of the level of service standards adopted in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Conservation easement means a legally enforceable land preservation agreement between a landowner and a charitable corporation, trust, or a governmental body or agency, as set forth in F.S. § 704.06. 
Conservation management area means those areas of land that will be set aside, in perpetuity, for the protection of regulated natural or archaeological resources in order to fulfill obligations as set forth in the city's Land Development Code. 
Consolidated apartment management office means an office providing residential rental services for apartments including, at a minimum, the management of apartments on the same property as the office, and including customary services such as apartment search and referral, provision of maintenance services, and lease transaction. 
Context area means the University of Florida Campus Master Plan Context Area. 
Continuum of care facility means a multi-faceted center contained on a single location the purpose of which is to organize and deliver housing, meals, and services to meet the specific needs of people who are homeless or who are about to become homeless as those persons move to stable housing and maximum self-sufficiency. This use may include, but is not limited to: emergency, transitional, and permanent housing; meals; health services including behavioral, mental, medical, dental and rehabilitative; counseling; entrepreneurial programs, including agricultural, retail, restaurants, business and personal services; agricultural uses and sales; camping facilities; day care facilities; veterinary services; social services; and recreational services. 
Contributing properties means properties located in a local register of historic places district that meet the following criteria: 
A.  The property is one that, by its location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association, adds to the district's sense of time and place and historical development. 
B.  A property should not be considered contributing if the property's integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association have been so altered by man or physical deterioration that the overall integrity of the property has been irretrievably lost. 
C.  Ordinarily structures that have been built within the past 50 years shall not be considered to contribute to the significance of a district unless a strong justification concerning their historical or architectural merit is given or the historical attributes of the district are considered to be less than 50 years old. 
Council of tree and landscape appraisers means a group of professional societies specializing in arboriculture, horticulture and nursery practices that have established a methodology for appraising the financial value of trees and landscaping. 
Courtyard means an inset area along a building frontage that may be covered or uncovered. The inset area is for pedestrians and may be used for a building entry area, seating area, landscape or garden area, art or sculpture display, or fountains. Courtyards may be used to provide building articulation and architectural interest. 
Critical duration means the duration of a specific storm event that creates the largest volume or highest rate of net stormwater runoff (post-development runoff less pre-development runoff) for typical durations. The critical duration is determined by comparing various durations of the specified storm and calculating the peak, rate and volume of runoff for each. The duration resulting in the highest peak rate or largest total volume is the critical duration storm. 
Crown means the foliated portion of a tree, from the lowest branch to the treetop; synonymous with canopy. 
Crown spread means the measurement of the outermost tips of a tree's branches as they form a circle. It is calculated by averaging the diameters of two circles - the distance across the narrowest point and at the widest point. 
Cul-de-sac means a street that terminates at one end with vehicle turnaround facilities at the end. 
Curb or curbline means the inside vertical face of a masonry curb, the centerline of a valley gutter, or the edge of the pavement where no curb or gutter exists. 
Dangerous person means a person who: 
A.  Has charges of an illegal act of violence pending against himself/herself or is confined pending resolution of his/her competency to stand trial for such an act; 
B.  Has been found not guilty of such an act by reason of insanity; 
C.  Has been convicted of such an act within the past five years or is serving a sentence for such an act; 
D.  Has been charged with a violent offense that was plea bargained to a lesser nonviolent offense or resulted in the withholding of adjudication as to guilt; 
E.  Has committed a victim-related sex offense; 
F.  Has been determined by the department of health and rehabilitative services to be presently dangerous to himself/herself or others or to present a clear and present potential to escape; 
G.  Has been determined by a licensed psychiatrist or a licensed clinical psychologist to be presently dangerous to himself/herself or others or to present a clear and present potential to escape; or 
H.  Has a history of committing acts of violence or escaping from secured premises. 
Day care center means any place, building or location, other than an occupied dwelling, where care is provided for four or more natural persons, not related to the operator. Such care may be rendered day or night. Such term specifically includes a kindergarten (when not part of a school), nursery school, child care center, preschool and adult day care facility. 
De minimis development means a development of such low intensity as to have a de minimis effect, if any, on the level of service standards adopted in the Comprehensive Plan. De minimis development includes one single-family dwelling or one two-family dwelling on a lot of record as of the effective date of adoption of this chapter. It also includes additions to or the erection of structures smaller than 200 square feet. De minimis development shall be eligible for a certificate of concurrency exemption. 
Deferral of capacity reservation means that water and wastewater treatment plant capacity is not reserved and plant connection fees are not assessed at the certificate of preliminary or final concurrency stage. An applicant for a deferral shall sign a deferral form available from the city. The applicant shall still meet water/wastewater concurrency requirements, but these are deferred until an application for a building permit is made. The city makes no guarantees that capacity will be available for the project. 
Degrade or degraded means to cause a feature or area to suffer an adverse impact. A degraded feature or area is one that has suffered an adverse impact from which full restoration to historic natural functioning has not yet been attained. 
Demolition means the tearing down or razing of 25 percent or more of a structure's existing external walls. 
Density means the extent of development of residential uses, expressed in dwelling units per acre of land. 
Design manual means a manual prepared and updated by the city manager or designee and on file in the public works department that provides design guidelines and illustrations to be used in the design and construction of physical improvements within the city. 
Developed area means the area within an imaginary line formed by the outer perimeter of all structures, parking lots, and other paving and manmade alterations to the natural condition of any lot or parcel of land, except for sidewalks in public rights-of-way and driveways, the perimeters to be adjusted to the closest geometric shape for which an area may be reasonably easily calculated. 
Developer means any person who engages in or proposes to engage in a development activity either as the owner or as the agent of an owner of property. 
Development or development activity means any of the following activities: 
A.  Construction, clearing, filling, excavating, grading, paving, dredging, mining, drilling or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil or vegetation of a site. 
B.  Building, installing, enlarging, replacing or substantially restoring a structure, impervious surface or water management system, and including the long term storage of materials. 
C.  The erection, placement, alteration, remodeling or reconstruction of any building on any land or the authorization of any improvements on any land to facilitate the use of such land. 
D.  Subdividing land into two or more parcels. 
E.  A tree removal for which authorization is required under this Code of Ordinances. 
F.  Erection of a permanent sign unless expressly exempted by this Code of Ordinances. 
G.  Alteration of a historic property for which authorization is required under this Code of Ordinances. 
H.  Changing the use of a site so that the need for parking is increased. 
I.  Construction, elimination or alteration of a driveway onto a public street. 
J.  For the purpose of vested rights, development has the meaning given to it in F.S. § 380.04 as amended. 
Development agreement means an agreement entered into between the city and a developer for the purpose of assuring the city that the developer shall provide required public facility capacity. Development agreements include, but are not limited to, agreements authorized pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220 and F.S. § 380.01, et seq., both as amended from time to time. 
Development order means any order granting, denying or granting with conditions an application for approval of a development project or activity. 
Development permit means any official city document that authorizes the commencement of construction or land alteration without need for further application and approval. Development permits include: all types of construction permits (plumbing, electrical, foundation, mechanical and so forth, in addition to the building permit itself), grading and clearing permits, tree removal permits, sign permits, etc. 
Development plan means a plan indicating the permitted design and extent of development of a parcel of land, approved under and pursuant to this chapter. 
Diameter breast height (DBH) means the diameter of the main stem of a tree as measured 4.5 feet above the natural grade at the base. The diameter of a multi-stemmed tree is measured at the narrowest point below the lowest branch. 
Directional sign or directory sign means any sign that exclusively contains information providing direction to pedestrian and vehicular traffic to any object, place, or area. The term includes, but is not limited to, a sign indicating an avenue of ingress or egress and a sign listing the occupants of a property and their office or suite numbers. 
Director means the director of the department designated by the city manager to administer these regulations. 
Disability glare means glare resulting in reduced visual performance and visibility, often accompanied by discomfort. 
Disposition means the placement of a building on its lot. 
District (for the purpose of historic preservation) means a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, objects or areas, which are united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district also may be comprised of individual resources that are separated geographically but are linked by association or history. 
District or zoning district means an area or areas of the city designated on the zoning map as being subject to the uniform regulations and requirements of a particular zoning category established in this chapter. 
Documentation means photographs, slides, drawings, plans, factual written descriptions or legal records. 
Dormitory, large means a dwelling used, or intended to be used, for the furnishing of sleeping accommodations for pay to transient or permanent guests with more than 2,500 gross square feet of space used, or intended to be used for such purpose. Meals or housekeeping facilities may also be provided such guests or tenants, but no group housing shall maintain an eating or drinking place, open to the public, in the same building or in any building in connection therewith. This use includes rooming houses, group or youth hostels, fraternities and sororities. 
Dormitory, small means a dwelling used, or intended to be used, for the furnishing of sleeping accommodations for pay to transient or permanent guests, with less than 2,500 gross square feet of space used, or intended to be used for such purpose. Meals or housekeeping facilities may also be provided such guests or tenants, but no group housing shall maintain an eating or drinking place, open to the public, in the same building or in any building in connection therewith. This use includes rooming houses, group or youth hostels, fraternities and sororities. 
Dripline means the minimum rooting volume of a tree necessary to sustain the tree's life, generally defined by the tree's crown spread or a radius of every 1.25 feet for every one inch DBH, whichever is greater, and from the surface to a depth of three feet. 
Drive-through facilities mean establishments that provide services or sales that are extended mechanically or personally to customers who do not exit their motorized vehicle. Such facilities include banking facilities, restaurants, food and/or beverage sales, dry cleaning, drug stores, retail sales, express mail services and other services. Not included in this definition are auto fuel pumps and depositories that involve no immediate exchange or dispersal to the customer, such as mailboxes, library book depositories and recycling facilities. 
Driveway means the improved area between a public street and private property intended to provide ingress and/or egress of vehicular traffic from the public or private street to a definite area of private property. 
Driveway permit means a written approval issued by a permitting authority, subject to conditions stated therein, authorizing construction, reconstruction or removal of any improvements connected to a public street. The permit shall be for a specific location and for a specific type and intensity of property use. 
Driveway, width (W) means the narrowest width of the driveway measured parallel with the edge of the street or roadway at the street right-of-way line. 
Dwelling means any building used primarily for human habitation. The term "dwelling" shall not include a hotel, motel, tourist court or other building for transients, but shall include group housing. 
Dwelling unit means a room or rooms in a dwelling, other than a dormitory, comprising the essential elements of a single housekeeping unit. Each area with one address for billing, one electric meter, and/or one full kitchen shall be considered a separate dwelling unit. 
Easement means an interest in land granted for a specific purpose or purposes but not conveying fee simple title to real property. 
Eaves means the lowest horizontal line of a sloping roof. 
Ecological integrity means the condition of an ecosystem whereby its natural communities and physical environments remain substantially intact, and key ecosystem processes such as nutrient cycles, succession, water levels and flow patterns, and the dynamics of sediment erosion and deposition, are functioning properly within the natural range of variability. 
Ecological value means the value of functions performed by an ecosystem. These functions provide the habitat requirements for living organisms, support biological populations, and sustain species diversity. 
Ecosystem means a dynamic complex of plant, animal, and micro-organism communities and their non-living environment that interacts as a functional unit. 
Effective date means the adoption date of an ordinance or the date specified in the ordinance as being the effective date. 
Electronic sign means any sign, or portions of a sign, where any light source, including but not limited to incandescent bulbs or light-emitting diodes (LED), constitute the sign text or image. This type of sign includes, but is not limited to, electronic message boards, television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat screens, LED screens, video boards, other types of electric and electronic display boards and screens, and holographic displays. Electronic signs include projected images or messages onto buildings or other objects. Signs that are illuminated by light sources only for the purpose of internal or external illumination are not considered electronic signs, nor are non-animated neon signs. 
Emergency shelter means any facility licensed by the state as an emergency shelter providing temporary room and board, protection and pre-placement screening or counseling for a maximum of 15 abused persons, for a one-time stay not to exceed 30 consecutive days per person in any consecutive three-month period; provided that such abused persons are not related to the owner of the premises by law, blood, marriage or adoption; provided, further, that the services rendered on site shall not include intensive treatment or therapy; and provided further that this shelter shall not house dangerous persons. 
Encroach means to break the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit with a structural element, so that it extends into a setback, into the public or private frontage zone, or above a height limit. 
Encroachment means any structural element that breaks the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit, extending into a setback, into the public or private frontage zone, or above a height limit. 
Enforcing officer means the city employee authorized by the city manager to enforce particular sections of this chapter or the Code of Ordinances. 
Engineer means a professional engineer registered to practice engineering by the State of Florida. 
Environmental (or environmentally significant) feature (or natural area) means natural features prone to damage due to development and necessary for: 1) the protection of public health, safety and welfare; or 2) the conservation of the natural environment. A natural area is anything needed by an organism, population or ecosystem, and excluding areas and features disturbed or created by humans, such as buildings or parking lots, but including areas defined as open space. Features and areas typically include one or more of the following: wetlands, lakes, creeks, special protection species habitat, floodplains, uplands and major tree groupings. 
Equipment rental and leasing, heavy means establishments primarily engaged in renting or leasing medical and/or construction equipment, industrial trucks, portable toilets. 
Equipment rental and leasing, light means establishments primarily engaged in renting or leasing computers, electronic equipment, appliances, party supplies, pianos, plants, vending machines, and furniture. 
Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix a sign, structure or building. 
Establish or establishment (in reference to planted trees) means the period of care that shall be provided to a young tree after planting, which is a minimum of one year and additional time as needed to ensure the survivability of the trees. If after three years, a young tree had developed a strong trunk, roots, branches and foliage, it is considered established and can be expected to survive without supplemental watering, with the exception of severe drought and shall be maintained up to a five year period. 
Excess parking means vehicular parking that exceeds the amount required by this chapter by more than ten spaces or more than ten percent, whichever is greater. 
Exercise studio means establishments primarily engaged in operating health clubs, spas, and similar facilities featuring exercise and other active physical fitness conditioning. This includes establishments providing dance and exercise classes. 
Express or parcel delivery distribution center means a facility that accepts from customers, sends, and receives parcels, packages, or mail, and distributes and picks up parcels, packages, and mail to and from individuals and commercial accounts. 
Expression line means a molding or cornice extending or offset a minimum of three inches from the surface plane of the building wall. Expression lines delineate the transition between the story levels. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Fair or better condition means that the tree has a relatively sound and solid root, trunk, and canopy structure, no major insect infestation or pathological problem, or problems that cannot be remedied with cultural practices, and a life expectancy greater than 15 years as determined by the city manager or designee. In the event of a disputed health condition, the condition rating system outlined in the latest edition of the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers Guide for Tree Appraisers shall be used by the city manager or designee to evaluate the health condition. A score of 60 or higher shall qualify a tree as fair or better condition. 
Family means one or more natural persons who are living together and interrelated as spouse, domestic partner, child, stepchild, foster child, parent, stepparent, foster parent, brother, sister, grandparent, niece, nephew, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, or legal guardian, as evidenced by written documentation of such relationship, plus no more than two additional unrelated natural persons occupying either the whole or part of a dwelling unit as a separate housekeeping unit. A family also includes a community residential home, as defined in this chapter, with six or fewer residents. The persons constituting a family may also include domestic servants and temporary gratuitous guests. "Temporary gratuitous guests" as used herein shall refer to natural persons occasionally visiting such housekeeping unit for a short period of time not to exceed 30 calendar days within a 90-day period. 
Family day care home, large means an occupied residence, licensed by the Alachua County Health Department as large family child care home, in which child care is regularly provided for children from at least two unrelated families and that receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operated for profit, and that has at least two full-time child care personnel on the premises during the hours of operation. One of the two full-time child care personnel shall be the owner or occupant of the residence. A large family child care home shall first have operated as a licensed family day care home for two years, with an operator who has had a child development associate credential or its equivalent for one year, before seeking licensure as a large family child care home. Household children under 13 years of age, when on the premises of the large family child care home or on a field trip with children enrolled in child care, shall be included in the overall capacity of the licensed home. A large family child care home shall be allowed to provide care for one of the following groups of children, which shall include household children less than 13 years of age: 
A.  A maximum of eight children from birth to 24 months of age. 
B.  A maximum of 12 children, with no more than four children under 24 months of age. 
Family day care home, small means an occupied residence, licensed by the Alachua County Health Department as a family child care home, in which child care is regularly provided for children from at least two unrelated families and which receives a payment, fee or grant for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operated for profit. Household children under 13 years of age, when on the premises of the family day care home or on a field trip with children enrolled in child care, shall be included in the overall capacity of the licensed home. A family day care home shall be allowed to provide care for one of the following groups of children, which shall include household children less than 13 years of age: 
A.  A maximum of four children from birth to 12 months of age. 
B.  A maximum of three children from birth to 12 months of age, and other children, for a maximum total of six children. 
C.  A maximum of six preschool children if all are older than 12 months of age. 
D.  A maximum of ten children if no more than five are preschool age and, of those five, no more than two are under 12 months of age. 
Farmers market means a membership group of farmers engaged in the sale of food and agricultural products that are primarily local in origin; and crafts made from materials gathered from a farm as part of production incidental to the sale of food and agricultural goods. Sales at a farmers market are intermittent during a limited time period but the market itself is permanently located on public property or right-of-way or on private property. 
Fence means a barrier constructed of materials other than masonry, erected for the purpose of protection, confinement, enclosure or privacy. The term "fence" does not include natural barriers, such as, but not limited to, trees, hedges or shrubs. 
Final development order means the final approval of a development plan, planned development, special use permit or final plat. This approval shall be granted prior to the issuance of a development permit as defined in this chapter. 
Final development order for purposes of concurrency means the final approval of a development project, the approval of which shall be granted prior to issuance of a development permit as defined in this chapter. (The final development order authorizes the project, whereas the development permit authorizes specific components of the project, such as building construction, parking lot installation, landscaping and the like.) For purposes of this chapter the final development plan approval is the final development order. 
Final development order for purposes of vesting. The following unexpired development orders shall be considered final development orders for the purposes of a determination of vested rights in a development approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived: 
A.  Building permit; 
B.  Final development plan approval; and 
C.  Final plat approval. 
Flag means any emblem or insignia that is displayed on a single pole or other supporting structure, including but not limited to those of any nation, state, political subdivision, religious, political, social or fraternal organization. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
A.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or 
B.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Floor area means the sum of the horizontal areas of all floors of a building, or buildings, on a development site, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls. Included within such sum shall be the areas of attic spaces with a vertical structural clearance of at least seven feet. Also included are floors of interior balconies or mezzanines, and floors of any other space reasonably usable for any purpose, including but not limited to garages, carports, patios, porches, decks, elevators, stairwells, and canopies. 
Floridan aquifer high recharge areas means those geographic areas where the Floridan aquifer system is vulnerable to degradation from stormwater runoff, or to contamination from land uses involved in the handling or storage of hazardous materials. These areas include stream to sink surface water basins, or areas that exceed 12 inches of aquifer recharge per year in the St. Johns River Water Management District, or have moderate to high recharge potential in the Suwanee River Water Management District, as depicted on the Floridan Aquifer Recharge Map in the future land use map series of the city's Comprehensive Plan or in the city's GIS map library, whichever map is the more current. 
FNAI and FNAI Guide means the Florida Natural Areas Inventory Guide to the Natural Communities of Florida: 2010 edition or most recent edition as updated. The FNAI Guide identifies and describes natural community classification groups based on a combination of landscape position, vegetation, and hydrology. The FNAI Guide is compiled by the Florida Natural Areas Inventory, a non-profit organization administered by Florida State University, dedicated to gathering, interpreting, and disseminating information critical to the conservation of Florida's biological diversity. 
Food distribution center for the needy means any building or structure, or a portion thereof, or site that is regularly used to furnish meals without cost or at very low cost to needy and destitute persons. A food distribution center for the needy shall not be considered to be a restaurant. The preparation of meals in any building or structure, or portion thereof, for distribution at another site or location shall not be considered to be a food distribution center for the needy. 
Food truck means a motorized vehicle or trailer that a natural person or business entity uses to sell immediately consumable food products and nonalcoholic beverage items from a fixed location. 
Footcandle means a unit of measure expressing the quantity of light received on a surface (assumed to be a horizontal plane unless otherwise specified), and measurable with an illuminance meter (i.e., light meter). 
Foster child means any dependent minor child placed in a home by a state agency or by a state-licensed private child-placing agency. 
Foster family home for children means a dwelling owned or rented by, and occupied by, parents licensed by the state to provide personal care for one or more foster children, all of whom live together in such dwelling as a family unit, with traditional family ties. Any former foster child who has lived continuously in such a home for one year prior to his/her attaining majority age shall be considered a member of the family and the parents may allow that former foster child to continue to live in that home without obtaining a landlord license. 
Four-family dwelling means a building containing four dwelling units. 
Fowl means chickens, pea fowl, and like animals (Galliformes); ducks, geese, and like animals (Anseriformes); emus; rheas; and ostriches (Struthio camelus). 
Fraternity house. See "dormitory." 
Freestanding sign means any sign that is mounted on or supported by uprights or braces in or upon the ground, a sign structure, a fence, or a wall of an accessory structure. 
Front open space means the area enclosed by the side lot lines, the street right-of-way line in the front of the property and the established line of setback. The established line of setback shall be the line, drawn parallel to the street in front of the property, extending from the point at which the principal building is closest to the street outward to the lot lines. All area directly in front of any part of the principal building shall also be considered to be in front of the established line of setback. 
Frontage means the length of the property line of a lot or tract of land abutting a public or private street, road, highway or other right-of-way. 
Fuel dealer means establishments primarily engaged in the retail sale of bottled gas, bottled butane gas, coal, liquefied petroleum (LP) gas, bottled propane gas, wood or other fuels. 
Full-cutoff fixture means a luminaire from which no light is emitted at or above a horizontal plane drawn through the lowest light-emitting portion of the luminaire and no more than ten percent of the lamp's intensity is emitted at or above an angle 10° below that horizontal plane, at all lateral angles around the luminaire. A full-cutoff luminaire, by definition, is also "fully shielded." 
Full development means the estimated maximum intensity of development for a particular service area based on full compliance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
Fully shielded means a lighting fixture constructed and installed in such a manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or through a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the luminaire, is projected below the horizontal as determined by photometric test or certified by the manufacturer. Any structural part of the light fixture providing this shielding shall be permanently affixed. 
Gainesville tree list means the list of trees provided in Article VIII of this chapter. 
Gallery means a private frontage conventional for retail use wherein the façade is aligned close to the sidewalk with an attached cantilevered shed or lightweight colonnade overlapping the sidewalk. 
Garden wall means a freestanding wall built along the site frontage line, or coplanar with the façade. It may mask a parking lot from the street and/or strengthen the spatial definition of the public realm. 
Glare means the effect by a light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted, to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual performance and ability. 
Glazing means the design and placement of windows and entrances with clear glass in a building facade. Glazing percentages are calculated by measuring the area of glazing between three feet and eight feet above grade, and dividing it by the total area of the building facade between three feet and eight feet above grade. Required glazing shall be at least 80 percent transparent and shall not utilize painted glass, reflective glass or other similarly treated windows. Glazed areas on entrances may be counted towards meeting the minimum glazing requirements. 
Golf cart, electric means a motor vehicle that is designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational purposes that is not capable of exceeding speeds of 20 miles per hour, and that is powered by an electric motor that draws current from rechargeable storage batteries, fuel cells, or other sources of electrical current. This definition does not include low-speed vehicles as defined by F.S. § 320.01(42). 
Governmental agency means the United States, any other country, the State of Florida, any other state, the County of Alachua, any other county, the City of Gainesville, any other municipality, any special district, and any agency, board, commission, authority or political subdivision thereof. 
Grade means the inclination from the horizontal of a road, unimproved land, etc., which is generally expressed by the vertical rise or fall as a percentage of the horizontal distance. 
Greenway, designated means greenways delineated on the map entitled "Map Displaying Greenways of Gainesville, Florida" on file with the city. 
Gross floor area means the sum of the horizontal areas of the floors of a building or buildings on a given land area, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls. Included within such sum shall be the areas of floors of attic spaces providing a vertical structural clearance of at least seven feet, floors of interior balconies or mezzanines, and floors of any other space reasonably usable for any purpose, no matter where located within a building. Not included shall be the floor area of garages, carports, patios, porches, elevators and stairwells. 
Gross leasable area means the total floor area designed for tenants' exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and upper floors. Gross leasable area does not include public or common areas such as public toilets, corridors, stairwells, elevators, machine and equipment rooms, lobbies or mall areas, either open or enclosed. 
Ground cover means low-growing plants planted in such a manner as to form a continuous cover over the ground, such as liriope, low-growing varieties of honeysuckle, sod, low growing varieties of junipers, or like plants. 
Ground-mounted sign means any sign that is mounted on or supported by an upright, uprights or braces in or upon the ground, any sign structure, or a fence or a wall of an accessory building or structure. 
Guyed tower means a communication tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
Habitat means the physical and biological surroundings of an organism, with appropriate levels of the resources needed by a species for survival and/or reproduction. 
Half or partial street means a street, generally parallel with and adjacent to the boundary line of a tract, having a lesser right-of-way width than required for a full width of the type involved. 
Hardcore (pornography) means depictions of sexual conduct that include one or more of the following: erect male organ; contact of the mouth of one person with the genitals of another; penetration of a finger or male organ into any bodily orifice in another person; open female labia; penetration of a sex toy or other device into a bodily orifice of any person, sometimes assisted by another person; actual male ejaculation; or the aftermath of male ejaculation. 
Health service means establishments primarily engaged in furnishing medical, surgical, and other health services to persons and pets. 
Heritage trees means trees that are larger than 20 inches diameter breast height; except for Water Oaks (quercus nigra), Laurel Oaks (Quercus hemispherica), Sweetgums (Liquidambar styraciflua), Loblolly Pine (Pinus taeda) and Slash Pine (Pinus elliottii), which become heritage trees only when they are larger than 30 inches diameter breast height. 
High quality trees means any trees of the following species: Live Oak (Quercus virginiana), Sand Live Oak (O. geminata), Bluff Oak (Q. austrina), Basket Oak (Q. michauxii), Southern Red Oak (Q, falcata), Southern Magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora), Florida Maple (Acer barbatum), Longleaf Pine (Pinus palustris), Spruce Pine (P. glabra), Cedar Elm (Ulmus crassifolia), Winged Elm (U. alata), Florida Elm (U. floridana), Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum), Pond Cypress (T. ascendens), Tupelo (Nyssa sylvatica), Mockernut Hickory (Caiya tomentosa/Pignut Hickory (C. glabra, Pecan (C. illinoensis), Persimmon (Diospyros virginiana), Basswood (Tilia Americana), Tulip Poplar (Liriodendron tulipifera), White Ash (Fraxinus Americana), Green Ash (F. pensylvanica) and Yaupon, Dahoon, and American Holly species (Ilex vomitoria, I, cassine, and I. opaca). 
High quality heritage trees means heritage trees of the species identified in the definition of high quality trees. 
High quality shade trees means trees of the native species listed in the definition of high quality trees that are identified on the Gainesville tree list in the category "high quality shade." 
Historic/cultural resource means a resource identified by the survey of resources conducted by ERLA and Associates and adopted by the city as part of the preservation and conservation element of the city's Comprehensive Plan or a resource added to the city's inventory (Florida site file) or local register. 
Home occupation means a gainful occupation, profession or use conducted by the occupant of a dwelling, when the activity is incidental to the primary use of the building as a residence. Home occupations shall not include the teaching of fine arts, family day care homes and community residential homes. 
Homeowners/condominium association means a private, nonprofit corporation, association or other legal entity established by the developer for the benefit and enjoyment of its membership and to provide for the care, maintenance, operation and protection of common areas within a development. 
Hotel or motel means a building in which lodging and/or boarding are provided and offered to the public for compensation. 
Housing for the elderly means residential development restricted to occupancy by elderly persons, as either tenants or owners, pursuant to recorded restrictive covenants requiring city approval to amend or pursuant to the applicable rules or regulations of any governmental agency participating in the financing of such development or in the subsidization of the rent or mortgage payments of the occupants. 
Ice manufacturing/vending machine means a self-contained ice plant that produces, stores, bags, and sells ice utilizing a vending machine concept. 
Identification sign means any sign with a message than includes only the name of a subdivision, neighborhood, or residential development. 
Illuminance means a quantity of incident light, measured in footcandles. 
Illuminated sign means any sign that is illuminated by artificial light, either from an interior or exterior source, including reflective or phosphorescent light. 
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) means the recognized technical authority on illumination, whose mission is to advance knowledge and disseminate information for the improvement of the lighted environment to the benefit of society. 
Impervious means material incapable of being penetrated, as by moisture, such as concrete or asphalt. 
Impervious ground coverage means an area of ground covered by any part of a building, street, parking lot or any other structure, improvement, facility or material that is incapable of being penetrated, as by moisture. 
Impervious surface means a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. It includes, but is not limited to, semi-impervious surfaces such as compacted clay, as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar structures. 
Improved street means those streets where physical improvements such as clearing, grading, curb and gutter, stormwater management facilities, pavement, sidewalks and bicycle facilities are constructed as required by the standards of this chapter and the code of ordinances. 
Improvements means physical changes made to raw land and structures placed on or under the land surface, in order to make the land more usable. Typical improvements would be clearing and grubbing, grading, street pavements, sidewalks, bicycle facilities, curb and gutter, drainage ditches, required trees, storm and sanitary sewers, streetlights, fire hydrants, street name signs, permanent control points (PCP's), etc. 
Industrial means a use where the principal purpose is the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances, including the bulk storage of raw materials, and which process may emit noise, vibration, dust, odor or pollutants. Activities include manufacturing, assembly and fabrication, including large scale or specialized industrial operations, processing and compounding of mostly-finished, and/or raw material in bulk form to be used in an operation. 
Infill means the use of vacant or underutilized land within a built-up area for further construction or development. 
Intensity of development or intensity of use means the extent of development of any land, expressed as building coverage and/or building height. 
Intersecting roadways means the intersection of roadways of public rights-of-way or the intersection of a public street and a private driveway or a private roadway of a significant traffic generator. 
Invasive, nonnative vegetation means any plant not indigenous to Florida, which exhibits, or has the potential to exhibit, uncontrolled growth and invasion or alteration of the natural qualities and functions of any native habitat. 
Junk means all waste or scrap materials, including but not limited to all scrap metals; discarded rope, batteries, paper, trash and other natural or synthetic fibers; discarded glass, tinware and plastic; and discarded household goods and hardware. This term shall also include inoperable motor vehicles, machinery and appliances no longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts, and parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances. 
Junkyard (or salvage yard) means an open area where junk is bought, sold, exchanged, stored, processed or handled as a principal or accessory use. This term shall also include operations primarily engaged in the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Laboratories, medical and dental means laboratories primarily engaged in providing analytic or diagnostic services to either the medical profession or to a patient on referral from a health practitioner, and include blood banks, plasma centers, plasmapheresis centers, and other body fluid collection, storage, and analysis, diagnostic imaging, and related services. 
Land surveyor means a land surveyor registered under F.S. Ch. 472, who is in good standing with the board of professional land surveyors. 
Land use element means the future land use element of the Comprehensive Plan, and relates to permissible planned uses of land. 
Land use plan means the future land use element of the most recent city Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to F.S. Ch. 163, and all amendments thereto. 
Land use regulation means any ordinance or resolution controlling the use, development, maintenance or transfer of real property. 
Landlord means any person, owner, agent, individual, firm or corporation or any combination thereof who leases, sublets, rents or allows the occupancy of any single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, three-family dwelling, four-family dwelling, multiple-family dwelling, group housing or other dwelling unit to or by another person or persons not members of his/her family in designated districts whether or not for consideration. 
Landscape materials means improvements such as living trees, shrubs, vines, grasses, ground covers and other plants, sand, wood mulch, and other materials that do not require soil compaction for their installation. 
Landscape zone means the portion of the area between the curb and the sidewalk designated for required street landscaping. 
Large scale retail means a retail or wholesale user that occupies at least 100,000 square feet of ground floor area, and has a regional sales market. Large scale retailers include, but are not limited to, membership warehouse clubs that emphasize bulk sales, and discount, home improvement, sports equipment, furniture and department stores. Retail uses that do not meet these criteria are classified as retail sales, unless otherwise noted in this code. 
Lattice tower means a guyed or self-supporting three or four-sided, open, steel frame structure used to support communications equipment. 
Level of service standard or LOS standard means an indicator of the extent or degree of service provided by or proposed to be provided by a public facility based on and related to the operational characteristics of the public facility. 
Light assembly, fabrication, and processing means a use with a principal purpose that includes the assembly, fabrication, processing, or packaging of components or products that are derived from previously prepared materials. Also included in this definition are research and development laboratories, printing and publishing plants, industrial type cleaning and laundry services, and specialty t-shirt production uses. This use is distinguished from industrial uses based on: the size and scope of the operation, the absence of heavy manufacturing processes, the absence of outdoor storage, and the ability to conduct all operations within a fully enclosed structure. See personal services and business services for repair of household appliances and office equipment, respectively. 
Light pollution means any adverse effect of artificial light including, but not limited to, glare, light trespass, skyglow, energy waste, and impacts on the nocturnal environment. 
Light trespass means light emitted by a luminaire that is cast beyond the boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is sited. 
Liner building means a building specifically designed to mask from the street the large expanse of blank facades common with parking structures, cinemas, supermarkets and similar structures, intended to present a façade that has adequate glazing. 
Listed species means those species of plants and animals listed by federal or Florida law as endangered, threatened, or a species of special concern; and those species ranked by the FNAI as S1, S2 and S3 plants, and S1 animals, S2 animals and only S3 animals that are breeding/nesting. 
Livestock means pigs and pig-like animals (Suidae); rabbits and rabbit-like animals (Leporidae); cows, sheep, goats and like animals (Bovidae); and horses and horse-like animals (Equidae). 
Local register means a means by which to identify and classify various sites, buildings, structures, objects, areas and districts as historic and/or architecturally significant. 
Local street means any street that is not designated as a collector or arterial on the roadway map on file in the public works department, is not functionally classified by the state department of transportation, and, by nature of its physical design, the local nature of trip purposes and the existing and anticipated traffic characteristics, is not suited to carry more than 1,200 average daily trips. 
Lot means a parcel of land contained within property lines of a specific area, including land within easements and building setback lines of the area, but excluding any land within street right-of-way. The word "lot" includes the words "plot," "unit," "parcel" and "tract." 
A.  Corner lot means a lot located at the intersection of two streets and abutting such streets on two adjacent sides of the lot, or a lot with two adjacent sides abutting adjoining and deflected right-of-way lines of the same street that form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
B.  Double-frontage lot means a lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two or more streets or two portions of the same street. 
C.  Interior lot means a lot other than a corner lot having frontage only on one street. 
D.  Reverse-frontage lot means a lot extending between and having frontage on a collector or arterial street and a local street and shall include double-frontage lots. 
Lot area means the total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
Lot coverage means the maximum combined area occupied by all principal and accessory buildings or structures expressed as a percentage, measured from the exterior walls that are roofed or otherwise covered. 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot line or property line means the boundary line of a lot. 
A.  Front lot line means that property line that abuts a public street. If a lot abuts on two or more streets, the front lot line shall be that property line abutting a street that has been so designated by the owner at the time of an application for a building permit, provided such lot is not thereby made nonconforming. 
B.  Side lot line means any property line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
C.  Rear lot line means that property line that is most distant from and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line. 
Lot of record means, for the purposes of determining vested rights, a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, lot split, metes and bounds description, or otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit and which existed in the records of the county property appraiser on November 16, 1992. 
Lot split means the division of a single tract of land into two lots or parcels, where there are no roadway, drainage or other required improvements, and where the resultant lots comply with the standards of this chapter. 
Lot width means the shortest horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured along any line that intersects the minimum required front yard setback line. 
Luminaire means a complete lighting unit (i.e., fixture), consisting of a lamp, or lamps and ballast(s) when applicable, together with the parts designed to distribute the light (e.g., reflector, lens, diffuser), to position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply. 
Maintain means to preserve from decline, keep in an existing state, or retain in possession or control. 
Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure supported entirely from an exterior wall of a building and intended for providing protection from sun and rain or embellishment of the facade. The sides of a marquee are typically used for the display of signs. 
Marquee sign means a building-mounted sign that is attached to an architectural feature that projects from a building, such as a marquee of the sort typically associated with a theater, a solid structural canopy, or an awning that extends over the entrance of a building. 
Maximum uniformity ratio means the maximum level of illuminance in relation to the minimum level of illuminance for a given area. For example, a maximum uniformity ratio of 10:1 means that for a given area, the minimum level of illuminance shall be no less than ten percent of the maximum level of illuminance. 
Medical marijuana dispensing facility means a facility that dispenses cannabis to qualified patients for a medical use, and not a recreational use, pursuant to all applicable regulations of the State of Florida, as may be amended from time to time. 
Message-board sign means a sign, no greater than six square feet in area that is mounted on the wall, door, or window of a business. The board may be mounted in a protective frame having a maximum depth of six inches. Chalk boards and bulletin boards are two types of message board signs. 
Microbrewery means a facility that produces no more than 15,000 barrels per year of fermented malt beverages on site and may include a taproom for sale of beer for on premise consumption or in sealed containers for takeaway. 
Microdistillery means a facility that produces no more than 15,000 gallons per year of spirituous beverages on site and may include a tasting room in which guests/customers may sample the product. Sale of spirituous beverages in sealed containers for take-away may be permitted in accordance with Florida law. 
Microwinery means a facility that produces no more than 100,000 gallons per year of vinous beverages on site and may include a tasting room for sale of wine for on premise consumption or in sealed containers for take-away. 
Microwave transmission tower means a structure operated for the specific purpose of transmitting microwave frequency bands not open to public correspondence, operated by and for the sole use of those licensees operating their own point-to-point radio communication facilities in the public safety, business, industrial, land transportation, marine or aviation service. 
Mile, statute means a distance of 5,280 feet. 
Minor subdivision means the subdivision of a tract of land into five or fewer lots in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter and where the resultant lots comply with all the standards of these regulations. 
Mitigation means compensatory actions taken before, during or after development to preserve, replace, enhance, create, or restore various environmental functions or features of a natural area, or to buffer or protect nearby land uses from adverse impacts of the development, or protect other significant local resources. 
Mobile home means any movable building or vehicle, with or without independent motorized power, built on an integral chassis or sections thereof, which is used or usable as a temporary or permanent dwelling. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land designed, constructed or used for the provision of individual lots or spaces, through lease or separate ownership, on which are placed mobile homes for residential purposes. 
Model home center means residential structures not occupied as a dwelling unit, open to the public for inspection, and used solely for demonstration and selling of residential dwellings. 
Model home unit means a residential structure built to code for eventual residential use, not occupied as a dwelling unit, open to the public for inspection, and used solely for demonstration and selling of residential dwellings being constructed in the same subdivision or development. 
Monopole tower means a communication tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires and ground anchors, used for the transmission of wireless communication. 
Monument sign means a freestanding sign with a base, either a solid structural base or a non-structural base that gives the appearance of a solid structural base that is at least 75 percent of the length of the sign face. 
Motion picture arcade means any booth, cubicle, stall or compartment that is smaller than 600 square feet in floor area, that is designed, constructed or used to hold or seat customers, and that is used for presenting motion pictures or viewing publications for a fee by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROM, books, magazines or periodicals) for observation by customers therein. Motion picture arcades are a prohibited use in all zoning districts in the city. 
Mounting height means the distance between the average grade and the bottom of the luminous opening of a luminaire. 
Moving sign means any sign that moves or mimics movement by natural or mechanical means, including but not limited to signs designed to flutter, wave, twirl, change the direction of a plane, or mimic movement with changes in lighting, text, or pictorial information. 
Multiple-family dwelling means a building containing two or more dwellings. 
Multiple occupancy means a building or development with two or more separate and distinct businesses and/or organizations. 
Native means those plants and animals, including commonized vegetation, and especially vegetation known to have existed locally when Ponce de Leon arrived in Florida, which are appropriate to the ecological setting, have noninvasive growth habits, are tolerant of the hydrologic conditions of the site, and require little maintenance upon maturity. 
Native plants means all plant life that persists and reproduces in Florida without the influence of humans and that are thought to have been present in the region prior to A.D. 1500 (year of first documented European contact). 
Natural vegetation means vegetation existing prior to development of a site that includes understory vegetation and typically includes a wooded area, of generally native species. 
Natural community means a distinct and recurring assemblage of populations of plants, animals, fungi and microorganisms naturally associated with each other and their physical environment. For the purposes of this Code, classification and nomenclature for natural communities shall follow the FNAI Guide. Natural communities do not include altered landcover types that are listed in Appendix 2 of the FNAI Guide. 
Natural resources means the biological, physical, geological and hydrological components of the environment in the City of Gainesville. 
Nature parks and public conservation/preservation areas means those lands owned and managed for the protection, preservation, and/or conservation of natural communities, as well as any other public park, preserve, or conservation areas, or the portion of those parks, preserves, or conservation areas, that are established to preserve natural communities. Nature parks and public conservation/preservation areas are shown in the Nature Parks and Public Conservation/Preservation Areas District Map that is maintained in the city's GIS map library. 
Noise level reduction (NLR) means a measurement standard for the reduction in sound level transmission between the exterior and interior of a structure. NLR standards are used to evaluate the effectiveness or establish requirements of techniques to limit sound transmission in order to prevent or mitigate adverse noise impacts through incorporation of noise attenuation into the design and construction of a structure. 
Nonconforming lot means any lot that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot area, lot depth or lot width, for any use, for the zoning district in which such lot is located. 
Nonconforming structure means any building or structure that does not meet the applicable zoning district's regulations for dimensions and location, site improvements or development standards. 
Nonconforming use means the use of any building or land for anything other than a use specifically permitted in the zoning district in which such building or land is located. 
Nonpresumptive vested rights means those instances where presumptive vested rights cannot be shown, but in which the property owner proves the following: upon some act or omission of the city, a property owner, relying in good faith, has made such a substantial change in position or has incurred such extensive obligations and expenses that it would be highly inequitable and unjust to destroy the rights acquired, and that development has commenced and is continuing in good faith. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature of design, movable, yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Obscene means material, as defined by Miller v. California , 413 U.S. 15 (1973), that: 
A.  Taken as a whole, the average person applying contemporary community standards would find appeals to the prurient interest; 
B.  Depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct as specifically defined herein; and 
C.  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
Occupancy means the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes, not necessarily absolutely continuously, but as a place of usual return (except as otherwise defined in articles of this chapter). 
Occupant (occupancy) means a legal occupant of a building or premises licensed to engage in a business, occupation or profession, or exempt from license due to governmental, educational, religious or other privileged status. 
Occupied rooms means rooms within enclosed structures that are, or may reasonably be expected to be, used for human activities including, but not limited to, sound communications, education or instruction, sleeping, eating, entertainment, or the use of telephones and other audio devices. 
Occupied structure means a structure with at least one occupied room. See "Occupied Rooms." 
Office means a room, studio, suite or building in which a person transacts his business or carries on his stated occupation. However, this term does not include any facility involving manufacturing, fabrication, production, processing, assembling, cleaning, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods and products; or the sale or delivery of any materials, goods or products that are physically located on the premises. This term includes administrative, business and professional offices, and radio and television studios, as well as banks and savings institutions, but excludes medical and dental offices. 
Office, medical and dental means an office in which the principal use is the dispensing of health and/or dental services by licensed practitioners. The use shall include massage therapists (masseurs/masseuses) licensed by the State of Florida. 
Official roadway map means a map maintained by the public works department showing the official designation of all existing and proposed arterial and collector streets, as adopted by ordinance of the city commission after review and recommendation by the city plan board, and showing all other streets for informational purposes. 
Off-premises sign means any sign (with the exception of vehicle signs) with a commercial message that directs attention to a specific business, product, service, entertainment event or activity, or any other type of event, activity or thing that is not provided, sold, produced, manufactured, furnished, conducted, or located at the property upon which the sign is located. 
Ordinary maintenance means work that does not require a building permit and that is done to repair damage or to prevent deterioration or decay of a building or structure or any part thereof by restoring the building or structure or part thereof as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to the damage, deterioration or decay. 
Original appearance means that appearance (except for specific color) that, to the satisfaction of the city manager or designee, closely resembles the appearance of either: 
A.  The feature on the building as it was originally built or was likely to have been built; or 
B.  The feature on the building as it presently exists so long as the present appearance is appropriate, in the opinion of the city manager or designee, to the style and materials of the building. 
Other-than-utility runway means any existing or planned runway that is constructed for, and intended to be used by, all types of aircraft, including those having gross weights greater than 12,500 pounds. 
Outdoor activity means any service or activity conducted or provided outside of the principal structure on a regular or recurring basis, approved as part of a development plan. 
Outdoor café means a seating area, located outside of the public right-of-way, that is adjacent to, operated by, and an accessory use to a restaurant, alcoholic beverage establishment, microbrewery, microdistillery, or microwinery. 
Outdoor storage means the storage or display, outside of a completely enclosed building, of merchandise offered for sale as a permitted use or of equipment, machinery and materials used in the ordinary course of a permitted use, or the storage of inoperable motor vehicles, or the storage of used materials or items whether for sale or not. This term expressly does not include junk or junkyards as defined in this section. 
Outdoor work space means an area, delineated on the development plan of a limited automotive service, which meets the requirements for use for the provision of services and repairs outside an enclosed building. This term does not include junkyards or outdoor storage. 
Outparcel means a separate tract of land, platted or otherwise created, which was included as an integral part of a unified development that was approved by the city through the development plan, subdivision and/or planned development review process. The outparcel shall have unified landscaping and buffers, shared parking, and traffic access and circulation and stormwater management systems integrated with the remainder of the development. The outparcel may or may not be a recorded parcel. For the purpose of development review and permitting, an outparcel may not be considered as an independent parcel unless it and the remainder of the parcels in the unified development can independently meet all of the applicable code requirements. 
Owner means a person who, or entity which, alone, jointly or severally with others, or in a representative capacity (including, without limitation, an authorized agent, attorney, executor, personal representative or trustee) has legal or equitable title to any property in question, or a tenant, if the tenancy is chargeable under his/her lease for the maintenance of the property. 
Parapet means a low wall projecting upward from the outside edge of a roof. 
Parcel means a unit of land within legally established property lines. Legally established property lines means those lines created by a recorded plat, minor plat or lot split, those units of land recognized as lots formed prior to 1961 as recorded on a map kept by the building division, and those lots recognized by the county code enforcement department at the time of any annexation. 
Parking means a temporary, transient storage of private passenger motor vehicles used for personal transportation while the operators of such vehicles are engaged in other activities. The term shall not include storage of new or used cars for sale, service, rental or any other purpose except as specified herein. 
Parking, interior means all parking spaces not located along the perimeter of the parking area. 
Parking, perimeter means parking spaces located along the edge of the paved parking surface. 
Parking space means an area adjacent to a driveway or other vehicular access, designed to be used for the parking of a motor vehicle. 
Parking garage. See "structured parking." 
Paved area means an improved area consisting of asphaltic concrete, concrete, brick or similar material that is intended or designated for parking, maneuvering and/or vehicular movement, and including pedestrian accessways immediately adjacent to such areas. 
Pedestal-type sign means a permanent ground-mounted sign, no greater than one and one-half feet by one and one-half feet in size and up to five feet in height, which advertises products or services provided on the premises. 
Pennant means a piece of cloth, plastic, paper or similar material that is attached to any staff, cord, or wire, either singularly or in a series. 
Permanent sign means any sign that an enforcing official determines is intended to be used for an indefinite duration of time because it is constructed and attached to a building, structure, or the ground in a manner that resists environmental loads such as wind, precludes ready removal or movement of the sign, and meets any applicable Florida Building Code standards. 
Person means any individual, group of persons, firm, corporation, association, company, organization, business trust, estate trust and any governmental agency or their representatives, except that the words "natural person" shall mean only a single human being. 
Personal service means a service use primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person, his or her apparel, pets, or small appliances. Some examples include barbershops, beauty shops, exercise studios, funeral homes, pet grooming, appliance repair/service, laundromats, health and fitness clubs, parcel delivery offices, etc. 
Personal wireless services (PWS) means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services as defined by federal regulations. 
Personal wireless service (PWS) antenna means a device used for sending or receiving radio signals used by a personal wireless service provider (a company authorized by the FCC to operate a PWS system), including the support structure used to hold the antenna at a particular height. This does not include accessory personal use antennas as allowed by the City Code of Ordinances. 
Pet services means establishments primarily engaged in performing services for pets, equines, and other animal specialties. Examples include, but are not limited to, training facilities, animal shelters, boarding kennels, dog pounds, veterinary services, services that are conducted outdoors, and similar uses. Excluded from this category are pet grooming facilities (see personal services). 
Place of religious assembly means a church, synagogue, mosque, temple or other permanent building used as a place of assembly for religious worship or services. 
Planned development layout plan means an unexpired development plan submitted for a proposed planned development that has been approved and adopted by ordinance by the city commission. 
Planning parcel means a land area within city limits made up of the parcel on which development or alteration is proposed and all contiguous parcels within city limits under common ownership or control as of the date of application submittal. Common ownership or control means the contiguous parcels that are owned by the owner/applicant or by entities owned or controlled by the owner/applicant. 
Pole height means the vertical distance measured from the average grade level on the ground to the base of the luminaire. 
Pollution or pollutants means adverse impacts to the physical, chemical or biological characteristics of the air, water or soil, which can be harmful to humans, animals, vegetation or structures. Pollutants are agents that cause pollution. 
Porch means a covered area adjoining the entrance to a building. Porches may be "engaged" (with two sides partially or fully enclosed by walls and roof), "integral" (part of the overall massing and roof form of the building), or "projecting" (open on three sides with a roof that is separate from the main building roof). 
Portable storage unit means any portable container or facility that is designed and/or used for the temporary storage or shipment of personal property, household goods, wares, building materials or merchandise, and which is located outside of an enclosed building and is delivered and removed by truck. 
Preliminary development order means any preliminary approval that does not authorize actual construction, mining or alterations to land and/or structures. A preliminary development order may authorize a change in the allowable use of land or a building, and may include approvals with conditions where a series of sequential approvals are required before action authorizes commencement of construction or land alteration. For the purposes of this chapter preliminary development orders include preliminary development plan approval, approval of rezoning to planned development, residential design plat approval, residential minor subdivisions, approval of a special use permit, approval of an amendment to a planned development ordinance, change of use permit approval, application for a building permit where vested rights have expired, and development on state and federal properties. 
Presumptive vested rights means those instances where there are reasonable grounds to believe that vested rights exist as determined by the director by virtue of the possession of a valid, unexpired final development order issued by the city prior to the effective date of the vested rights review ordinance. 
Primary frontage means the site frontage facing the primary street. 
Primary street means the street that a property for development fronts. At street intersections, the larger, more important street shall be recognized as the primary street. 
Principal structure means a structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated, including any attached carport, shed, garage or any other structure that is a part of the principal building and structurally dependent, totally or in part, on the principal building. In a residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal structure on the lot on which the same is situated. 
Principal use means the use that constitutes the primary activity, function or purpose of a parcel of land or building. 
Private school means a school that is not operated by any governmental agency but that meets all criteria imposed by law or ordinance to satisfy the requirements for mandatory school attendance of elementary, middle or high school. 
Private street, approved means any privately-owned accessway that has been determined by the city manager or designee to meet the access and construction standards set forth in this code. For purposes of lot split or minor subdivision, "existing" approved private street means an approved private street that exists on the date of filing the application for the minor subdivision or lot split. "New" approved private street means a new street is being approved as part of the minor subdivision or lot split process. 
Professional care means care rendered by a person with specialized training in that type of care, including but not limited to medical care, counseling and other types of therapy and rehabilitative services. 
Professional school means a school that teaches a specialized type of intellectual knowledge, expertise or training acquired by a prolonged course of classroom study resulting in some type of credential, as distinguished from a course of study involving manual or physical processes that involves training outside the confines of a classroom or that involves noise that is audible outside the confines of a classroom. The term includes colleges, universities, vocational and trade schools. 
Project means a single development as designated by the applicant, but two or more purportedly separate developments shall be considered one project if the city manager or designee determines that three or more of the following criteria exist: 
A.  The purportedly separate developments are located within 250 feet of each other; 
B.  The same person has an ownership interest or an option to obtain an ownership interest of more than 50% of the legal title to each purportedly separate development; 
C.  There is a unified development plan for the purportedly separate developments; 
D.  The purportedly separate developments voluntarily do or shall share private infrastructure; or 
E.  There is or will be a common management or advertising scheme for the purportedly separate developments. 
Projecting sign means any sign that is affixed to any building wall or structure and extends more than 12 inches horizontally from the plane of the building wall. 
Public administration buildings means federal, state, and local government facilities, including administrative offices, fire and police stations, tax collection, supervisor of elections, post office, and similar establishments. Public facilities that involve outdoor storage, vehicle repair, manufacturing and similar activities are classified as public maintenance and storage facilities. 
Public facilities means transportation facilities (including roads, transit, sidewalks, and bicycle/trails), wastewater facilities, solid waste facilities, stormwater management facilities, potable water facilities, water supply, public school facilities and recreation facilities. 
Public library means a facility operated by a governmental agency to collect, organize and make accessible educational, informational and cultural resources to the general public. 
Public maintenance and storage facilities means publicly owned and operated facilities that involve vehicular storage, fleet maintenance facilities (workshops, fueling stations, vehicle washes), materials storage, equipment storage, training (indoor and outdoor). 
Public park means properties and facilities owned and operated by any governmental agency that are open to the general public for recreational purposes. 
Public school means a school that is operated by a governmental agency and meets all criteria imposed by law or ordinance to satisfy the requirements for mandatory school attendance of elementary, middle or high school. 
Public service vehicle means a mobile unit such as a bloodmobile, bookmobile or X-ray laboratory designed to provide a noncommercial public service in a temporary location. 
Public use means the use of any land, water or building by a governmental agency for a public service or purpose. 
Public utility means a utility owned, operated and maintained by a public or governmental entity or a publicly-regulated utility company, including but not limited to stormwater, drainage, water, wastewater, reclaimed water, chilled water, natural gas, electric or telecommunications facilities. 
Public utility easement (PUE) means a non-possessory, non-exclusive interest in the land of another and the right to use the property for the purpose of installing, operating and maintaining public utility facilities. 
Qualitative tree survey. See "tree survey, qualitative." 
Radius return (R) means the curved arc between intersecting street pavements. 
Rear lane means a vehicular way located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas, parking, and outbuildings and containing utility easements. The streetscape consists of gravel or landscaped edges. Rear lanes have no raised curb, and are drained by percolation. (See Alley definition). 
Recreational area or recreation area means any common area or dedicated public area, including open space or buildings, but not including streets or off-street parking or loading areas, which is usable for either passive or active recreational activities. Passive recreational activities are those that involve mere observation or only a small amount of activity to derive relaxation or pleasure, and they include such pursuits as sightseeing, bird watching, picnicking, fishing and the like. Active recreational activities are those that require a certain degree of physical exertion in order to obtain exercise or a release of energy, and they include both team sports and individual sports, playground activities, exercise facilities and the like. 
Recreation, indoor means an indoor public or private establishment designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure time activities. Some examples include bowling alleys, theaters, gymnasiums, fitness facilities, pool halls, laser tag, and skating rinks. This category does not include sexually-oriented motion picture theaters, stadium/sports arenas, or any public recreation facilities. 
Recreation, outdoor means any premises where the principal use is the provision of outdoor amusements, sports, games, athletic facilities, or other outdoor recreational facilities and/or services. This term includes golf driving ranges, miniature golf, paintball facilities, and water slides; but does not include golf courses, shooting ranges, drive-in theaters, stadiums/sports arenas, or any public parks. 
Recreational vehicle means any vehicle, not exceeding 35 feet in overall length or eight feet in width, designed and intended for recreational purposes, including trailers, travel trailers, boats, campers, pickup campers, buses, tent trailers, motor homes and other similar vehicles with or without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on public thoroughfares. 
Recycling center means operations primarily engaged in collecting, sorting, transporting, compacting, cleaning and breaking of reusable material, including but not limited to glass, paper, aluminum, steel cans, reusable household items and plastic, which is intended for reuse, remanufacture or reconstitution in an altered form. This definition excludes operations engaged in burning or melting of such products, the collection of refuse, household appliances, auto parts or hazardous materials, and the wrecking or dismantling of auto salvage material. 
Regulated natural or archaeological resource means any of the following: significant natural communities, listed species, strategic ecosystems, Floridan aquifer high recharge areas, significant archaeological resources, and significant geological resource features. Surface waters and wetlands, and regulated trees, including champion and heritage trees, are specifically excluded as they are regulated under separate provisions of this Code. 
Regulated trees means trees of eight inches or greater in diameter breast height or any tree that was planted in compliance with an approved development order or to mitigate the removal of a regulated tree. Slash and Loblolly Pines are not regulated until they reach 20 inches in diameter, except those that were preserved during development in order to meet a landscaping requirement, which are considered regulated regardless of size. 
Rehabilitation center means a facility providing professional care, nonresident only, for those requiring therapy, counseling or other rehabilitative services related to drug abuse, alcohol abuse, social disorders, physical disabilities, intellectual disabilities or similar problems. 
Relocatable structure means a building or portion of a building made up of prefabricated units able to be disassembled and reassembled frequently; a single unit of construction consisting of walls, roof and floor that is movable as a unit, either on wheels or by truck. The terms "mobile," "demountable," "divisible" and "portable" connote types of relocatable buildings. A relocatable structure shall meet all code requirements for its particular use. 
Required tree means trees planted to meet a specific landscaping requirement such as trees in buffers, landscape islands, and stormwater management areas. 
Research, development and testing facilities means establishments primarily engaged in conducting research and experimental development in the physical, engineering, or life sciences, such as agriculture, electronics, environmental, biology, botany, biotechnology, computers, chemistry, food, fisheries, forest, geology, health, mathematics, medicine, oceanography, pharmacy, physics, veterinary, and other allied subjects. 
Residence for destitute people means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of temporary residences for those persons lacking residences, possessions or resources. Services include overnight accommodations and furnishing of meals to residents only. Revenue is derived only from charitable sources. 
Residential area means, when used in the context of regulating sexually oriented businesses, any of the following: land zoned in any RSF district, any RMF district, the MH district, the RC district, or the PD district (if predominantly residential). 
Residential zoning district means zoning districts that allow predominantly residential uses, including RSF, RC, MH, RMF, U1, and U2. All other districts are deemed non-residential. 
Resources, historic means sites, buildings, structures, objects and areas whether public or private, either singly or in combination, as defined in this section. 
Restaurant means any use located in any structure or building or portion thereof where the use primarily involves the retail sale of food and beverages, which may include alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and where at least 51 percent of the monthly gross revenues derived from such use are attributable to the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages. This use may include caterers and industrial and institutional food service establishments. 
Restoration means the revival or rehabilitation of structures, natural areas or features to a condition in which the structure, area or feature functions in a relatively self-maintaining, historically natural condition. 
Retransmission tower means a structure operated for the specific purpose of retransmitting the signals of a radio broadcast station or another retransmission facility without significantly altering the characteristics of the incoming signal other than its frequency or amplitude. 
Right-of-way means land dedicated, deeded, used or to be used for a street, alley, walkway, boulevard, drainage facility, access for ingress or egress, or other purposes by the public. 
Roof sign means any building-mounted sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure. Signs on parapet walls or mansards are not considered roof signs. 
Roofline means the highest continuous horizontal line of a roof. On a sloping roof the roofline is the principal ridge line, or the highest line common to one or more principal slopes of the roof. On a flat roof the roofline is the highest continuous line of the roof or parapet, whichever is higher. 
Roll-off means an open-top dumpster or facility that is delivered and removed by truck and is commonly used to collect and store a variety of waste materials such as, but not limited to, construction and demolition waste. 
Rooming house. See "dormitory." 
Root paths means narrow trenches under pavement filled with root zone media and strip drain board, which are used to guide roots out of confined planting areas. 
Root zone means the allotted area of soil that is provided for the growth of tree roots. 
Root zone media means the appropriate soil structure and texture to accommodate healthy root growth for required landscaping. The minimum components of rootzone media are uncompacted soil (bulk density less than 1.50 g/cc in loam. 1.70 g/cc sand, or 1.40 g/cc clay soil) devoid of seeds of invasive exotic species and of pH 5.5 to 6.5, composted leaf mold or peat moss, and well-graded, medium angular sand (0.50 to 0.25 mm). The natural topsoil of the site qualifies if the above qualities exist. The maximum depth for structural soil used as root zone media shall be 36 inches, the maximum depth for root zone media used with structural root box cells shall be 45 inches. 
Root zone volume means a measurement of the net soil volume not including structural components such as stone. The root zone can include soil within the tree opening or soil under pavement, as long as the soil volumes are compacted to no more than 85 percent dry density. Structural soils are exempt from this compaction requirement. A variety of techniques are suitable for under pavement locations, including but not limited to structural root box cells, structural soil, tree wells, root paths and soil trenches. The soil volumes shall be accessible to the tree roots to be considered part of the root zone volume. Rooting space should be composed of soil defined in the ordinance as root zone media. The depth of root zone, for purposes of calculating the volume, shall not exceed four feet. 
Row house. See "attached dwelling." 
Sadomasochistic practices means flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked. 
Salvage yard. See "junkyard." 
Scooter means a motor vehicle powered by a motor with a displacement not exceeding 151 cubic centimeters and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground. This definition shall include mopeds and motorized scooters as defined by the Florida Statutes. For the purpose of this code and unless specified otherwise, scooters are deemed to be vehicles - see "vehicle" definition. 
Secondary frontage means that frontage facing the secondary street. 
Secondary street means any street fronting a development that is not identified as the primary street. 
Sediment means solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has moved from its site of origin, by water. 
Sedimentation means the deposition of waterborne sediment into a body of running water, into a lake, on property other than the site of origin, or on public rights-of-way. 
Service area entrance means an external door opening into an enclosed building that contains one or more service bays. 
Service bay means an area that is designed and constructed for the repair, servicing, or maintenance of a single motor vehicle and may include a vehicle lift or service well. 
Service provider means any individual, company, firm or other entity that provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities. 
Setback or setback line means a line determined by measurement, parallel to a lot line, creating an area between the lot line and the setback line in which all structures (unless otherwise limited) may not be erected. 
Setback, street means a line determined by measurement, parallel to the street curb (on all sides of the lot facing a street), creating an area between the street curb and building façade. 
Sexual conduct or specified sexual activities means the engaging in or the commission of an act of sexual intercourse, oral genital contact, masturbation, or the touching of the sexual organs, public region, buttock or female breast of another person for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of another person. 
Sexually oriented business means an inclusive term used to describe collectively: sexually oriented cabaret; sexually oriented motion picture theater; motion picture arcade; massage parlor, establishment or practice that is not licensed under F.S. Ch. 480; and sexually oriented retail store. This collective term does not describe a specific land use and shall not be considered a single use category for purposes of the zoning code or other applicable ordinances. 
Sexually oriented cabaret means a building that features dancing or other live entertainment that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibiting of "sexual conduct" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by customers therein on more than half the days that it is open, or which is marketed as or offers performances described as "adult" or "XXX." The fact that an establishment does not serve alcoholic beverages shall not remove it from classification as a "sexually oriented cabaret" if it otherwise falls under this definition. This definition is intended to include "adult performance establishments" as defined in chapter 14.5, article IV of the Gainesville Code of Ordinances, but this definition is not limited to such establishments. 
Sexually oriented devices means any three-dimensional object designed and marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genital organ or anus or for sadomasochistic use or use in sexual conduct and shall include devices such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexually oriented media means media, including magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, CD-ROMs or other devices used to record computer images, that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "sexual conduct" or "specified anatomical areas" (separately defined). 
Sexually oriented motion picture theater means a cinema or motion picture theater that shows hardcore features on more than half the days that it is open, or which is marketed as or offers features described as "adult" or "XXX". This definition specifically excludes motion picture arcades. 
Sexually oriented retail store means a retail sales or service establishment that meets any one of the following four tests: 
A.  More than 30 percent of the gross public floor area or stock in trade consists of sexually oriented media; 
B.  It offers for sale items from any two of the following categories: sexually oriented media; lingerie; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; and the combination of such items comprise more than ten percent of its gross public floor area or stock in trade; 
C.  More than five percent of its gross public floor area or stock in trade consists of sexually oriented devices; or 
D.  It is advertised, marketed, or holds itself out in any forum as an "XXX," "adult," or "sex" business. 
Shielded fixture means a luminaire that includes an adjustable mounting device allowing aiming in any direction and contains a shield, louver, visor, or baffle to reduce direct view of the lamp. 
Shrub means a woody perennial plant differing from a perennial herb by its persistent and woody stems and from a tree by its low stature and habit of branching from the base. 
Sidewalk means an area on public or private property where pedestrians walk or stand, generally parallel to the edge of a street, roadway or curb. 
Sidewalk café means a seating area within the public right-of-way that is adjacent to, operated by, and an accessory use to a restaurant, alcoholic beverage establishment, microbrewery, microdistillery, or microwinery. 
Sight distance means the continuous section of roadway visible to the driver of a vehicle from any particular point on the roadway. 
Sign means any letter, number, symbol, figure, character, mark, plane, design, pictorial, stroke, stripe, trademark or combination of these so placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened, or installed for the purpose of attracting the attention of and communicating a message to members of the public, either pedestrians and/or motorists, and that can be seen from a public or private street. 
Sign area means the total surface area contained within any common geometric figure (e.g., parallelogram, circle, triangle, trapezoid, hexagon, ellipse, etc.), whether real or imaginary as applicable, that encloses all the elements or copy of the sign message as provided in the definition of a sign. 
Sign band means a permanent architectural feature integrated into the façade of a building intended for the placement of a sign(s). 
Sign structure means any accessory structure or device the primary purpose of which is to be or to display a sign. 
Significant adverse impact means direct contamination, alteration, or destruction, or that which contributes to the contamination, alteration, or destruction of a natural resource, or portion thereof, to the degree that its environmental benefits are or will be eliminated, reduced or impaired, such that the activity will cause long-term negative impacts on the natural resource. 
Significant archaeological resources mean those archaeological resources that are listed, or are eligible for listing, on the National Register of Historic Places. 
Significant geological resource features means geological features that include, but are not limited to: point source features such as sinkholes, caves, spring heads, and limestone outcrops; lineal features such as lineaments, ridges, escarpments, and spring runs; and areal features such as steep slopes and springsheds. 
Significant natural community means a natural community that exhibits ecological integrity, may be rare or provide functional connectedness within the landscape context, and can be maintained through appropriate management such as prescribed burning or alternate vegetation management methods, control and removal of exotic species, or hydrologic restoration. Significant natural communities often provide habitat for one or more rare plant and animal species, or contribute to the habitat requirements for animal species with large home ranges, or for migratory or colonial nesting species. Significant natural communities are those that are ranked as S1, S2, or S3 by the FNAI. 
Silviculture means a process, following best management practices and/or accepted forest management principles, whereby the trees constituting forests are tended, harvested, and reproduced. 
Simulated gambling device means any mechanical or electrical contrivance, computer, terminal, video or other equipment that may enable a user, upon the payment of consideration either directly or indirectly in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, to play or operate a simulation of gambling or any game that, by either the use of skill or an element of chance with an outcome unpredictable to the user, may reveal, deliver or entitle the user to receive anything of value. This definition does not include any devices expressly permitted by state law, and does not include an individual's personal, recreational, and non-commercial ownership, possession, play, operation or use of a device that could be construed to be a simulated gambling device. 
Simulated gambling establishment means a building, edifice, structure or location, along with its grounds, in which simulated gambling devices are used, operated or stored, including but not limited to, game rooms, arcades, internet cafés, internet centers or sweepstakes redemption centers. This definition does not include any establishment that is expressly permitted by state law, including but not limited to an "arcade amusement center" as defined in F.S. § 849.161. 
Sinkhole means a funnel-shaped depression in the land surface, generally in a limestone region, caused by solution processes and often resulting in connection(s) with subterranean passages and groundwater systems. 
Single-family dwelling means a single residential building consisting of one dwelling unit that is arranged, intended or designed for one family. A residential building with more than one kitchen, one meter for any utility (unless multiple meters are needed and billing is combined to one address); more than one address to the property; or more than two of the same major appliance (refrigerator, range, oven, kitchen sink, dishwasher, washer or dryer), even if consolidated in one kitchen or area, shall be considered a multifamily dwelling. 
Site, historic means the location of a significant event, activity, building, structure or archaeological resource where the significance of the location and any archaeological remains outweighs the significance of any existing structures. 
Site plan. See "development plan." 
Skilled nursing facility means a facility that provides around-the-clock professional medical care for patients with chronic illnesses or patients recovering from acute illnesses who need skilled nursing care but do not need to be hospitalized. 
Snipe sign means any temporary sign that is attached to any object, including but not limited to a tree, utility, pole, or fence post, that is either located on public property or located on private property without the owner's consent. 
Social service facility or halfway house means an establishment providing professional care, resident or nonresident, for those requiring therapy, counseling or other rehabilitative services related to drug abuse, alcohol abuse, social disorders, physical disabilities, intellectual disabilities or similar problems. 
Soil bulk density means a measure of soil compaction expressed as the mass of soil per unit of volume. 
Soil compaction means compression of the soil resulting in a reduction of the total pore space, especially the macropores (air-filled spaces between soil particles) and micropores (which fill with water). 
Soil stabilization means measures, strategies, practices or systems used to protect soil from raindrop impact and flowing water. Typical measures include vegetative establishment and mulching. 
Soil trenches means trenches under reinforced structural slabs filled with root zone media compacted to a maximum 80 percent proctor, which are used to guide roots out of confined planting areas. 
Solar generation station means an electrical energy generation plant, comprised of one or more devices, that captures solar energy and converts it to electrical energy primarily for sale or consumption off-premises. Solar generation station devices typically consist of photovoltaic solar cells, but can also be combinations of light reflectors, concentrators and heat exchangers. The term solar generation station is not intended to include the use of solar energy devices for net metering (producing electrical energy primarily for on-premises consumption). 
Sorority house. See "dormitory." 
Sound level means the quantity, in decibels, measured by an instrument satisfying the requirements of the American Standard Specification for Type I sound level meters. The sound level is the frequency-weighted sound pressure level obtained with the frequency weighting "A" and the standardized dynamic characteristic "SLOW." 
Special event means a temporary meeting, activity, gathering, or group of persons or vehicles, or a combination thereof, having a common purpose, design, or goal that will affect or impact the ordinary and normal use by the general public upon any public or private facility, street, sidewalk, alley, public or private area, or building where the event substantially inhibits the usual flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and is not the type approved for, or customarily associated with, the site upon which the event is located. 
Special protection species means plant and animal species listed as threatened, endangered or of special concern. Refer to the "Special Protection Species of Alachua County" table in the city Comprehensive Plan. 
Special use permit means a permit by which a use or activity that is not permitted by right may be allowed after careful consideration by the city plan board. 
Specialty t-shirt production means establishments that buy broadwoven fabrics in the grey for conversion into T-shirts that are finished on-site and sold as wholesale (not retail). The finishing process may include bleaching, dyeing, printing (roller, screen, flick, or plisse), or other mechanical finishing such as pre-shrinking, shrinking, stone washing, sponging, calendaring, mercerizing, and napping. The finishing process does not include coating, laminating, varnishing, waxing, rubberizing, or impregnating fabrics or textiles. 
Specified anatomical areas mean any of the following, singly or in combination: 
A.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
B.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Spring means water discharged as natural leakage or overflow from an aquifer through a natural opening in the ground. The term spring shall include karst windows, which are depression openings that reveal portions of a subterranean flow or the unroofed portion of a cave. It shall also include spring runs, whose flow is predominantly composed of spring discharge. 
Springshed or spring recharge basin means those areas within ground and surface water basins that contribute to the discharge of a spring. 
State highway system means roads that have been functionally classified by the state department of transportation as being part of the state highway system. 
Steep slope means any ground surface having a slope greater than or equal to five percent. 
Stoop means a small platform, entrance stairway at a building entrance covered by a secondary roof or awning. 
Storefront means a building frontage conventional for retail use, with substantial glazing and awning or canopy, wherein the façade is aligned close to the sidewalk with the building entrance at sidewalk grade. 
Stormwater means the flow of water that results from, and which occurs during and immediately following, a rainfall event. 
Story means a habitable level within a building, excluding an attic or raised basement if they do not exceed five and one-half feet. 
Strategic ecosystems means the 47 ecosystem areas identified within the City of Gainesville and Alachua County, Florida, which were evaluated, described, and ranked in the KBN/Golder Associates Report, "Alachua County Ecological Inventory Project" (1996). Strategic ecosystems are generally larger natural resource areas that are intact, capable of restoration, and that require conservation or management to maintain reserves of biodiversity at the landscape, natural community, and species-specific level(s). 
Street means any publicly dedicated accessway such as a street, road, highway, boulevard, parkway, circle, court or cul-de-sac, and shall include all of the land lying between any right-of-way lines as delineated on a plat showing such streets, whether improved or unimproved, except those accessways such as easements and rights-of-way intended solely for utilities and similar facilities and easements of ingress and egress. 
Street banner means a flexible sign generally suspended along or across a street. 
Street centerline means the surveyed and prescribed centerline of a street established by the state department of transportation or city public works department or, if no centerline has been so established, the line midway between the existing or proposed street right-of-way lines. 
Street right-of-way means a strip or area of land dedicated or deeded for use of and by the public as a public street. 
Street right-of-way line means that line denoting the edge of the right-of-way of the street and being identical with the property lines of persons owning property fronting on the streets. For the purposes of establishing the vision triangle as described in the Engineering Design and Construction Manual, the street right-of-way line for a private driveway or private roadway shall be set as a parallel line 10 feet from the face of the curb, edge of pavement or edge of the driving surface. 
Structural root box cells means fiberglass-reinforced polypropylene structures including frames and decks designed to support pavement loads and hold root zone media for the purpose of supporting tree growth. 
Structural soil means a designed medium that can meet or exceed pavement design and installation requirements while remaining root penetrable and supportive of tree growth. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, and having a height of four inches or more, except for patios, ground-level parking and loading facilities, fences and individual doll houses, play houses, and animal or bird houses that are neither to be used for human habitation, i.e., a place of permanent or temporary residence, nor storage as a principal use. 
Structure (for the purpose of historic preservation) means a work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it may be an engineering project large in scale. 
Structured parking means a building or structure consisting of two or more vertical levels that is used to park motor vehicles. Structured parking can either be: a stand-alone building with two or more vertical levels of parking; or, part of a multi-story building that may contain a mix of uses where the parking is on a separate level and at least one level of parking is above grade (such as the third floor of a three-story building). Structured parking specifically excludes individual garages accessory to a dwelling unit or non-residential unit, whether attached to or detached from the unit. 
Subdivider means the owner, or the agent of the owner, of any tract or parcel of land, who divides or subdivides or resubdivides the tract or parcel of land into three or more lots, building sites or other divisions, for the purpose of transferring an ownership interest therein, or any person who performs any clearing and grubbing on any land incidental to or preparatory to the construction or laying out of improvements on the site to facilitate a subdivision of the property, or any owner of property or the agent of the owner who develops or improves property in accordance with a subdivision plat approved pursuant to this chapter. 
Subdivision means any division or resubdivision of a tract or parcel of land into three or more lots, building sites or other divisions; provided, however, that the following shall not be included within this definition nor be subject to the provisions of this chapter except as specifically set forth in this chapter: 
A.  Conversion of a building into individual units for the purpose of transferring an ownership interest therein. 
B.  The public acquisition of strips of land for widening or opening streets, or for drainage or public utilities improvements. 
Substandard lot means a nonconforming lot that meets any one of the following criteria: 
A.  Has less than 5,000 square feet of lot area in a district where the minimum required lot area is 5,000 feet or greater; 
B.  Has less than 80% of the minimum required lot area in a district where the minimum required lot area is less than 5,000 square feet; or 
C.  Has a lot width or lot depth that is less than 50 percent of the minimum required lot width or lot depth in the specific district. 
Substantial development means the point in development when all the required permits necessary to continue the development have been obtained and the actual construction of water and sewer lines, or streets, or the stormwater management system, on such portion of the development is complete or is progressing in a manner that significantly moves the entire development toward completion. 
Surface parking means a single level of parking at grade, whether covered or uncovered; or attached or detached from a building. Surface parking is also defined as a single level of ground floor parking within the footprint of a building. Individual garages that are accessory to a dwelling unit or non-residential unit, whether attached to or detached from the unit are surface parking. 
Surface waters means all waters on the surface of the earth, contained in bounds created naturally or artificially, including, the lakes, ponds, impoundments, rivers, streams, springs, creeks, branches, sloughs, tributaries and other watercourses. 
Technical review committee means a committee created by article III of this chapter. 
Temporary sign means any sign that an enforcing official determines is not intended to be used for a permanent duration of time because it does not meet the definition of permanent sign. Temporary signs include, but are not limited to, banners, pennants, posters, and signs made of paper, cloth, canvas, plastic sheets, cardboard, or similar materials. 
Three-family dwelling means a building containing three dwelling units. 
Tower height means the vertical distance measured from the base of the tower or antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of any part of the structure. 
Townhouse. See "attached dwelling." 
Trail means any greenway, pathway, bike path or other accessway not open to motor vehicles, other than emergency and maintenance vehicles, within a public right-of-way or easement or on privately-owned land that is open to the public for the purpose of an off-road pathway system. 
Trailer sign means any sign, except a vehicle sign, that is designed to be readily moved from place to place by its placement or display on a wheeled conveyance. 
Transect means a geographical cross-section of a region used to reveal a sequence of environments. This cross section can be used to identify environments that vary by their level and intensity of urban character, a continuum that ranges from rural to urban. 
Transect zone (T-zone) means one of several zoning districts on the zoning map, based on the principles of the transect. Transect zones are the equivalent of other zoning districts, except that in addition to the usual building use, density, height, and setback requirements, they include standards pertaining to the design and form of development. 
Transmitter tower means a structure designed, constructed or used for the purpose of supporting an antenna used for transmitting and/or receiving any form of radio, television, radar or other type of wave, impulse or other electromagnetic signal. Antennas mounted on poles that are less than three inches in diameter and are no more than 20 feet above the highest point of the roof are secondary towers and shall not be considered transmitter towers. This definition also does not include structures supporting antennas constructed and/or used by public utilities and governmental agencies. 
Tree appraised value means the dollar value to the city of a tree on private or public property used for the purpose of calculating cash recompense for removal or destruction. This payment shall be made at the time of the site work permits are provided to the developer. The tree appraised value shall be calculated as follows: 
(3.14) × (½ diameter breast height) 2 = trunk area 
(trunk area) × (unit factor for square inch price, as determined annually by the tree advisory board in consultation with the city manager or designee) = square inch value 
(square inch value) × (55% diminution rating) = tree appraised value 
Example calculation: 20" Live Oak in fair or better condition: 
(3.14) × (½ × 20)2 = 314 square inches of trunk area 
(314 sq in) × ($40) = $12,560 square inch value 
($12,560) × (.55) = $6,908 tree appraised value 
Tree means any living self-supporting perennial plant whose one main stem attains at least a diameter of three inches (nine inches in circumference) at four and one-half feet above ground level and a height of 15 feet at maturity. 
Tree grouping or major tree grouping means an assemblage of closely spaced trees that encompass an area of at least 400 square feet and that provide coverage of at least 50 percent of that area. 
Tree lawn means a pervious area between the back-of-curb and sidewalk or along the street edge intended for the planting of street trees. 
Tree root plate means the below-ground area adjacent to the trunk where the major buttress roots and support roots occur, generally a circular area with a radius of four times the diameter of the tree trunk at ground level. For example, a two-foot diameter trunk has a root plate radius of eight feet outside the trunk on all sides. 
Tree survey means a map that depicts the geographic location of regulated trees with their scientific names (both genus and species) and indicates the diameter of each regulated tree measured at four and one-half feet above the natural grade at the base. 
Tree survey, qualitative means an alternative to the tree survey. A qualitative tree survey shall be prepared by and executed by a certified arborist with current credentials from the International Society of Arboriculture or by a licensed landscape architect. The report shall show the surveyed location, diameter, genus and species of all Heritage trees, all regulated trees of high quality shade tree species, other trees worthy of protection, and existing trees planted to comply with earlier approved development plans. On-site meetings with the city manager or designee will confirm which trees shall be included in the survey and to confirm that the survey meets code requirements. The survey shall also cover matters identified as significant relative to the urban forest based on site conditions. 
Tree well means a complete or partial enclosure below ground, filled with rootzone media, where a tree is planted. Apertures at the surface are provided to conduit air and water to the tree roots. 
T-zone. See "transect zone." 
Under-canopy sign means a sign suspended beneath a canopy, marquee, awning, or other roof projection. 
Understory means the complex of woody, fibrous, herbaceous and grass and sedge plant species typically associated with a forested community. 
Understory trees means trees that average less than 40 feet in height at maturity, whether or not the tree is found in an understory habitat. 
Uniformity ratio means the average level of illuminance in relation to the minimum level of illuminance for a given area. For example, a uniformity ratio of 4:1 means that for a given area, the minimum level of illuminance shall be no less than 25 percent of the average level of illuminance. 
Uplands means all land areas that are neither wetlands nor surface waters. 
Urban forest means the sum total of all vegetation growing within the city limits, whether on public or private property. 
Usable open space means that part of the ground, roof, balcony or a porch that is devoted to outdoor living or recreation. Such space shall be provided as a common area conveniently located and readily accessible from all living units located on the building site and shall have no dimension less than 20 feet. Such space shall not include private roadways open to vehicular traffic, off-street parking area, loading space or required minimum front yard area. 
Use means any activity, function or purpose to which or for which a parcel of land or building is put, used, arranged or occupied, for any purpose, including any residential, office, business, industrial, public or any other purpose or use. 
Utilities mean any water system, electrical power system, sanitary sewer system, stormwater management system, gas, telephone and television cable system, or similar system. 
Utility building or facility means a location or installation of a utility company where employees are not stationed and traffic is not generated, such as a substation or lift station. 
Variance means a relaxation from strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter or building chapters, in accordance with the criteria of this chapter. 
Variances for improvements on roadways means a relaxation of the terms of chapter 23 of the City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances, where the variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property, and not the result of the actions of the applicant, or his/her predecessors, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As further defined for the purpose of this chapter, a variance is authorized only for driveway widths, street line corner clearances, and property line edge clearances. No variances shall be granted for roads on the state highway system or county-maintained streets without prior written permission from the state department of transportation or the county to authorize the activity requested in the variance application. 
Vehicle means any self-propelled conveyance designed or used for the purpose of transporting or moving persons, animals, freight, merchandise or any substance, including passenger cars, trucks, buses, golf carts, motorcycles and scooters, but not including tractors, construction equipment, machinery or any device used in performing a job other than transportation. 
Vehicle repair means any vehicle repair and service establishments that do not meet the definition of vehicle services. 
Vehicle services means the provision of any of the following services: automobile stereo sales and installation; auto detailing that may include washing, waxing and polishing by hand; pinstriping, window tinting, interior cleaning and carpet shampooing; rustproofing; sales and installation of car accessories such as car covers, car masks, sunroofs and louvers; automobile batteries, tires and brakes, sales and installation; automotive lubrication and fluid change operations that may include the replacement of engine oil, brake and transmission fluids, and filters; and diagnostic automotive center (tune-up clinics), which may include the testing, adjustment and replacement of spark plugs, points, condensers, coils, carburetors, fuel injectors, distributor caps, voltage regulators, fan belts and water hoses. 
Vehicle sign means any sign that has a total sign area in excess of ten square feet and that is on or affixed to a transportation vehicle, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, boats, trailers, and campers. 
Vehicular canopy means a roofed, open, drive-through structure designed to provide temporary shelter for vehicles and their occupants while making use of a service. 
Vehicular use area means all paved and unpaved areas intended for the use of vehicles, including off-street parking, vehicular storage, driveways and/or accessways. 
Vested rights certificate means a certificate issued by the city indicating the possession of vested rights to development, the extent of these vested rights and the time period during which these vested rights remain valid. 
Vocational and trade schools means establishments primarily engaged in offering vocational and technical training in a variety of technical subjects and trades. The training often leads to job-specific certification. Instruction may be provided in diverse settings and through diverse means. The training provided by these establishments may include the use of simulators and simulation methods. 
Wall sign means any building-mounted sign mounted on and approximately parallel to the face of a principal building wall and projecting not more than 12 inches from the plane of the wall. 
Warehouse/distribution facilities mean any premises where the principal use is the storage of goods and materials. 
Waste management facility means a facility that collects, transports, processes or disposes, manages and monitors waste materials. Uses found under this classification include but are not limited to hazardous materials, recycling, junkyard and salvage yards and recycling centers. 
Watercourse means any channel, drain, drainage creek, ditch, drainageway, dry run, spring, stream or canal, but not including a lake, pond or pool without outlet under normal circumstances. 
Wet detention means a stormwater management facility in which a design water pool is normally maintained and that has the extended capacity to provide detention for the required stormwater treatment volume. Water quality treatment is enhanced by nutrient uptake through the use of water-tolerant vegetation, and by settling and absorption by soils. 
Wetland function means the values of a wetland for: water quality protection and enhancement; attenuation of flood damage; aesthetic, scenic and open space values; recreation; habitat for fish, wildlife and native plant communities; historic and archeological heritage; groundwater recharge; contributions to the base flow of streams; scientific investigation and education; or as a type of place that is rare or unique in the area. 
Wetlands mean those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils. Soils present in wetlands generally are classified as hydric or alluvial, or possess characteristics that are associated with reducing soil conditions. The prevalent vegetation in wetlands generally consists of facultative or obligate hydrophytic macrophytes that are typically adapted to areas having soil conditions described above. These species, due to morphological, physiological, or reproductive adaptations, have the ability to grow, reproduce, or persist in aquatic environments or anaerobic soil conditions. Florida wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bayheads, bogs, cypress domes and strands, sloughs, wet prairies, riverine swamps and marshes, hydric seepage slopes, tidal marshes, mangrove swamps and other similar areas. Florida wetlands generally do not include longleaf or slash pine flatwoods with an understory dominated by saw palmetto. 
Wholesale trade means any premises where the principal use is the sale of goods and materials in bulk quantities primarily for purposes of resale. 
Wildlife corridor means a habitat linkage along which wide-ranging animals can travel, plants can propagate, genetic interchange can occur, and populations can move in response to environmental changes and natural disasters. 
Window sign means a building-mounted sign painted, mounted and/or attached to the inside or outside of a window. 
Wireless communications facility means any equipment or facility used to provide personal wireless services, including antennae, towers, equipment enclosures, cabling, antenna brackets, and other such equipment. Placing a wireless communications facility on an existing structure does not cause the existing structure to become a wireless communications facility. This does not include television antennas as defined in article V in this chapter or other accessory personal use antennas as allowed by the Code of Ordinances. 
Xeriscape means the use of innovative design to achieve a landscape needing relatively little water, fertilizer, pesticides and maintenance. 
Yard means the space on any lot between the lot lines and the minimum required setback line for principal structures. 
A.  Front yard means the area between the front lot line and the minimum required front yard setback. 
B.  Rear yard means the area between the rear lot line and the minimum required rear yard setback. 
C.  Side yard means the area between the side lot line and the minimum required side yard setback, not including any part of the front or rear yard. 
Youth association means any building used for providing programs and recreational activities for youth from public schools and private schools, such as but not limited to, YMCA, YWCA, Boys' and Girls' Club. 
Zoning map atlas (zoning map) means the official map adopted by this chapter, showing the zoning districts and transect zones applicable to all lands within the city, and all amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 160485 , § 1, 3-1-18; Ord. No. 160685 , § 1, 3-15-18; Ord. No. 170974 , § 1, 2-21-19)  
ARTICLE III. - HOW-TO GUIDE  
DIVISION 1. - REVIEWING AUTHORITIES 
 
Sec. 30-3.1. - Development review coordinator. 
The city manager or designee shall serve as the development review coordinator and shall have the following duties: 
A.  Receive all applications for development plan approval. 
B.  Schedule all applications for review before the technical review committee and development review board. 
C.  Chair the technical review committee. 
D.  Ensure that proper notice is given prior to all hearings on development applications. 
E.  Ensure that all time limits are met. 
F.  Monitor the progress of all development plan applications through the review process and be available to respond to the queries of interested persons. 
G.  Schedule application cutoff dates.  
Sec. 30-3.2. - Technical review committee. 
A.  Establishment and purpose. The technical review committee (TRC) is hereby created and shall have the following duties: 
1.  Meetings. The TRC shall meet at least monthly to review development proposals as prescribed in this article. 
2.  Decisions. As prescribed in this article, the committee shall either make the final decision on development proposals or make recommendations to the reviewing board with decision-making authority. 
B.  Membership. The TRC shall be composed of an employee appointed from each of the following city departments: 
1.  Planning and development services. 
2.  Public works department. 
3.  Fire/rescue department. 
4.  Representatives of other departments as deemed appropriate.  
Sec. 30-3.3. - City plan board. 
A.  Establishment and purpose. The city plan board (CPB), which shall be designated as the local planning agency in accordance with F.S. § 163.3174, is hereby created and shall have the following duties: 
1.  Plan for the proper growth and development of the city, meaning the scientific, aesthetic, and orderly disposition of land, resources, facilities, and services with the goal of securing an environment for present and future generations that is environmentally sustainable, socially just and desirable, and economically sound. The board shall keep constantly informed of and in touch with the physical changes of the city and its surrounding environs and is authorized to gather information and make recommendations to the city commission with regard to such growth and development. 
2.  Prepare the City of Gainesville Comprehensive Plan and amendments thereto, and make recommendations to the city commission regarding the adoption or amendment of such plan. 
3.  Monitor and oversee the effectiveness and status of the Comprehensive Plan, and recommend to the city commission such changes in the Comprehensive Plan as may from time to time be required, including the periodic evaluation and appraisal of the Comprehensive Plan required by F.S. § 163.3191. 
4.  Review proposed land development regulations, the Land Development Code, or amendments thereto, and make recommendations to the city commission as to the consistency of each proposal with the adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
5.  Perform all other functions, duties, and responsibilities designated by the Land Development Code or otherwise assigned by the city commission. 
B.  Membership. 
1.  The city plan board shall have seven regular members, representing a cross section of the city, appointed by the city commission. Regular members of the city plan board shall be and remain bona fide residents of the city. If at any time a member of the city plan board fails to remain a resident of the city, such person shall no longer serve on the board. 
2.  The city plan board shall have an additional member (hereinafter, the "school board representative") that represents and is appointed by the School Board of Alachua County. The duties of the school board representative are limited to attending city plan board meetings at which the city plan board considers Comprehensive Plan amendments and rezonings that would, if approved, increase residential density on the property that is the subject of the proposed amendment or rezoning. The school board representative shall be a non-voting member. 
3.  Each member shall be appointed to a three-year term commencing on November 1 of the year appointed. Members may be reappointed for consecutive terms and may hold office after expiration of their term until a successor has been appointed and qualified. 
4.  When a regular member position becomes vacant before the end of the term, the city commission shall appoint a substitute member to fill the vacancy for the duration of the vacated term. When the school board representative position becomes vacant before the end of the term, the School Board of Alachua County shall appoint a substitute member to fill the vacancy for the duration of the vacated term. 
5.  Probationary period for regular members. 
a.  New appointees to the city plan board shall complete a 60-day probationary period prior to commencement of the term of office. During this period appointees shall meet the same attendance requirements as other board members, but shall not have the power to vote or be counted for the purpose of constituting a quorum. 
b.  Any appointee who fails to successfully complete the probationary period, except as provided below, shall be automatically disqualified for membership on the city plan board, upon the filing with the clerk of the commission of appropriate proof that the appointee has failed to successfully complete the probationary period. 
c.  Exception. The city commission may waive the required probationary period for any appointee to the city plan board upon good cause shown and entered in the record of the minutes of the city commission. 
C.  Officers. 
1.  The members of the city plan board shall annually elect a chair and vice-chair from among the regular members and may create and fill other offices as the board deems necessary. The chair shall preside over the board and shall have the right to vote. In the absence of the chair, the vice-chair shall perform the duties of the chair. 
2.  The city plan board may create whatever subcommittees it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the board. The chair of the board shall annually appoint the membership of each subcommittee from the regular members of the board. The school board representative is eligible for subcommittee membership, and the chair of the board may appoint the school board representative to any given subcommittee. 
3.  The city manager shall appoint a city employee to serve as secretary to the board, recorder and custodian of all board records. 
D.  Compensation of members; funding; absenteeism; legal counsel. 
1.  Neither regular members nor the school board representative shall be compensated, but may be paid for travel and other expenses incurred on board business under procedures prescribed in advance by the city commission. 
2.  The city commission shall appropriate funds to permit the city plan board to perform its prescribed functions. 
3.  Absenteeism by regular board members shall be governed by board rules. 
4.  The city attorney shall provide legal counsel to advise and represent the board as necessary. 
E.  Rules of procedure. The city plan board shall adopt rules of procedure to carry out its purposes. All rules shall conform to this article, the Code of Ordinances and state law, and shall be reviewed and approved by the city commission. 
1.  The board shall meet at least once each calendar month, unless cancelled by the board or its chair, and more often at the call of the chair or the city commission. 
2.  The board shall adopt rules setting the number of members needed to establish a quorum. 
3.  Each decision of the board shall be approved by a majority vote of the regular members present at a meeting in which a quorum is in attendance and voting. 
4.  The board shall conduct hearings in accordance with this article and state law. 
5.  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, indicating the attendance of each member, and the decision on every question. 
F.  Final and non-final decisions. The city plan board has final decision authority for special use permits (other than wellfield special use permits), development plans, determinations for nonpresumptive vested rights and concurrency, and decisions on binding resource determinations. All other actions of the board are non-final and advisory to the city commission. Advisory actions of the board shall not obligate the city. 
G.  Implementation of board's decision. Any permit, authorization, or other development order issued, based on the board's decision, prior to the end of the period for filing an appeal for any available administrative or judicial remedies is considered conditional. Any action taken during the appeal period is taken at the sole risk of the property owner or representative, who may be required to undo any work done if the decision of the board is overturned either by a rehearing of the board, an appeal for an administrative remedy, or an appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction.  
Sec. 30-3.4. - Development review board. 
A.  Establishment and purpose. The development review board (DRB) is hereby created and shall have the following duties: 
1.  Review and act upon applications for development plan approval pursuant to the Land Development Code. The airport authority shall act in the capacity of the development review board for development plans for the Gainesville Regional Airport in accordance with an approved airport layout plan. 
2.  Review and approve, approve with conditions or deny modifications and variances from the requirements of this Land Development Code, as specifically provided in this Land Development Code. 
3.  Make recommendations to the city plan board on land development regulations either upon referral by the city plan board or upon its own initiation. 
4.  Perform all other functions, duties, and responsibilities designated by the Land Development Code or otherwise assigned by the city commission. 
B.  Membership. 
1.  The development review board shall have seven regular members appointed by the city commission. Members of the development review board shall be and remain bona fide residents of the city. If at any time a member of the development review board fails to remain a resident of the city, such person shall no longer serve on the board. When appointing residents to the development review board, the city commission shall give special consideration to those with the following experience: 
a.  An architect or landscape architect. 
b.  A civil engineer. 
c.  A person engaged in real estate sales or development. 
d.  A professional with experience in natural or environmental sciences. 
e.  An urban planner; and 
f.  A citizen at large. 
2.  Each member shall be appointed to a three-year term commencing on November 1 of the year appointed. Members may be reappointed for consecutive terms and may hold office after expiration of their term until a successor has been appointed and qualified. 
3.  When a member position becomes vacant before the end of the term, the city commission shall appoint a substitute member to fill the vacancy for the duration of the vacated term. 
4.  Probationary period. 
a.  New appointees to the development review board shall complete a 60-day probationary period prior to commencement of the term of office. During this period appointees shall meet the same attendance requirements as other board members, but shall not have the power to vote or be counted for the purpose of constituting a quorum. 
b.  Any appointee who fails to successfully complete the probationary period, except as provided below, shall be automatically disqualified for membership on the development review board, upon the filing with the clerk of the commission of appropriate proof that the appointee has failed to successfully complete the probationary period. 
c.  Exception. The city commission may waive the required probationary period for any appointee to the development review board upon good cause shown and entered in the record of the minutes of the city commission. 
C.  Officers. 
1.  The members of the development review board shall annually elect a chair and vice-chair from among the members and may create and fill other offices as the board deems necessary. The chair shall preside over the board and shall have the right to vote. In the absence of the chair, the vice-chair shall perform the duties of the chair. 
2.  The development review board may create whatever subcommittees it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the board. The chair of the board shall annually appoint the membership of each subcommittee. 
3.  The city manager shall appoint a city employee to serve as secretary to the board, recorder and custodian of all board records. 
D.  Compensation of members; funding; absenteeism; legal counsel. 
1.  Board members shall not be compensated, but may be paid for travel and other expenses incurred on board business under procedures prescribed in advance by the city commission. 
2.  The city commission may appropriate funds to permit the development review board to perform its prescribed functions. 
3.  Absenteeism by board members shall be governed by board rules. 
4.  The city attorney shall provide legal counsel to advise and represent the board as necessary. 
E.  Rules of procedure. The development review board shall adopt rules of procedure to carry out its purposes. All rules shall conform to this article, the Code of Ordinances and state law, and shall be reviewed and approved by the city commission. 
1.  The board shall meet at least once each calendar month, unless cancelled by the board or its chair, and more often at the call of the chair or the city commission. 
2.  The board shall adopt rules setting the number of members needed to establish a quorum. 
3.  Each decision of the board shall be approved by a majority vote of the members present at a meeting in which a quorum is in attendance and voting. 
4.  The board shall conduct hearings in accordance with this article and state law. 
5.  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, indicating the attendance of each member, and the decision on every question. 
F.  Implementation of board's decision. Any permit, authorization, or other development order issued, based on the board's decision, prior to the end of the period for filing an appeal for any available administrative or judicial remedies is considered conditional. Any action taken during the appeal period is taken at the sole risk of the property owner or representative, who may be required to undo any work done if the decision of the board is overturned either by a rehearing of the board, an appeal for an administrative remedy, or an appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction.  
Sec. 30-3.5. - Historic preservation board. 
A.  Establishment and purpose. The historic preservation board (HPB) is hereby created and shall have the following duties: 
1.  Update the official inventory of cultural resources and submit to the city commission recommendations and documentation concerning such updating. 
2.  Develop programs to stimulate public interest in urban neighborhood conservation and participation in the adaptation of existing codes, ordinances, procedures and programs to reflect urban neighborhood conservation policies and goals. 
3.  Explore funding and grant sources and advise property owners concerning which might be available for the identification, protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of historic, architectural, archaeological and cultural resources. 
4.  Cooperate with agencies of city, county, regional, state and federal governments in planning proposed and future projects to reflect the concerns and policies expressed in this article, and assist in the development of proposed and future land use plans. 
5.  Advise property owners and local governmental agencies concerning the proper protection, maintenance, enhancement and preservation of cultural resources. 
6.  Advise the city commission concerning the effects of local governmental actions on cultural resources. 
7.  Conduct regular public meetings and call special meetings. 
8.  Otherwise further the objectives and purposes stated in the historic preservation and conservation regulations of this chapter, which can be found in article IV, division 5. 
9.  Report to the city commission concerning the board's activities at least once a year. 
10.  Review and recommend sites, buildings, structures, objects, areas and districts, both public and private, for listing on the local register for historic places. 
11.  Approve or deny petitions for certificates of appropriateness required under article IV, division 5. 
12.  Notify the city manager, who shall take appropriate action when it appears that there has not been compliance with the requirements of article IV, division 5. 
B.  Membership. 
1.  The historic preservation board shall have nine regular members appointed by the city commission. Members of the board shall be and remain bona fide residents of the city. If at any time a member of the board fails to remain a resident of the city, such person shall no longer serve on the board. When appointing residents to the historic preservation board, the city commission shall appoint at least one registered architect and shall, when possible, appoint a representative from each of the following areas of expertise: 
a.  History. 
b.  Real estate or real property appraisal or finance. 
c.  Urban planning or law. 
d.  Engineering or building construction. 
e.  Landscape architecture. 
2.  Each member shall be appointed to a three-year term. Members may be reappointed for consecutive terms and may hold office after the expiration of their term until a successor has been appointed and qualified. 
3.  When a member position becomes vacant before the end of a term, the city commission shall appoint a substitute member to fill the vacancy for the duration of the vacated term. 
C.  Officers. 
1.  The board shall annually elect a chair and a vice-chair from among the members and may create and fill other offices as the board deems necessary. The chair shall preside over the board and shall have the right to vote. In the absence of the chair, the vice-chair shall perform the duties of the chair. 
2.  The city manager shall appoint a city employee to serve as secretary to the board, recorder and custodian of all board records. 
D.  Rules of procedure. The historic preservation board shall adopt rules of procedure to carry out its purposes. All rules shall conform to this article, the Code of Ordinances and state law, and shall be reviewed and approved by the city commission. 
1.  The board shall meet at least once each calendar month, unless cancelled by the board or its chair, and more often at the call of the chair or the city commission. 
2.  No business shall be conducted by the board without the presence of a quorum of five voting members. 
3.  Voting on certificates of appropriateness. Approval or denial of petitions for certificates of appropriateness shall require the affirmative vote of at least four voting members. If insufficient affirmative votes are obtained, a matter shall be tabled and placed on the agenda for the following meeting. However, petitions for certificates of appropriateness shall be deemed automatically granted if not approved or denied within 45 calendar days after the first meeting at which they were considered. 
4.  The board shall conduct hearings in accordance with this article and state law. 
5.  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, indicating the attendance of each member, and the decision on every question.  
Sec. 30-3.6. - Heritage overlay district board. 
A.  Establishment and purpose. The heritage overlay district board is hereby created and shall have the following duties: 
1.  Review regulated work items submitted for its review pursuant to the provisions of section 30-4.27. 
B.  Membership. 
1.  The board shall consist of five members appointed by the city commission. At least three members shall reside in a heritage overlay district and, if more than one heritage overlay district exists, at least one member shall reside in each existing district; however, if it is not possible to meet the foregoing requirements in making appointments, the city commission may appoint any resident of the city to the board. If a member of the board ceases to be a resident of the city, such person shall no longer serve on the board. 
2.  Each member shall be appointed to a two-year term commencing on November 1 of the year appointed. Members may be reappointed for consecutive terms and may hold office after expiration of their term until a successor has been appointed and qualified. 
3.  When a member position becomes vacant before the end of the term, the city commission shall appoint a substitute member to fill the vacancy for the duration of the vacated term. 
C.  Officers. 
1.  The board shall annually elect a chair and a vice-chair from among the members and may create and fill other offices as the board deems necessary. The chair shall preside over the board and shall have the right to vote. In the absence of the chair, the vice-chair shall perform the duties of the chair. 
2.  The city manager shall appoint a city employee to serve as secretary to the board, recorder and custodian of all board records. 
D.  Rules of procedure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure to carry out its purposes. All rules shall conform to this article, the Code of Ordinances and state law, and shall be reviewed and approved by the city commission. 
1.  The board shall meet once each calendar month, as necessary to consider any petitions timely filed for that meeting. A meeting may be cancelled by the board or its chair as specified in the board rules of procedure. 
2.  Three members shall be present to establish a quorum. A majority of the quorum is required for approval. Petitions on the agenda, but not heard due to a lack of quorum, are continued to the next meeting one time. If the board fails to reach a quorum a second consecutive time, the petition is deemed approved. 
3.  The board shall conduct hearings in accordance with this article and state law. 
4.  At board meetings, the board deliberation and public comment shall be limited to whether or not the regulated work item is consistent with the district's regulations, as set forth in the ordinance for that district, including the design standards report. 
5.  The board can approve, approve with conditions, deny or continue to a date certain a petition for a regulated work item. The board may continue a petition only once. At the second hearing on a continued petition, the board shall render a decision or the petition shall be deemed approved. 
6.  The decision of the board on a petition shall be the final decision of the city. 
7.  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, indicating the attendance of each member, and the decision on every question.  
Sec. 30-3.7. - Neighborhood workshop. 
A.  Purpose and intent. Neighborhood workshops are intended to encourage applicants to be good neighbors and to allow for informed decision making, although not necessarily to produce complete consensus on all applications, by: 
1.  Ensuring that applicants pursue early and effective citizen participation in conjunction with their applications, giving the applicants the opportunity to understand and try to mitigate any real or perceived impacts their applications may have on the community; 
2.  Ensuring that citizens and property owners have an adequate opportunity to learn about applications that may affect them and to work with the applicant to resolve concerns at an early stage of the process; and 
3.  Facilitating ongoing communication among the applicant, interested citizens and property owners, and city staff throughout the application review process. 
B.  Applicability. Every application that requires board approval, including future land use map changes, rezonings, special use permits, subdivisions, or development plans shall first hold a neighborhood workshop and shall include in the application a written record of such meeting. Development plans located within a transect zone that meet or exceed the thresholds for intermediate or major development review shall also conduct a neighborhood workshop. The following development applications are exempt from the requirements of this section: 
1.  Text changes to the Comprehensive Plan or Land Development Code. 
2.  City-initiated amendments to the future land use map of the Comprehensive Plan that change the future land use from Alachua County to City of Gainesville categories. 
3.  City-initiated amendments to the zoning map that change the zoning from Alachua County to City of Gainesville districts. 
4.  Development plan applications for nonresidential projects of 10,000 square feet or less of floor area when not abutting or adjacent to property zoned for single-family residential use. 
5.  Development plan applications for residential projects of ten units or less. 
6.  Environmental remediation or safety improvements required by local, state, and federal agencies. 
C.  Workshop requirements. 
1.  The applicant shall provide the opportunity for a workshop to inform neighboring property owners of the proposed application. The workshop shall be held in a location generally near the subject property and shall be held in a facility that is ADA compliant. The applicant shall provide notification by mail to all owners of property located within 400 feet of the subject property and to all neighborhood associations registered with the city and located within one-half-mile of the property. The city manager or designee shall provide mailing labels to the applicant. The applicant shall mail these notices with proper postage at least 15 calendar days before the workshop. The applicant shall also advertise the workshop in a newspaper of general circulation at least 15 calendar days before the date of the workshop. 
2.  The workshop shall start between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. on a weekday or between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on a weekend. All required workshops shall be held prior to submittal of the application. The applicant shall be required to schedule an additional workshop if the initial workshop has occurred more than six months prior to submittal of the application.  
Sec. 30-3.8. - Public notice. 
A.  General. The notice provisions in this section shall be required prior to all board hearings and are supplemental to any notice required by state law. If two public hearings are required, then supplemental notice shall be provided prior to the first public hearing. A request by the applicant to continue a board hearing shall require the applicant to incur re-notification and re-advertising costs. 
B.  Mailed notice. Unless otherwise provided by law, addresses for mailed notice required by this chapter shall be obtained from the latest ad valorem tax records provided by the county property appraiser. The failure of any person to receive notice shall not invalidate an action if a good faith attempt was made to comply with the notice requirements. The notice shall identify the physical address of the subject property; the date, time, and location of the public hearing; and a description of the application including the nature and degree of the request, potential uses, and other information as required by the city. The notice shall be mailed at least 15 calendar days prior to the date of the board hearing to all real property owners whose land will be affected and whose property lies within 400 feet of any affected property. 
C.  Posted notice. Posted notice signs shall be posted by the applicant in accordance with procedures established by the city, and shall include a description of the application with the nature and degree of the request, potential uses, and other information as required by the city, and shall identify the date, time, and location of the public hearing. Signs shall be posted at least 15 calendar days prior to the date of the board hearing. Properties under consideration for a land use or zoning map change that involve more than 50 non-contiguous acres shall not be required to post signs when the application is initiated by the city. 
D.  Failure to perfect supplemental notice. If an applicant fails to provide supplemental notice in accordance with this section prior to the public hearing, then the public hearing shall be cancelled to allow compliance with the notice requirements. The failure to provide the supplemental notice required by this section shall not be construed to invalidate any final action on a land development decision, if discovered after final action has been taken. 
Table III-1: Public Notice. 
APPLICATION TYPE 	NEWSPAPER AD 	MAILED NOTICE 	POSTED NOTICE 
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS/LAND USE CHANGES 
Text changes not including amendments to the list of permitted/prohibited uses. 	As required by law. 	Not required. 	Not required. 
Text changes amending the list of permitted/prohibited uses involving less than 5% of the total land area of the city. 	As required by law. 	Required. 	Not required. 
Text changes amending the list of permitted/prohibited uses involving more than 5% of the total land area of the city. 	As required by law. 	Not required. 	Not required. 
Land use map changes involving less than 5% of the total land area of the city. 	As required by law. 	Required. 	Required. 
Land use map changes involving more than 5% of the total land area of the city. 	As required by law. 	Not required. 	Required, except as provided in this section. 
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE AMENDMENTS/REZONINGS 
Text changes not including amendments to the list of permitted/prohibited uses. 	As required by law. 	Not required. 	Not required. 
Text changes amending the list of permitted/prohibited uses involving less than 5% of the total land area of the city. 	As required by law. 	Required. 	Not required. 
Text changes amending the list of permitted/prohibited uses involving more than 5% of the total land area of the city. 	As required by law. 	Not required. 	Not required. 
Zoning map changes involving less than 5% of the total land area of the city. 	As required by law. 	Required. 	Required. 
Zoning map changes involving more than 5% of the total land area of the city. 	As required by law. 	Not required. 	Required, except as provided in this section. 
Special use permits 	As required by law. 	Required. 	Required. 
Development review board 	As required by law. 	Required. 	Required. 
Variances 	As required by law. 	Required. 	Required. 
Historic preservation board (COA) 	As required by law. 	Not required. 	Required. 
Heritage overlay district board 	As required by law. 	Not required. 	Required. 
Right-of-way vacations 	As required by law. 	Required. 	Not required. 
  
DIVISION 2. - ZONING VERIFICATION LETTERS 
 
Sec. 30-3.9. - Required. 
An application for a zoning verification letter (ZVL) may be voluntarily submitted by any individual seeking verification of the zoning status of a specific parcel of land. However, submittal of a ZVL application shall be required in the following situations and it shall be unlawful to conduct any of the following activities until the city manager or designee has issued a zoning verification letter (ZVL) certifying that such activity complies with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
A.  Establish any business, profession or occupation, or change the location of a business, profession or occupation that is subject to a business tax as provided for in chapter 25 of the Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Begin any new use, or undertake an addition to any existing use. 
C.  Make a change of use, as the term is defined in this chapter, of any land or structure, or extend any use or any lot on which exists a legally nonconforming use.  
Sec. 30-3.10. - Review procedures. 
A.  Applications. Applications for a ZVL shall be submitted on a form provided by the city. The request shall provide sufficient information to identify the property and the information the requestor seeks to verify. The requestor is solely responsible for the accuracy of the information provided in the application. 
B.  Staff review. Upon receipt of a completed application, the city manager or designee shall review the application and issue a ZVL that may only address the following information: 
1.  The future land use designation of the property. 
2.  The zoning district of the property. 
3.  A list of permitted uses in the property's zoning district. 
4.  Verification that a particular use is permitted within the property's zoning district. 
5.  The development regulations applicable to the property. 
6.  Zoning action needed to permit a particular use. 
7.  Identification of any outstanding notice of violations issued for code enforcement violations of the property.  
Sec. 30-3.11. - Duration, limitations, effect. 
A.  Duration. There is no specific expiration date for an issued ZVL. However, the regulations in this chapter are continually under review and may change at any time, and any ZVLs issued are subject to changes to this chapter adopted after the issuance of the letter. Applicants have the responsibility of ensuring that all applicable rules, regulations, and circumstances have not changed subsequent to the issuance of a ZVL. 
B.  Limitations. If the city manager or designee determines that a ZVL was based on inaccurate or misleading information or if the ZVL does not comply with this chapter, then the city manager or designee may at any time issue a modified ZVL that complies with this chapter or revoke the ZVL. 
C.  Effect. A ZVL does not authorize development activity. 
D.  Review. The determinations made within a ZVL are not subject to appeal.  
DIVISION 3. - TEXT AMENDMENTS, LAND USE AND ZONING CHANGES 
 
Sec. 30-3.12. - Review procedures. 
The following procedures shall apply to all applications, including those initiated by the city, for text amendments to the Comprehensive Plan or Land Development Code, and land use or zoning changes. 
A.  Pre-application meeting. It is recommended that applicants meet with the planning and development services department prior to submitting an application, in order to discuss the application process. No person may rely upon any comment made by any participant at the pre-application conference as a representation or implication that the application will be ultimately approved or rejected in any form. 
B.  Application submittal. 
1.  An application for a text amendment to the Comprehensive Plan or Land Development Code may be submitted by any citizen or owner of land in the city. 
2.  Applications for a land use change or rezoning may be submitted by the property owner. If there are multiple owners, each shall include authorization on the application. The property owners may authorize an agent to represent the owners by submitting an affidavit with the application. 
C.  Staff review. Staff shall submit to the city plan board a written report that includes analysis of the application and a recommendation based on the applicable criteria required by this division. 
D.  Neighborhood workshop. Applicants for a land use change or rezoning shall hold a neighborhood workshop as required by this article. 
E.  City plan board review. The city plan board shall review the application at a public hearing. When reviewing the application, the city plan board may receive and consider the comments and concerns of other relevant boards serving the city commission, such as the development review board and the historic preservation board. This city plan board shall make a recommendation to the city commission regarding the application, and such recommendation shall be processed as follows: 
1.  If both staff and the city plan board recommend approval of the application as submitted or with amendments voluntarily agreed upon by the applicant, then the application may be forwarded to the city attorney's office to prepare the appropriate ordinance in accordance with law. 
2.  If either staff or the city plan board recommends denial of the application, then the application shall be forwarded to the city commission for approval, denial, approval with amendment, or remand to the board for further consideration. If the city commission approves the application as submitted or with amendments, then the city attorney's office shall prepare the appropriate ordinance in accordance with law. 
F.  City commission review. 
1.  The city commission shall consider the application at public hearings as required by law. 
2.  If the matter is quasi-judicial as determined by the city attorney's office, the city commission shall conduct the quasi-judicial hearing at first reading of the ordinance, as applicable. The recommendations of city staff or other regulatory agencies and the appropriate reviewing boards shall be included and become a part of the record before the city commission. 
3.  The city commission may act on any application without a recommendation from the city plan board if the board has not acted on the matter within 45 calendar days of the date of the first regular meeting of the city plan board after an application has been submitted. 
4.  If an application is not acted upon finally by the city commission within six months of the date upon which the city plan board made a recommendation to the city commission, the application shall be deemed denied without prejudice. However, no application shall be deemed denied if the city commission has continued its consideration to a date certain, or has stayed action on the application by enactment of a moratorium ordinance. 
G.  Withdrawal of applications. An application for any action provided by this chapter may be withdrawn by the applicant. However, if notice has been given, the application shall be withdrawn by the applicant at a public hearing, and for purposes of refiling a land use change or rezoning application, a withdrawn application shall be limited as if it were denied. Fees paid shall not be refundable if any expense has been incurred by the city for public notice. 
H.  Limits on applications relating to same property. 
1.  If the city commission has denied an application for a land use change or rezoning, the city plan board shall not consider any land use change or rezoning applications for any part of the same property for a period of 12 months from the date of the denial. 
2.  Whenever the city commission has adopted an ordinance to change the land use or zoning for a property, the city plan board shall not consider any land use change or rezoning applications for any part of the same property for a period of 12 months from the date of the ordinance adoption. 
3.  The city commission may waive the above time limitations by the affirmative vote of five commissioners, provided 30 calendar days have elapsed since the action of the commission, and if the city commission deems such action necessary to prevent an injustice or facilitate the proper development of the city.  
Sec. 30-3.13. - Land use change criteria. 
Applications to change the land use category for a property by amending the future land use map of the Comprehensive Plan shall be reviewed according to the following criteria: 
A.  The goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  The need for additional land in the proposed land use category based on the projected population of the city and the relative availability of the current and proposed land use categories. 
C.  The proposed land use category of the property in relation to surrounding properties and other similar properties. 
D.  The potential impact of the land use change on adopted level of service standards.  
Sec. 30-3.14. - Rezoning criteria. 
Applications to rezone property shall be reviewed according to the following criteria: 
A.  Compatibility of permitted uses and allowed intensity and density with surrounding existing development. 
B.  The character of the district and its suitability for particular uses. 
C.  The proposed zoning district of the property in relation to surrounding properties and other similar properties. 
D.  Conservation of the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
E.  The applicable portions of any current city plans and programs such as land use, traffic ways, recreation, schools, neighborhoods, stormwater management and housing. 
F.  The needs of the city for land areas for specific purposes to serve population and economic activities. 
G.  Whether there have been substantial changes in the character or development of areas in or near an area under consideration for rezoning. 
H.  The goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
I.  The facts, testimony, and reports presented at public hearings. 
J.  Applications to rezone to a transect zone shall meet the following additional criteria: 
1.  The proposed T-Zone shall provide a logical extension of an existing zone, or an adequate transition between zones. 
2.  The area shall have had a change in growth and development pattern to warrant the rezoning to a more or less urban T-Zone. 
3.  The request shall be consistent with the overall City of Gainesville vision for growth and development as expressed in the City of Gainesville Comprehensive Plan. 
4.  If not adjacent to an existing T-Zone, the rezoning site shall comprise a minimum of ten acres.  
DIVISION 4. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 
 
Sec. 30-3.15. - Purpose. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the planned development (PD) district is to provide a particularized zoning district that recognizes unique conditions, allows design flexibility, and promotes planned diversification and integration of uses and structures, which other zoning districts cannot accommodate, while also retaining the city commission's authority to establish such limitations and regulations as it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The PD district is designed to: 
1.  Encourage flexible land development that sustainably uses land and infrastructure, reduces transportation needs, conserves energy, and maximizes the preservation of natural resources. 
2.  Allow the integration of different land uses and densities in one development that would not otherwise be provided for in other zoning districts in this chapter, and which encourage compatibility in overall site design and scale both internal and external to the project site. 
3.  Permit outstanding and innovative residential and nonresidential developments with quality-of-life design features, such as an integration of housing types and accommodation of changing lifestyles within neighborhoods; design that encourages internal and external convenient and comfortable travel by foot, bicycle, and transit through such strategies as pedestrian scale, a building orientation generally toward streets and sidewalks, parking located to the side or rear of buildings, narrow streets, modest setbacks, front porches, connected streets, multiple connections to nearby land uses, terminated vistas, recessed garages, alleys, enhances landscaping, and mixed-uses. 
4.  Provide flexibility to meet changing needs, technologies, economics, and consumer preferences and allows for ingenuity and imagination in the planning and development of relatively large tracts. 
5.  Achieve overall coordinated building and facility relationships and infill development, and eliminate the negative impacts of unplanned and piecemeal development.  
Sec. 30-3.16. - Applicability of other regulations. 
All building code, housing code and other land use regulations of this chapter are applicable to a PD, except to the extent that they conflict with a specific provision of an approved PD.  
Sec. 30-3.17. - Review criteria. 
In addition to the general review criteria for rezonings provided by this article, the city plan board and the city commission shall evaluate PD applications according to the following additional criteria: 
A.  Consistent with Comprehensive Plan. A PD application may only be approved if it is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Conformance to PD purpose. A PD application may only be approved if it is in conformance with the purpose of PDs as articulated in section 30-3.15. 
C.  Internal compatibility. All uses proposed within a PD shall be compatible with other proposed uses; that is, no use may have any undue adverse impact on any neighboring use, based on the streetscape, treatment of pedestrian ways and circulation, motor vehicle circulation, and the separation and buffering of parking areas and sections of parking areas; the existence or absence of, and the location of, focal points and vistas, open spaces, plazas, recreational areas and common areas, and use of existing and proposed landscaping; use of the topography, physical environment and other natural features; use and variety of building setback or build-to lines, separations and buffering; use and variety of building groupings, building sizes, architectural styles, and materials; variety and design of dwelling types; particular land uses proposed, and conditions and limitations thereon; and any other factor deemed relevant to the privacy, safety, preservation, protection or welfare of any proposed use within the PD. 
D.  External compatibility. All uses proposed within a PD shall be compatible with existing and planned uses of properties surrounding the PD; that is, no internal use may have any avoidable or undue adverse impact on any existing or planned surrounding use, nor shall any internal use be subject to undue adverse impact from existing or planned surrounding uses. An evaluation of the external compatibility of a PD should be based on the following factors: adjacent existing and proposed uses, design of the development, traffic circulation, and density and intensity. 
E.  Intensity of development. The residential density and intensity of use of a PD shall be compatible with and shall have no undue adverse impact upon the physical and environmental characteristics of the site and surrounding lands, and shall comply with the policies and density limitations set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. Within the maximum limitation of the Comprehensive Plan, the permitted residential density and intensity of use in a PD may be adjusted upward or downward in consideration of the following factors: the availability and location of public and utility services and facilities; the trip capture rate of development; and the degree of internal and external connectedness of streets. 
F.  Usable open spaces, plazas and recreation areas. Usable open spaces, plazas and recreation areas provided within a PD shall be evaluated based on conformance with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan and the sufficiency of such areas to provide appropriate recreational opportunities, protect sensitive environmental areas, conserve areas of unique beauty or historical significance, enhance neighborhood design, and encourage compatible and cooperative relationships between adjoining land uses. 
G.  Environmental constraints. The site of the PD shall be suitable for use in the manner proposed without hazards to persons either on or offsite from the likelihood of increased flooding, erosion or other dangers, annoyances or inconveniences. Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall all be appropriate to the type, pattern and intensity of development intended. The conditions and requirements of the protection of resources article shall be met. 
H.  External transportation access. A PD shall be located on, and provide access to, a major street (arterial or collector) unless, due to the size of the PD and the type of uses proposed, it will not adversely affect the type or amount of traffic on adjoining local streets. Access shall meet the standards set in chapter 23 and chapter 30, article VI. Connection to existing or planned adjacent streets is encouraged. The trip generation report shall be signed by a professional engineer registered in the state when there is a difference between the traffic report provided by the petitioner and the concurrency test. 
I.  Internal transportation access. Every dwelling unit or other use permitted in a PD shall have access to a public street directly or by way of a private road, pedestrian way, court or other area that is either dedicated to public use or is a common area guaranteeing access. Permitted uses are not required to front on a dedicated public road. Private roads and other accessways shall be required to be constructed so as to ensure that they are safe and maintainable. 
J.  Provision for the range of transportation choices. Sufficient off-street and on-street parking for bicycles and other vehicles, as well as cars, shall be provided. Parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with such standards as are approved by the city commission to ensure that they are safe and maintainable and that they allow for sufficient privacy for adjoining uses. When there is discretion as to the location of parking in the project, it is strongly encouraged that all motor vehicle parking be located at the rear or interior side of buildings, or both. The design of a PD should, whenever feasible, incorporate appropriate pedestrian and bicycle accessways so as to provide for a variety of mobility opportunities. Connection to all sidewalks, greenways, trails, bikeways, and transit stops along the perimeter of the PD is required. Where existing perimeter sidewalks do not exist, sidewalks shall be provided by the development.  
Sec. 30-3.18. - Review procedures. 
A.  Unified control. All land included in any PD application shall be owned or under the legal control of the applicant, whether the applicant be an individual, partnership, corporation, other entity, group or agency. The applicant shall provide evidence of such ownership or control, including upon request of the city manager or designee all agreements, contracts, guarantees and other necessary documents and information that the city deems necessary. 
B.  Pre-application meeting. Before application submittal, the applicant shall present a generalized description of the project to the city manager or designee at a pre-application conference. 
C.  First-step meeting. Before application submittal, the applicant shall attend a first-step meeting to discuss the development review process, code requirements and to confer with staff about the PD. The first-step meeting may be attended by staff of the technical review committee or staff of the planning and development services department. Comments made by staff at a first-step meeting are made solely for preliminary informational purposes and shall not be construed as an approval or denial or agreement to approve or deny any application. 
D.  Application submittal. The applicant shall submit a complete application, accompanied by the applicable fee, on a form provided by the city together with all plans, documentation and information deemed necessary by the city. 
E.  Technical review committee review. The technical review committee shall review the application for conformance with the city's Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code, and issue a recommendation. 
F.  Neighborhood workshop. The applicant shall hold a neighborhood workshop per the requirements of this article. 
G.  City plan board review. The city plan board shall review the application (PD layout plan and report) and the technical review committee recommendation at a public hearing. The city plan board shall recommend denial, approval, or approval subject to conditions, and the recommendation shall be forwarded to the city commission for consideration. 
H.  City commission review. 
1.  The city commission shall deny the application, approve the application, or approve the application with conditions that it deems necessary and appropriate. 
2.  If the city commission approves an application with conditions, then the applicant shall revise the application to clearly incorporate such conditions and file with the city manager or designee within 60 calendar days of such approval. Failure to file the revised application within the time prescribed shall render any approval of the city commission null and void unless the applicant files with the city commission a written request for an extension of time within such 60-day period. The city commission may grant an extension for good cause shown.  
Sec. 30-3.19. - Phasing. 
The city commission may allow or require the phasing of a PD. When provisions for phasing are included in a PD, each phase shall be planned and related to previous development, surrounding properties and the available public facilities and services so that a failure to proceed with phases will have no adverse impact on the PD or surrounding properties.  
Sec. 30-3.20. - Development time limits. 
The city commission may establish reasonable time limits for the completion of any dedicated public facilities within a PD, facilities planned for common areas, and the total PD. If phasing is provided for, time limits for the completion of each phase may also be established or may be deferred until development review. Any such time limit may be extended by the city commission for an additional reasonable time limit upon the written request of an applicant and based upon good cause, as determined by the city commission. Any such extension shall not automatically extend the normal expiration date of a building permit, site plan approval or other development order.  
Sec. 30-3.21. - Amendments. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, an amendment to an approved PD (except for an extension of a time limit) shall be accomplished only by a new PD rezoning application. 
B.  The following types of amendments to the requirements of an approved PD may be authorized by the appropriate reviewing board during development plan review, provided such amendments meet the criteria set forth in this article for the development review process: 
1.  Minor adjustments or shifts in the location and siting of buildings, structures, parking bays, and parking spaces. 
2.  Changes in the location of utility tie-ins and solid waste, recycling, and yard trash containers. 
3.  Reductions in the overall density or intensity of structural ground coverage of the development. 
4.  Changes in the location and types of landscape materials, excluding changes in location of buffers. 
5.  Minor changes in the walkway and bikeway systems. 
6.  The addition of accessory structures or utility buildings of less than 1,000 square feet where there are no major changes to the perimeter features of the development. 
7.  The addition of up to ten new parking spaces. 
8.  Any expansion of gross floor area or enlargement of the building envelope that does not require the addition of required parking spaces or alter standards of the PD ordinance. 
9.  Modifications that do not entail amendments to specific language included within the PD ordinance.  
DIVISION 5. - SPECIAL USE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 30-3.22. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of this division to recognize and permit certain uses and developments that require special review, and to provide the standards by which the applications for permits for uses and development shall be evaluated. It is further intended that special use permits be required for developments that, because of their inherent nature, extent, and external effects, require special care in the control of their location, design, and methods of operation in order to ensure conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and this chapter.  
Sec. 30-3.23. - Required. 
The applicable uses listed in article IV may be established in that zoning district only after issuance and recordation of a special use permit by the city plan board.  
Sec. 30-3.24. - Review criteria. 
No special use permit shall be approved by the city plan board unless the following findings are made concerning the proposed special use. The burden of proof on the issue of whether the development, if completed as proposed, will comply with the requirements of this chapter remains at all times on the applicant. 
A.  The proposed use or development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the Land Development Code. 
B.  The proposed use or development is compatible with the existing land use pattern and future uses designated by the Comprehensive Plan. Factors by which compatibility of the proposed use or development shall be reviewed include scale, height, mass and bulk, design, intensity, and character of activity. 
C.  The proposed use will not adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
D.  Ingress and egress to the property, proposed structures, and parking/loading/service areas is provided and allows for safe and convenient automobile, bicycle, and pedestrian mobility at the site and surrounding properties. 
E.  Off-street parking, service, and loading areas, where required, will not adversely impact adjacent properties zoned for single-family residential use. 
F.  Noise, glare, exterior lighting, or odor effects will not negatively impact surrounding properties. 
G.  There is adequate provision for refuse and service/loading areas, and these areas shall be reviewed for access, screening, location on the site, and pedestrian/bicycle mobility and safety. Outdoor storage or display areas, if included, will not adversely impact surrounding properties and shall be reviewed for screening and location on the site. 
H.  Necessary public utilities are available to the proposed site and have adequate capacity to service the proposed use or development. 
I.  Screening and buffers are proposed of such type, dimension, and character to improve compatibility and harmony of the proposed use and structure with the uses and structures of adjacent and nearby properties. 
J.  The hours of operation will not adversely impact adjacent properties zoned for single-family residential use. 
K.  Any special requirements set forth in the Land Development Code for the particular use involved are met.  
Sec. 30-3.25. - Review procedures. 
A.  Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting is not required; however, the applicant is encouraged to attend a meeting with staff to review applicable procedural and regulatory requirements. 
B.  Applications. Each application shall be filed with the city manager or designee on the form prescribed. Any incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. The application shall include proof of having met the requirements of a neighborhood workshop as provided in this article. 
C.  Staff meeting. The applicant for a special use permit shall meet with city staff to discuss the procedures and requirements and to consider the elements of the proposed use and site and the proposed site layout. 
D.  Staff report. The city manager or designee shall submit to the city plan board a written report that includes analysis of the application and a recommendation based on the review criteria provided in this division. 
E.  City plan board hearing. 
1.  The city plan board shall consider the evidence presented in the public hearing and the written report submitted by the city manager or designee and shall act on the application based on the review criteria provided in this division. 
2.  Action on the application shall be one of the following: 
a.  Approval; 
b.  Approval subject to conditions; or 
c.  Denial, with a statement of the reasons for denial. 
F.  Effect of denial or withdrawal. No application for a special use permit may be submitted within two years after the date of denial or withdrawal of a request for the same use for the same property. The city plan board may waive this time limitation by the affirmative vote of five members, provided 30 calendar days have elapsed and provided the city plan board deems such action necessary to prevent an injustice. 
G.  Amended application. Amendment of an application may be allowed at any time prior to or during the public hearing, provided that no such amendment shall be such as to make the case different from its description in the notice of public hearing. If the amendment is requested by the applicant after notice of the hearing has been given and such amendment is at variance with the information set forth in the notice, then the applicant shall pay an additional fee in the same amount as the original fee for amended public notice. If the amended notice can be mailed at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing originally scheduled, the hearing on the amended petition may be held on that date; otherwise, the chairperson shall announce at the public hearing that the hearing will be continued to a future meeting with proper public notice.  
Sec. 30-3.26. - Effect and limitations. 
A.  Effect. Special use permits, including any permit conditions, shall run with the land and shall be binding on the original applicant as well as any successors or assigns. 
B.  Modifications. After approval and issuance of a special use permit, the following situations are allowed only with the review and issuance of a new special use permit: 
1.  A change in the boundaries of the approved site. 
2.  A change from the approved use. 
3.  Either an increase of ten percent or more or incremental increases that total ten percent or more in the floor area or number of parking spaces as approved. 
4.  Substantial changes in the approved location of principal or accessory structures. 
5.  Structural alterations significantly affecting the basic size, form, style, ornamentation, and appearance of principal or accessory structures as shown on the approved plans. 
6.  Substantial changes in approved pedestrian or vehicular access or circulation. 
7.  Substantial change in the approved amount or location of landscape screens or buffers. 
C.  Expiration. Special use permits shall expire 12 months after the date of approval unless, at that time, the authorized use has commenced or development at the site is continuing in good faith with an active building permit. At the request of the applicant and for good cause shown, the city plan board may extend the time of the permit's expiration for good cause shown and if not in conflict with any other provision of this chapter. 
D.  Abandonment. On request of the permit holder, the city manager or designee may approve the abandonment of a special use permit provided no construction has begun. In addition, if the use allowed by a special use permit has been abandoned for a continuous period of 12 months, the permit shall be void. The process to determine whether a use has been abandoned shall be the same as that provided for nonconforming uses in article X. 
E.  Revocation. If any conditions of an issued special use permit are violated, the city plan board may, after giving proper notice to the permit holder, revoke the permit at a public hearing. The permit may be reinstated by the city manager or designee if the circumstances leading to the revocation are corrected.  
DIVISION 6. - WELLFIELD PROTECTION SPECIAL USE PERMIT 
 
Sec. 30-3.27. - Purpose. 
A.  This division is established for the purpose of protecting the immediate and long-term supply of potable water in the community by creating a permit procedure for uses and developments within the Murphree Wellfield Protection Zones (also known as Murphree Wellfield Management Zones) as delineated in the Alachua County Code of Ordinances, as may be amended from time to time, and to provide the standards by which the applications for permits for uses and development shall be evaluated. 
B.  It is further intended that wellfield protection permits or wellfield protection Special Use Permits be required for developments that require special care in the control of their location, design, and methods of operation in order to ensure conformance with the city's Comprehensive Plan and Alachua County Murphree Wellfield Management Code (also known as Murphree Wellfield Protection Code), as may be amended from time to time.  
Sec. 30-3.28. - Required. 
Unless exempt as provided in this division, all new development and existing development within the primary, secondary, and tertiary wellfield protection (management) zones of Alachua County that will intensify, expand, or modify a use directly associated with the storage of hazardous materials (as defined in the Alachua County Hazardous Materials Management Code) shall first obtain a Wellfield Protection Special Use Permit (WPSUP). 
A.  The standards and requirements of this division shall apply to all properties located in the wellfield protection management zones. Properties that may only be partially located in a wellfield protection management zone shall be treated as if the entire property is located completely within the wellfield protection management zone. 
B.  The primary, secondary, and tertiary wellfield protection zones are those zones delineated on the Murphree Wellfield Protection management zones map on file with the city.  
Sec. 30-3.29. - Exemptions. 
A.  Uses allowed within residential zoning districts. 
B.  Any proposed uses or development associated with the Murphree Water Treatment Plant, or electric transmission and distribution systems or generally the provision of utility service by a government-owned utility shall be exempt from the provisions of this division. 
C.  Exemptions from the permit requirements shall be allowed for uses and developments that meet the following criteria, except for specially regulated industrial uses allowed by special use permit: 
1.  There is no manufacture, storage, use, or sale of hazardous materials at the site or development as defined and regulated in the Alachua County Hazardous Materials Management Code, other than hazardous materials excluded from the provisions of the Hazardous Materials Management Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
2.  The project is part of an environmental cleanup or facility upgrade that is required by a local, state or federal environmental agency, and the project is in compliance with the Alachua County Hazardous Management Materials Code and all other applicable state and federal regulations. 
3.  Redevelopment of an existing site that may manufacture, store, use, or sell hazardous materials at the site or development as defined and regulated in the Alachua County Hazardous Materials Management Code, but where the actual development project will not involve hazardous materials other than those associated with similar construction projects, and the project is in compliance with the Alachua County Hazardous Materials Management Code and all other applicable state and federal regulations.  
Sec. 30-3.30. - Review criteria. 
A.  Primary zone. No use involving hazardous materials shall be allowed in this zone, except for uses or development associated with the Murphree Water Treatment Plant, or electric transmission and distribution systems or generally the provision of utility service by a government-owned utility. All other uses shall obtain a WPSUP. 
B.  Secondary and tertiary zone. The development or use shall be reviewed using the following criteria: 
1.  The criteria for special use permits provided in section 30-3.24 have been met. 
2.  The proposed use or development will not endanger the city's potable water supply. 
3.  The necessary public utilities are available to the proposed site and have adequate capacity to service the proposed use and development. The development must be connected to the potable water and wastewater system. 
4.  There has been proper abandonment, as regulated by the applicable water management district or state agency, of any unused wells or existing septic tanks at the site. An existing septic tank may remain if it is used solely for domestic waste and if it meets all applicable state and local regulations. 
5.  There is no current or proposed underground storage of petroleum products or hazardous materials at the development site. 
6.  The applicant is in compliance with the requirements of the Alachua County Hazardous Materials Management Code, and all applicable state and federal regulations. 
7.  The development property addresses environmental features such as wetlands, creeks, lakes, sinkholes, and soils to ensure that hazardous materials will not endanger the potable water supply and the environmental features.  
Sec. 30-3.31. - Review procedures. 
A.  Pre-application meeting. The applicant for a WPSUP shall meet with staff to discuss the procedures and requirements and to consider the elements of the proposed use and site, and the proposed site plan. 
B.  Applications. Applications shall be filed with the city manager or designee on the form prescribed. Any incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
Applications shall include a development plan. However, if any of the items required for the development plan are inapplicable or irrelevant to a proposed development, such item may be omitted upon approval of the appropriate staff, provided the applicant identifies in writing any missing item and includes a brief explanation of why it is inapplicable or irrelevant. The city plan board may, at the public hearing, approve the omission of items from the development plan if it finds they are not relevant to a determination that the proposed use or development meets the requirements of this division. 
C.  Staff review. Staff from Gainesville Regional Utilities, Alachua County Environmental Protection Department, and the city shall review the request and submit to the city plan board a written analysis of the application and a recommendation based on the criteria provided in this division. 
D.  City plan board hearing. 
1.  The city plan board shall consider the evidence presented in the public hearing and the written report submitted by staff and shall act on the application based on the review criteria provided in this division. 
2.  Action on the application shall be one of the following: 
a.  Approval; 
b.  Approval subject to conditions; or 
c.  Denial, with a statement of the reasons for denial. 
E.  Effect of denial or withdrawal. No application for a WPSUP may be submitted within two years after the date of denial or withdrawal of a request for the same use for the same property. The city plan board may waive this time limitation by the affirmative vote of five members, provided 30 calendar days have elapsed and provided the city plan board deems such action necessary to prevent an injustice. 
F.  Amended application. Amendment of an application may be allowed at any time prior to or during the public hearing, provided that no such amendment shall be such as to make the case different from its description in the notice of public hearing. If the amendment is requested by the applicant after notice of the hearing has been given and such amendment is at variance with the information set forth in the notice, then the applicant shall pay an additional fee in the same amount as the original fee for amended public notice. If the amended notice can be mailed at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing originally scheduled, the hearing on the amended petition may be held on that date; otherwise, the chairperson shall announce at the public hearing that the hearing will be continued to a future meeting with proper public notice.  
Sec. 30-3.32. - Effect and limitations. 
A.  Effect. WPSUPs, including any permit conditions, shall run with the land and shall be binding on the original applicant as well as any successors or assigns. If there is a change of ownership or operator at the development site, the new owner or operator shall inform the city of its identity and registered agent for service of notice within 30 calendar days. Failure to do so shall be considered a violation of a condition of the permit. 
B.  Modifications. After approval and issuance of a WPSUP, the following situations are allowed only with the review and issuance of a new special use permit: 
1.  A change in the boundaries of the approved site. 
2.  A change from the approved use. 
3.  An increase in the storage capacity or type of any hazardous materials used, manufactured, sold or stored at the site, including new hazardous materials not previously listed in the original WPSUP. This criterion shall not apply to hazardous materials excluded from the provisions of the Alachua County Hazardous Materials Management Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
C.  Expiration. WPSUPs shall expire 12 months after the date of approval unless, at that time, the authorized use has commenced or development at the site is continuing in good faith with an active building permit. At the request of the applicant and for good cause shown, the city plan board may extend the time of the permit's expiration for good cause shown and if not in conflict with any other provision of this chapter. 
D.  Abandonment. On request of the permit holder, the city manager or designee may approve the abandonment of a WPSUP provided no construction has begun. In addition, if the use allowed by a WPSUP has been abandoned for a continuous period of 12 months, the permit shall be void. The process to determine whether a use has been abandoned shall be the same as that provided for nonconforming uses in article X. 
E.  Revocation. If any conditions of an issued WPSUP are violated, the city plan board may, after giving proper notice to the permit holder, revoke the permit at a public hearing. The permit may be reinstated by the city manager or designee if the circumstances leading to the revocation are corrected.  
DIVISION 7. - SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 30-3.33. - Purpose. 
This division is intended to provide standards for the division of land in a manner that would facilitate the coordination of land development in accordance with orderly physical patterns; to encourage development of an economically stable and healthful community; to ensure proper identification, monumentation and recording of real estate boundaries; to ensure that adequate and necessary physical improvements of lasting quality will be installed in subdivisions by the subdividers and that taxpayers will not bear this cost; to provide for safe and convenient vehicle, bicycle, pedestrian and transit access; to provide an efficient, adequate, and economic supply of utilities and services to new land developments; to prevent periodic or seasonal flooding and to protect groundwater and surface water quality through provision of protective flood control and stormwater management facilities; to help conserve and protect physical and scenic resources; to sustain and replenish the urban forest; to promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare; and to implement the Comprehensive Plan.  
Sec. 30-3.34. - Lot splits and lot line adjustments. 
A.  Lot splits. Lot splits shall be processed as follows: 
1.  Lot split restrictions. 
a.  Lot splits are not permitted in minor subdivisions approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  No further division of an approved lot split is permitted, unless a minor subdivision or record plat is prepared and submitted in accordance with this chapter. 
c.  Only those lot splits that do not require any street, sidewalk, bikeway, bridge, drainage facility, screening wall or any other improvement required under this chapter may be processed under this section. 
2.  Lot split standards. 
a.  Each proposed lot shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  Each lot shall front a public street or approved private street for the required minimum lot width for the zoning district where the lots are located, except as provided in section 30-6.8. 
c.  If any lot abuts a public right-of-way that does not conform to the design specifications provided in section 30-6.6 B., as further specified in the Design Manual, the owner may be required to dedicate, at no cost to the city, one-half of the right-of-way width necessary to meet the minimum design requirements. 
d.  A lot split shall be allowed only where water, sewer, fire and solid waste services are available to service the proposed lots. Alternatively, in the event city water or sewer is not available at any lot line, the lot may be served by a well or septic tank; provided the lot is a minimum size of one acre and the well or septic tank is permitted and approved by the governmental agencies with jurisdiction. Based on the review by the governmental permitting agencies, a well or septic tank may not be allowed within the wellfield districts, special environmental concern areas or areas with the presence of hazardous materials or known environmental contamination, due to health and safety concerns. Further, at the time city water or sewer become available at the lot line, the property owner shall, at its sole expense, connect to city water or sewer. This connection requirement shall run with the land and shall be evidenced in a written document executed by the property owner and recorded in the public records of Alachua County, Florida, at the time of approval of the lot split. In the case of a vacant lot, the connection shall be required at the time of application for development. In the case of existing development (other than single-family or two-family), the connection shall be required at the time of application for development plan review at the rapid review level or higher. In the case of single-family or two-family development, the connection shall be required at the time of application for a permit for an additional bathroom or for any structure equal to or greater than 25 percent of the square footage of the existing principal structure. 
3.  Review. 
a.  Application. After a mandatory pre-application conference with staff, an application shall be completed on a form prescribed by the city and submitted together with the following: 
i.  A boundary survey and lot split for the proposed division prepared by a professional land surveyor registered in the state according to F.S. Ch. 472. The proposed lot split shall show the intended division, legal descriptions, and acreage for the parent parcel and proposed lots. 
ii.  A statement indicating the location where water or sanitary sewer service is available to the property, and a statement indicating that all utility service shall be installed beneath the surface of the ground in accordance with section 30-8.2. 
b.  Upon receipt of a completed application, the several departments of the city shall review and provide comment. 
c.  If the proposed lot split meets the conditions of this section and otherwise complies with all applicable laws and ordinances, the city manager or designee shall approve the lot split by affixing his or her signature to the application form. 
d.  Upon approval of the lot split, the city shall record the split on the appropriate maps and documents in the city. In addition, the applicant shall file lot splits with the Alachua County Property Appraiser's office and in the public records of Alachua County. 
B.  Lot line adjustments. The lot lines of lots within an existing minor subdivision or existing lot split may be altered in accordance with the following requirements. A lot line adjustment shall only be used to adjust the lot lines of existing lots that were created by minor subdivision or lot split and shall not be used to further subdivide existing lots or create new lots. 
1.  An application for a lot line adjustment, signed by the owners of all lots that will be adjusted, shall be completed on a form prescribed by the city and submitted together with a surveyor's affidavit prepared by a professional land surveyor registered in the state that describes and depicts the adjustment in the lot lines and references the filing or recording information for the minor subdivision or lot split. 
2.  The applicant shall pay the same fee as for a lot split as specified in appendix A. 
3.  The application shall be reviewed by city staff to verify that the requested adjustment, if approved, will not create any nonconformity or violations of this chapter. If same are created, the application shall be denied. 
4.  The lot line adjustment, if approved by the city manager or designee, shall not be effective until the applicant records the surveyor's affidavit in the public records of Alachua County.  
Sec. 30-3.35. - Single lot replatting. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish an abbreviated process by which existing (improved) subdivision lots may be replatted without going through the standard process of platting or replatting subdivisions. 
B.  Applicability. Individual lots shown on recorded plats that depict easements or front, side, or rear building setback lines may be replatted under this section. The lot shall be improved (building or structure) and there shall be an encroachment upon one or more of the building setback lines or easements indicated on the recorded plat. 
C.  Review. 
1.  Application. An application, on a form prescribed by the city, shall be completed and submitted together with the following: 
a.  The proposed (final) plat of the lot. The record plat should be signed by all lot owners of record and mortgagees, if any. 
b.  A survey of the lot and improvements certified by a professional land surveyor registered in the state according to F.S. Ch. 472. The survey should be drawn and submitted on a drawing no less than 11 inches by 17 inches in size. 
c.  Copies of the existing recorded subdivision. 
d.  Title evidence that conforms to the requirements of F.S. § 177.041. 
e.  Taxes paid receipt. 
f.  Formal consent of the requisite number of owners of properties within the subdivision or from the authorized representative of the homeowners association of the subdivision or other authorized entity or individual affixed to or attached to the linen or film that will be recorded in the public records. 
g.  In the event there is an encroachment over, under, upon or through an easement, the release or extinguishment of the easement from applicable utilities. 
h.  An opinion from an attorney addressed to the City of Gainesville that the homeowners association, entity, or owners of property have the authority to amend the restrictions, plat lines, easements, as applicable, and that the consent has been properly executed by the appropriate parties. 
2.  Upon receipt of a completed application, the several departments of the city shall review and provide comment. 
3.  Upon the adoption of a resolution approving the replat of the single lot, the original linen or stable base film drawing of the replat shall be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court. It shall be recorded by the property owner requesting replat with all fees paid by that owner. Upon recording the replat, copies shall be submitted to the city in the form prescribed by the city.  
Sec. 30-3.36. - Minor subdivisions. 
A.  Minor subdivision standards. 
1.  Each proposed lot shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  All existing principal and accessory structures on each lot shall conform to the use and development standards of this chapter. 
3.  All lots have city water and sewer services available and constructed to the lot line of at least one lot, with appropriate easements granted to allow future water and sewer connections to each of the lots at the time each lot is developed. 
4.  If the proposed minor subdivision abuts a public right-of-way that does not conform to the provisions of section 30-6.6 B., as further specified in the Design Manual, the owner may be required to dedicate, at no cost to the city, one-half of the right-of-way width necessary to meet the minimum design requirements. If the proposed minor subdivision abuts both sides of a substandard street, one-half of the right-of-way width necessary to meet those minimum design requirements may be required from each side. The dedication of this right-of-way or any easements necessary shall be accomplished by a separate document. The applicant shall provide the city with legal descriptions of all easements or rights-of-way to be dedicated, and the city shall prepare and record the necessary documents as part of the approval process. 
5.  Each lot in the minor subdivision shall front for the entire required minimum lot width on a public street or an approved private street. Where there is no minimum lot width requirement, each lot shall abut a public street or approved private street for a width equivalent to the maximum driveway width required in section 30-6.20, plus any required turning radii area. Notwithstanding the above, the length of street frontage may be modified during minor subdivision review by the city manager or designee, based on the need to achieve the most efficient lot layout, access to and from the minor subdivision, operational needs of service vehicles, vehicular circulation and the health, welfare, and safety of the public. 
6.  The minor subdivision shall create vehicular and pedestrian access to serve the minor subdivision and improve gridded connectivity by connecting to surrounding existing streets and by including new streets within the minor subdivision so that the resulting blocks will not exceed a maximum block perimeter of 2,000 feet. Modifications to this requirement may be granted by the city manager or designee where the construction of a street is limited by existing conditions such as, but not limited to: 
a.  Access management standards; 
b.  Regulated environmental features; or 
c.  Public facilities, such as, but not limited to, stormwater facilities, parks, or schools. 
Alternatively, where the technical review committee determines that it is not possible to construct the streets that would be required to meet the block perimeter standard, the block perimeter shall be completed with the provision of pedestrian and bicycle paths or multi-use paths. The required streets or paths shall be constructed at the expense of the applicant according to the appropriate city standards as determined through the minor subdivision review process, but may be sited and configured in a manner so that the streets provide the most appropriate access to the minor subdivision and connectivity to the surrounding street network. Where a street or path is planned to provide a future connection to a street or path beyond the extent of the minor subdivision, the applicant shall provide for the connection of the street by stubbing out the road improvements as close as practicable to the boundary of the minor subdivision. 
7.  Each approved private street shall meet the following requirements in addition to the requirements in section 30-6.8: 
a.  An approved private street shall be paved to a minimum width of 12 feet wide for one-directional traffic flow and 18 feet wide for two-directional traffic flow. Alternatively, a determination shall be made by the city public works department, the city fire rescue department, and city solid waste department that the approved private street is adequate to support service vehicles as necessary to provide municipal services. 
b.  The structure and sub-base of the approved private street shall meet the standards set forth in the Design Manual. 
c.  Each approved private street shall be connected directly to a public street or to another approved private street. The method and type of connection shall be subject to approval by the city public works department in accordance with the standards set forth in the Design Manual. The private street serving the minor subdivision shall have a maximum length of 1,000 feet (measured by traversing the length of the approved private street from its farthest extent to the nearest public street). At the point the private street reaches 1,000 feet in length, the applicant shall provide one of the following, as determined by the city fire rescue department: appropriate emergency connection to the nearest public road, if such a connection can be made on property within the minor subdivision; or a turnaround sized to accommodate fire and rescue vehicles. 
d.  The owners of each approved private street shall provide necessary easements to the city for the purpose of providing municipal services. Alternatively, if the city finds the street serves a valid public purpose, the owners may gratuitously dedicate an approved private street for purposes of public right-of-way. 
e.  Lots created on an approved private street shall be designed to minimize the number of curb cuts onto the street. Shared driveway access shall be required of adjoining lots, except where an odd number of lots are created, in which case, one lot, as determined by the city public works department, may be allowed to have a separate driveway. 
8.  All proposed minor subdivisions shall meet the level of service standards in the Comprehensive Plan. Proof of meeting these standards shall exist in the form of a certificate of concurrency exemption, certificate of preliminary concurrency or certificate of conditional concurrency reservation. The approval of a nonresidential minor subdivision in no way reserves capacity for the purposes of concurrency. 
B.  Review. 
1.  Application. After a mandatory pre-application conference with staff, an application shall be completed on a form prescribed by the city and submitted together with the following: 
a.  A map of boundary survey and minor subdivision certified by a professional land surveyor registered in the state according to F.S. Ch. 472. The survey shall be drawn on a 24-inch by 36-inch linen or stable base film with a three-inch margin on the left for binding, and a one-half-inch margin on the other three sides. Additional information to be shown on the survey shall include but not be limited to: 
i.  The lot lines, dimensions, legal descriptions and acreages for each lot being created. 
ii.  The acreage of the total tract. 
iii.  A vicinity map showing the location of the survey in relationship to major thoroughfares. 
iv.  A note stating, "THIS IS NOT A RECORD PLAT." 
v.  A municipal approval statement, to be signed by the director of planning and development services, director of public works and general manager for Gainesville Regional Utilities or their designee, certifying that the minor subdivision conforms to all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city. 
vi  A statement to be signed by the clerk of the court, stating, "Received and filed as an unrecorded map in accordance with F.S. § 177.132." 
vii.  The minor subdivision book and page where the survey is to be filed. 
viii.  The exact location of all existing principal and accessory structures on each lot. If the existing structures obscure the alignment of the proposed lots they may be left off the map of minor subdivision and be submitted separately on a boundary survey of the parent parcel. Any shared use of said structures shall be clearly stated and shown as easements on the minor subdivision. 
b.  A statement indicating the location where water or sanitary sewer service is available to the property, and a statement indicating that all utility service shall be installed beneath the surface of the ground in accordance with section 30-8.2, and a statement indicating where stormwater management facilities are available to accommodate stormwater runoff of the proposed development. 
c.  If located on an approved private street, a signed consent (on the form provided by the city) from the owners of each approved private street that serves the minor subdivision. 
d.  Payment of fees as required by appendix A. 
2.  Upon receipt of a completed application, the several departments of the city shall review and provide comment. 
3.  Minor subdivisions that require any street, sidewalk, bikeway, bridge, drainage facility, screening wall or any other improvement required under this chapter may receive conditional approval but will not receive final approval or be filed with the clerk of the circuit court until all required improvements are fully constructed and approved by the city. No building permits may be issued for any of the lots until final approval is granted and the minor subdivision is filed. 
4.  If the proposed minor subdivision meets the conditions of this section and otherwise complies with all applicable laws and ordinances, the technical review committee shall approve the minor subdivision by affixing their signatures to the original document. 
5.  Upon approval of the minor subdivision, the original linen or stable base film drawing of the survey and any covenants, deed restrictions or other required documents shall be filed with the clerk of the circuit court as an unrecorded map, in accordance with F.S. § 177.132. It shall be filed by the subdivider with all fees paid by the subdivider. Upon filing of the approved minor subdivision, copies of the filed minor subdivision and any required documents shall be submitted to the city, in the form prescribed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 170831 , § 1, 4-5-18)  
Sec. 30-3.37. - Subdivisions. 
A.  Requirements. To effectuate the purpose of this article, every subdivision of land within the city shall be made in accordance with the requirements specified in this article. Such requirements include a pre-application conference; obtaining design plat approval; obtaining construction plan approval; obtaining final plat approval; constructing required public improvements; and supplying security for the construction and maintenance of such improvements. Proposed residential subdivisions shall meet the level of service standards adopted in the Comprehensive Plan. Proof of meeting these standards shall exist in the form of a certificate of concurrency exemption, certificate of preliminary or final concurrency (as applicable at the particular review stage), or certificate of conditional concurrency reservation. 
B.  Pre-application conference. 
1.  Required. Prior to the preparation of a design plat, the subdivider shall seek the advice of city staff to become familiar with the subdivision requirements, city policies and provisions of the Comprehensive Plan. The subdivider is encouraged to bring plans and data specified in this section so as to clearly show existing conditions of the site and its vicinity and the proposed layout of the subdivision. It is intended that the procedure will assist the subdivider in preparing a plat that will meet the requirements of this article. This procedure does not require a formal application or fee. 
2.  Prohibited or discouraged designs or improvements. As indicated in this article and further referenced in the Design Manual, certain practices, designs or improvements are discouraged or prohibited. If prohibited, a modification will be required in order for the same to be allowed. If discouraged, the same may be allowed by the city commission depending on a proper showing of necessity and the infeasibility of requiring the preferred practices, designs or improvements when applied to the particular circumstances involved. 
3.  Concept review (Sketch drawing). The applicant may submit an application for the optional concept subdivision review by city staff, with a sketch that contains the following: 
a.  Approximate tract boundaries. 
b.  Approximate location with respect to section lines. 
c.  Streets on and adjacent to the tract. 
d.  Proposed general street layout. 
e.  Environmental features including but not limited to significant topographical and physical features, regulated surface waters and wetlands, regulated natural and archaeological resources, creeks, uplands, lakes, wetlands, FEMA and community determined flood plains, and heritage trees. 
f.  Generalized existing vegetation, including areas of native forest where the land shows no evidence of prior use for agriculture. 
g.  Proposed general lot layout and the total number of lots. 
h.  Existing buildings on the property. 
i.  Land use and zoning designation of the subject property. 
j.  Generalized stormwater management plan. 
The review schedule for concept subdivision plans shall follow the same submittal and review schedule for development plans. As far as may be practicable on the basis of a sketch, the reviewer will, without prejudice to the city, advise the subdivider of the extent to which the proposed subdivision conforms to the standards of this chapter and other applicable ordinances or statutes, and will discuss possible plat modifications necessary to secure compliance and whether a traffic study will be required. 
C.  Design plat. 
1.  Generally. Prior to the recording of an approved final plat, or prior to the conditional approval of a final plat, clearing and grubbing of land, tree removal, and the construction of improvements is expressly prohibited. Following a pre-application conference, the requirements of this section become applicable and supersede any other regulation on tree removal. 
2.  Application. After a mandatory pre-application conference with staff, an application shall be completed on a form prescribed by the city and submitted together with the applicable fee. Each application shall include multiple copies of the design plat as necessary to facilitate the review process, prepared in accordance with the standards specified in this chapter and including all of the specifications set forth in this section. Proposed residential subdivisions shall meet the level of service standards adopted in the Comprehensive Plan. Proof of meeting these standards shall exist in the form of a certificate of concurrency exemption, certificate of preliminary concurrency or certificate of conditional concurrency reservation. 
3.  Fees. The fee required with an application for design plat approval shall be as set forth in appendix A. Such fees are required to defray the cost of filing the application, notifying interested parties, conducting investigations, and holding hearings on the design plat and final plat. 
4.  Developments of regional impact. For any subdivision that is presumed to be a development of regional impact as provided in F.S. Ch. 380 and Chapter 27F, Florida Administrative Code, additional copies of the design plat and a completed application for development approval shall be submitted for filing with the regional planning agency and the state land planning agency. 
5.  Specifications. 
a.  The design plat shall be drawn clearly and legibly at a scale of at least one inch equals 100 feet on linen or stable base film, using a sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches, reserving a three-inch binding margin on the left side and a one-inch margin on the other three sides. If more than one sheet is required, an index map relating each sheet to the entire subdivision shall be shown on the first sheet. The design plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor, signed and sealed before review, and shall contain the following information: 
i.  Proposed name of the subdivision. 
ii.  Name and registration number of surveyor. 
iii.  Date of survey approval, north point with bearing or azimuth reference clearly stated in the notes or legend, graphic and written scale, and space for revision dates. 
iv.  Vicinity map showing location with respect to major roads and acreage of the subdivision. 
v.  Boundary line of the tract by bearings and distances. 
vi.  Legal description of the tract to be subdivided. 
vii.  Preliminary layout including streets, alleys and easements with dimensions and proposed street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses, and designation of any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings. 
viii.  Total number of lots. 
ix.  The front building setback line for each lot. 
x.  An inscription stating "NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING." 
xi.  Sidewalks, on all streets, on both sides, and at least five feet wide. 
b.  The design plat shall also contain or be accompanied by: 
i.  The name, address, and telephone number of the property owner and of any agent of the property owner involved in the subdivision of the property. 
ii.  The exact locations, names, and widths of all existing streets, alleys, and recorded easements within and immediately adjoining the subdivided lands. 
iii.  The location and a general description of any utilities facility on the subdivision tract. 
iv.  The invert elevation of existing and proposed sewers. 
v.  The location and size of existing improvements on the subdivision tract. 
vi.  The zoning and land use plan designations of lands within the subdivision tract and of abutting property. 
vii.  Natural and manmade features on the subdivision tract, including creeks, ponds, lakes, sinkholes, wetlands, watercourses, municipal, and community wellfield management zones, major aquifer recharge areas, and lands within the floodplain and flood channel as shown on the community determined flood control maps and FEMA. 
viii.  The location of all major tree groupings and identification of all heritage trees by genus and species on the subdivision tract, a designation of which tree groupings and heritage trees are proposed to be removed, and identification by genus and species of all regulated trees located in or within 15 feet of any proposed right-of-way or utility improvement. A generalized landscaping plan that shows the locations of the required shade trees with the appropriate space allocations to meet code requirements for street trees, buffers, retention basins, and stormwater management facilities. The design plat and the final plat shall include a statement that all champion and high quality heritage trees shall be preserved or mitigated in accordance with the requirements of this code. 
ix.  Stormwater management plan in accordance with this chapter and the Design Manual. 
x.  A soil survey map. 
xi.  A generalized statement outlining, as far as is known, the subsurface conditions of the subdivision tract, including subsurface soil, rock, and groundwater conditions, the location and results of any soil permeability tests, the location of any underground storage tanks, and the location and extent of any muck pockets. 
xii.  A topographic map of the subdivision tract and a minimum of 100 feet or more of the surrounding area as required to determine the offsite drainage and any impacts caused by or related to the offsite drainage. The map shall be prepared by a land surveyor, with maximum intervals of one foot where overall slopes are no more than two percent, two feet where slopes are between two and ten percent, and five feet where slopes are ten percent or greater based on North American Vertical Datum, 1988. 
xiii.  A general location map showing the relationship of the subdivision tract to such external facilities as streets, residential area, commercial facilities, and recreation or open space areas, and greenways, within one mile of the tract. 
xiv.  A plan for the elimination and future control of invasive non-native plant species from the site. The non-native removal shall be completed as specified in the management plan prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy and yearly inspections for three years to assure that infested areas have remained at less than ten percent of the initial population. 
c.  If the proposed subdivision contains land located within the floodplain as shown on the community determined flood control maps and FEMA maps, the subdivider shall be required to submit topographic information for areas adjoining sides of the channel, cross sections for land to be occupied by the proposed development, high water information, boundaries of the land within the floodplain and other pertinent information. 
d.  If the proposed subdivision includes regulated surface waters or wetlands, or regulated natural and archaeological resources, the subdivider shall be required to submit the following additional information for those areas designated: 
i.  A design plat showing buffer distances between the areas to be developed and regulated surface waters and wetlands, and regulated natural and archaeological resources. 
ii.  Square footage and percent of total subdivision tract to consist of impervious surface. 
iii.  A description of strategies to protect or restore environmental features on the subdivision tract. 
iv.  Projected on-site and off-site water quality impacts to outstanding Florida waters (OFW) that may result from the proposed subdivision. 
v.  Any required set-aside, conservation management area, or mitigation area. 
6.  Officials' examination. 
a.  The design plat shall be reviewed and commented on by the technical review committee and other applicable departments and agencies. 
b.  The public works director or designee shall examine the design plat to determine if the application conforms to criteria for general engineering, traffic stormwater management, flood plains and maintenance easement requirements. 
c.  The general manager for utilities or designee shall examine and check the design plat for needed utility easements. 
d.  The planning and development services department shall, at the development review board and city commission hearings on the design plat, report the findings and recommendations of the reviewing officials and county, state, and federal agencies, together with an analysis of the conformance and nonconformance of the design plat to the provisions of this chapter and other applicable requirements. 
7.  Development review board review. 
a.  At a scheduled public meeting, the development review board will receive reports on and review the design plat to determine its conformance with all applicable requirements. 
b.  The development review board review shall include consideration of staff findings and evidence and testimony from the general public. The board shall determine if the proposed subdivision is in conformity with the general goals and objectives of the city with respect to the Comprehensive Plan; the city's official roadway map; existing zoning requirements, including amendments thereto; policies and plans established by the city with respect to neighborhoods, lake levels, water supply, maintenance of the tree canopy levels identified in the Comprehensive Plan, control of invasive non-native plant species, protecting environmental features, provision for emergency access, consideration of pedestrian, bicycle and transit access and greenway connections, waste disposal and other essential utilities; the overall stormwater management plan including landscaping of stormwater management basins; and policies for development in any special improvement and redevelopment districts. Particular attention shall be given to the arrangement, location, and width of streets, the provision of high quality shade trees along the streets, their relation to the topography of the land, water supply, sewage disposal, stormwater management, lot sizes and arrangement, and the present or future development of abutting property. 
c.  The board may approve the design plat as presented if found to be in compliance, require modifications, or disapprove the plat. Approval of the design plat, subject to conditions, revisions and modifications as stipulated by the board, shall constitute conditional board approval of the subdivision as to the character and intensity of development and the general layout and approximate dimensions of streets, lots and other proposed features. If the design plat is disapproved, the Development Review Board shall indicate the reasons therefor. 
8.  City commission review. 
a.  Within 60 calendar days after development review board approval, the subdivider shall file with the city at least three copies of the design plat, including any modifications imposed by the development review board. If the subdivider does not file the design plat within the prescribed time period, no preliminary development order shall be issued unless an extension of time is requested in writing prior to the expiration of that period and is granted by the city commission. In granting an extension, the city commission may attach such other restrictions or conditions as the commission deems appropriate to serve the public interest. In the case of residential subdivisions, the city commission may vote to grant extensions for design plat review of up to six months only and only if the subdivider possesses a valid, unexpired certificate of concurrency exemption, certificate of preliminary concurrency or certificate of conditional concurrency reservation, as appropriate. Further extensions for city commission review of design plats for residential subdivisions shall require a new concurrency review. 
b.  The city commission shall review the recommended design plat and consider findings made by the development review board and staff. The city commission shall determine if the proposed subdivision is in conformity with the general goals and objectives of the city with respect to the Comprehensive Plan; existing zoning requirements, including all amendments thereto; policies and plans established by the city with respect to neighborhoods, lake levels, water supply, sustaining the urban forest, protecting environmental features, provision for emergency access, consideration of pedestrian, bicycle, vehicle, and transit access and greenway connections, waste disposal and other essential utilities; the overall stormwater management plan; and policies for development in any special improvement and redevelopment districts. Particular attention shall be given to the arrangement, location, function, and width of streets, their consistency with the goal of developing a multimodal transportation network and providing sufficient space for street trees both above and below ground, their interaction with the overall transportation system and relation to the topography of the land, water supply, sewage disposal, stormwater management, lot sizes and arrangement, and the present or future development of abutting property. 
c.  The commission may approve the design plat as presented if found to be in compliance, require modifications, or disapprove the design plat if it is not in compliance. If disapproved, the design plat shall be redesigned before resubmission for approval. 
d.  Effect of approval. Approval of the design plat by the city commission is a preliminary development order. It shall not constitute acceptance of a final plat but shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. The preliminary development order and the associated design plat shall expire and be of no further effect 12 months from the date of approval unless either a timely final plat is filed for approval or the time is extended with appropriate conditions by the city commission prior to expiration; otherwise, the subdivider shall reapply for design plat approval in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In the case of residential subdivisions, the city commission may vote to grant extensions of up to six months only, and only if all the concurrency management requirements of this chapter can be met and if the extension would not be in conflict with any other ordinance of the city. The approval of nonresidential subdivisions in no way reserves capacity for the purposes of concurrency. This provision regarding the effect of approval and expiration of a design plat shall not be subject to a variance or otherwise superseded by any ordinance or regulation of the city. 
D.  Construction plans. 
1.  Preparation. Following city commission approval of the design plat, the subdivider shall submit construction plans and specifications for all subdivision improvements required in accordance with this article. The construction plans shall be prepared by an engineer registered in the state in conformance with this article, the Design Manual, and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
Plans for the proposed improvements and a boundary survey shall be required. The improvement plans shall show the proposed locations, sizes, types, grades, and general design features of each facility, and shall be based upon reliable field data. These drawings shall include, at a minimum, a topographic map, stormwater management plan, a landscape plan, an invasive exotic plant control plan, and construction drawings showing street profiles, street cross sections, and water supply, sewer and stormwater management as specified by the public works department and Gainesville Regional Utilities and all champion and heritage trees identified for preservation or removal, with protective barricades drawn to scale. The landscape plan shall show all buffers and stormwater management areas as well as the locations and specifications for street trees. 
2.  Review. The subdivider shall submit multiple sets of plans as necessary to facilitate review by the city in accordance with development review. The construction plans shall be approved if they are consistent with the approved design plat and comply with all standards and specifications. If the construction plans are not consistent with the design plat as approved by the city commission or do not comply with all standards and specifications, the city shall issue either: 
a.  Conditional approval, subject to any necessary modifications that shall be indicated on the plans or attached to them in writing; or 
b.  Disapproval of the construction plans or any portion thereof, indicating in writing the reasons for the disapproval. The subdivider shall be responsible for timely resubmittal of acceptable plans within 12 months from the date of approval of the preliminary development order. 
E.  Final plat. 
1.  Generally. The final plat shall conform to the design plat as approved by the city commission and shall incorporate all modifications and revisions specified in the approval, except shifts in stormwater and roadway facilities that do not change lot layout may deviate from the design plat with approval from the city manager or designee. 
2.  Application. After approval of the design plat and construction plans, the final plat and other information required in this section shall be submitted in the correct form as prescribed by the city. The following shall be submitted for the final plat review: 
a.  The original stable base film tracing of the final plat prepared in accordance with the requirements of this article, F.S. Ch. 177, and any other applicable statutes and ordinances. 
b.  A title opinion of an attorney at law licensed in Florida or a certification by an abstractor or title company as required by F.S. Ch. 177. 
c.  Applicable public improvement security documents. 
d.  An additional fee as set forth in appendix A to defray the expense of investigating, holding hearings and acting upon the final plat. 
e.  An additional fee as set forth in appendix A to defray the expenses of inspection of roadway and drainage facilities by the city manager or designee. 
3.  Specifications. The final plat shall be legibly drawn at a scale of at least one inch equals 100 feet using a sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches, reserving a three-inch binding margin on the left-hand side and a one-inch margin on the other three sides. If more than one sheet is required, an index map relating each sheet to the entire subdivision shall be shown on the first sheet. The final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor in accordance with and include all of the information required by F.S. Ch. 177. The final plat shall also contain: 
a.  The exact boundary line of the tract. 
b.  A vicinity map showing the location and acreage of the lands subdivided. 
c.  The location of all creeks, ponds, lakes, sinkholes, wetlands, and watercourses within the subdivided lands and any part of the lands within the flood channel or floodplain as shown on the city's flood control maps adopted pursuant to this chapter as of the date of final plat submission. 
d.  The front building setback line for each lot. 
e.  Any subdivision boundary that is within a half-mile radius of any horizontal geodetic control monument established by the county control densification survey or National Geodetic Survey Horizontal or Vertical Control Network bearing confirmed coordinate values related to the 1983 and the 1990 North American Datum Adjustment shall conform to the following requirements: 
i.  All final plats shall identify all horizontal and vertical geodetic control monuments as described above located within 500 feet of the proposed plat boundary. 
ii.  All plats shall have a minimum of three permanent reference monuments per 40 acres of platted subdivision, which shall have state plane coordinates established from the 1983 and the 1990 North American Datum Adjustment delineated on the plat and shall be tied directly to the plat boundaries. 
iii.  All plats shall have a minimum of two benchmarks located and described with the plat that shall be projected from North American Vertical Datum, 1988, or later. 
iv.  The basis of bearings for all plats shall be grid north as established from the county control densification survey and state plane coordinate system or National Geodetic Survey Horizontal Control Network. 
v.  The state plane coordinates and bearing basis shall be established by conducting a self-closing traverse between two horizontal geodetic control monuments. Each traverse shall meet or exceed third order class one standards of accuracy as described in the most recent version of the Standards and Specification for Geodetic Control Network (SSGCN), as set forth by the Federal Geodetic Control Committee. When a development contains multiple units, a major control traverse tied to two horizontal geodetic control monuments may be submitted with the first phase, with subsequent units being tied to this control traverse. 
vi.  A traverse sheet identifying the field angles, permanent reference points, distances and the adjustments shall be submitted on 8½-inch by 11-inch paper with the plat submitted for final development review. Copies of the field notes shall also be submitted. All documents shall be signed and sealed by a surveyor. 
vii.  All geodetic monuments, including traverse stations set for the county control densification survey, that fall within the limits of a development shall be shown on the development plan and construction plans. All geodetic monuments that are in danger of being disturbed or destroyed shall be referenced by a surveyor prior to the start of construction and reset by a surveyor after the construction is complete. If it is not practical to reset the geodetic monument in its original position, an off-set monument may, with the approval of the city manager or designee, be set. The referencing and resetting of a geodetic monument shall be in accordance with the specifications set forth in Article 2.1 of the SSGCN. Traverse stations shall require an accuracy of third order class one and primary stations and their Azimuth marks shall require second order class one accuracy standards. The surveyor who resets the geodetic monument shall be responsible for the preparation and submittal of all documents necessary for the notification of the state department of environmental protection, city engineer, the county property appraiser's office and any other appropriate government agency. Notification shall include, but not be limited to, a complete description of the geodetic monument with all its accessories, an accurate how-to-reach description, the date of last station recovery, the name of the person recovering monumentation, and the address of the recovery party. This work shall be performed prior to the final inspection and/or acceptance of the development. 
viii.  Any person who disturbs or destroys a geodetic monument shall be fully responsible for the expense of having the monument reset by a surveyor. The city may, at the expense of the person responsible for disturbing or destroying the monument, have a surveyor reset the geodetic monument in accordance with the specifications set forth in Article 2.1 of the SSGCN. 
ix.  For purposes of this section, a surveyor means a person who is registered to engage in the practice of surveying and mapping under F.S. Ch. 472. 
4.  Review. 
a.  Staff review. Prior to final plat approval, city staff and the city attorney's office shall review the proposed plat and supporting documents. If the proposed plat and supporting documents meet the technical requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws and ordinances, the departments shall approve the plat as to the requirements within their areas of responsibility. 
b.  City commission review. If the final plat is consistent with the design plat as approved by the city commission, meets all requirements of this chapter, and otherwise complies with all applicable laws and ordinances, it shall be forwarded to the city commission for final consideration. Upon approval, the final plat shall bear certification of the approval by the clerk of the city commission. 
5.  Recording. Upon approval of the final plat by the city commission, the original linen or stable base film tracing of the final plat, any required covenants or deed restrictions, and the declaration of condominium if the subdivision is a condominium development, shall be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court by the subdivider with all recording fees paid by the subdivider within 15 calendar days from the date the final plat has been returned to the subdivider by city staff. Recording the approved final plat shall constitute a final development order. Within 15 calendar days from the date of recording, three Mylar copies of the recorded plat and three paper copies of the recorded plat signed and sealed by the clerk of the circuit court shall be submitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 170831 , § 2, 4-5-18)  
Sec. 30-3.38. - Subdivision improvements. 
A.  Generally. 
1.  Within 12 months after final plat approval, the subdivider shall construct the subdivision improvements required by this section, other applicable ordinances and statutes, and such additional standards and specifications as may be adopted from time to time by the city commission. 
2.  An engineer shall design the installation of all streets, sidewalks, bikeways, drainage structures, bridges, bulkheads, and water and sewer facilities. 
B.  Monuments. 
1.  Permanent reference monuments (PRM's) and permanent control points (PCP's), as defined in F.S. Ch. 177, shall be placed as required by F.S. Ch. 177. PRM's shall be set in the ground so that the upper tip is flush with or no more than one foot below the finish grade. 
2.  All lot corners shall be designated with a permanent marker such as an iron rod, iron pipe or concrete monument. 
3.  The land surveyor shall, within one year after city commission approval of the final plat, including conditional approval if applicable, certify that the above-required monuments have been set and the dates they were set. 
C.  Inspection of improvements. 
1.  The directors of public works and Gainesville Regional Utilities shall be authorized to inspect required subdivision improvements during construction to ensure that the work is in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. If any substantial changes are required in the approved plans or specifications during construction, the changes shall be submitted for approval of the directors of public works and Gainesville Regional Utilities as applicable. 
2.  The subdivider shall retain a reputable recognized commercial laboratory that shall certify all materials and perform and certify all required density, LBR, concrete or other tests as may be required by the city when reasonably necessary to ensure that all improvements are constructed as per approved plans and specifications. 
D.  Acceptance for maintenance. 
1.  Prior to acceptance for maintenance by the city, the subdivider shall notify the Gainesville Regional Utilities in writing that all required subdivision improvements have been completed. Upon receipt of notice from the subdivider, the Directors of Public Works and Gainesville Regional Utilities will make an inspection of the construction work. If work is found to be satisfactorily completed, the city will accept the improvements for maintenance. 
2.  Acceptance for maintenance is intended to mean normal maintenance functions as routinely performed by the city. It shall not include removal of soil accumulations on streets caused by excessive erosion from adjacent lots, either prior to or during building construction within the subdivision. It shall not include damage to any improvements caused by private construction or private utility vehicles within the one-year maintenance period. All decisions regarding abnormal damage or maintenance shall be made by the public works department or Gainesville Regional Utilities.  
Sec. 30-3.39. - Security for subdivision improvements. 
A.  Construction security. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no final plat of any subdivision shall be approved by the city unless security is filed with the city to secure the construction and completion of the required subdivision improvements in a satisfactory manner within 12 months from the date of final plat approval. If the subdivider fails to construct and complete the required subdivision improvements within the required time frame, the city shall use the security to complete the required subdivision improvements. In determining the cost of the improvements for which security is required, improvements otherwise covered by a separate bond or security arrangement between the subdivider and the city and those improvements already constructed and approved by the director of public works shall not be included. The form of security shall be one of the following: 
1.  Surety bond. A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state with a rating of not lower or less than A-XII as rated by A.M. Best Company, Inc., an independent national rating service for surety companies. The surety bond shall be enforceable by and payable to the city in a sum at least equal to 120 percent of the total cost of the required subdivision improvements provided in the subdivision as estimated by the subdivider's engineer and verified and approved by the directors of public works and Gainesville Regional Utilities. The surety bond shall be first approved by the city attorney as to form and legality prior to its submission with the proposed final plat to the city commission for approval and shall be executed by both the subdivider and the party or parties with whom the subdivider has contracted to perform the work and construct the improvements. 
2.  Cash deposit. A cash deposit with the city in the same amount that would be required for the surety bond, which cash shall be deposited with the director of management and budget of the city and held under the same conditions as are required in a surety bond. Such deposit will be held for the developer and, in the event of any nonperformance by the developer as required by the ordinances of the city, will be used by the city to complete the required subdivision improvements. During construction, upon the request of the subdivider, and upon inspection and approval of construction and costs thereof by the city, the city shall refund to the subdivider an amount equal to the approved costs for such improvements; provided, at no time shall the balance of the cash deposit with the city be reduced to less than 30 percent of the estimated costs of the subdivision improvements until all the subdivision improvements are completed and so certified to by the city. Interest earned on all such cash deposits with the city shall be for the account and to the credit of the person or persons making such deposit. 
3.  Letter of credit. Deposit with the city and place with the city manager or designee an irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit by a Florida bank. The letter of credit shall be for an amount equal to 120 percent of the estimated costs of the required subdivision improvements. The letter of credit shall remain with the city as a valid letter of credit until the city is satisfied that all construction of required subdivision improvements has been completed in accordance with plans and specifications and that all other provisions of this chapter relating thereto have been fully complied with. 
4.  Construction loan agreement. 
a.  Deposit with the city a construction loan agreement in the amount of at least 120 percent of the estimated cost of the required subdivision improvements, which agreement shall be entered into by a recognized lending institution with the subdivider for the benefit of and satisfactory to the city, providing that: 
i.  The lending institution will make payments on the proceeds of the loan to the city if the subdivision improvements are not completed and approved by the city within the time required; 
ii.  No payments of proceeds of the portion of the loan reserved for improvements shall be made to anyone until the city has approved the payment, which approval will be given if work is accomplished in accordance with approved plans and specifications and ordinances of the city; and 
iii.  At no time will the loan proceeds be expended by that lending institution in excess of 90 percent of the estimated costs of the required subdivision improvements until all the improvements are completed and so certified to by the city. 
b.  Deposit with the city a construction loan agreement in the amount of at least 100 percent of the estimated cost of the required subdivision improvements, which agreement otherwise meets the requirements of Subsection a. above, and an unconditional guaranty from the subdivider in the amount of at least 20 percent of the estimated cost of the required subdivision improvements that meets the following requirements: 
i.  Absolutely and unconditionally, jointly and severally, guarantees to the city the full and prompt payment of the amount set forth in the guaranty that will be used by the city to complete the required subdivision improvements, and the complete performance of the subdividers of all conditions and requirements to be performed by the subdivider under the City Code; 
ii.  Unconditionally, jointly and severally, agrees to pay all reasonable expenses and charges, legal fees and other fees (including attorney's fees and costs, including court costs at trial, appeal or bankruptcy proceeding) paid or incurred by the city in enforcing the unconditional guaranty; 
iii.  Jointly and severally agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its elected and appointed officers, employees, and agents from any loss suffered or occasioned by the failure of the subdivider to satisfy its obligations to third parties arising out of the subdivision of the land; 
iv.  Binds the guarantors and their successors and assigns, and inures to the benefit of the city; and 
v.  Makes such other representations and warranties requested by the city manager or designee to protect the interests of the city. 
5.  Combination. Use a combination of the allowable security types as provided for in this section in order to reach the total of 120 percent of estimated costs of required subdivision improvements. 
B.  Conditional final plat. 
1.  In lieu of the security requirements of this section, the city commission may approve a conditional final plat, where approval of the plat is conditioned on the subdivider proceeding with installation of the required subdivision improvements and fully completing the improvements, in full accordance with approved plans and specifications and the ordinances of the city, within two years of the date of conditional final plat approval. The plat shall not be recorded, but shall be retained by the clerk of the commission until the city manager shall have certified that all required subdivision improvements have been completed in accordance with approved plans and specifications and ordinances of the city and the same has been approved by the city commission. Upon certification by the city manager and upon proof by title insurance or other similar assurance to the satisfaction of the city that there are no liens or possibilities of liens on the subdivision improvements or on the property to be dedicated to the public, and that the dedicator has clear fee title thereto, the city shall approve the final plat and accept the dedication of the public right-of-way easements, and other dedicated portions as previously shown on the prior approved plat as set out in this chapter, and the subdivider shall record the plat and provide copies as specified in section 30-3.37. 
2.  No building permits shall be issued on property within the boundaries of the subdivision plat until the plat shall have been approved and accepted by the city commission and placed on record in the public records of the county. 
3.  During construction the subdivider may, upon the posting of a bond or other such security for the cost of the uncompleted improvements, have a prior conditional approval converted to final approval and acceptance provided that all other requirements and conditions of this chapter applicable to final plat acceptance have been met. 
C.  Maintenance security. 
1.  Under any arrangement for subdivision development within the city, the subdivider is obligated to the city for any necessary repair of all required subdivision improvements under the ordinances of the city for the period of one year following the date the city accepted the improvements for maintenance. During the one-year period, the subdivider shall provide the city with security in a form set forth in this section in an amount equal to 15 percent of the costs of the required subdivision improvements, which may be used by the city to pay the costs of any necessary repairs and maintenance on the subdivision improvements during the one-year period. 
2.  In those developments where lands and improvements remain under private common ownership, instruments relating to the use and maintenance of such areas and improvements shall be required. The city may require the establishment of an appropriate entity and the execution and recording of any appropriate legal instrument necessary to ensure the maintenance, protection, and preservation of common areas designated on the plat. The title to all land and improvements that are shown on the plat as common areas, private roads, etc., shall be held and continue to be held so as to ensure their proper maintenance and care and to permit and ensure their continued use as intended in the approved plat. The instruments shall include means legally enforceable by the city, the subdivider and his/her successors to guarantee payment of such sums of money as are necessary for the maintenance; and all conveyances or transfers of any interest in any of the property of the development shall be legally encumbered of record so as to guarantee the continued use of the common areas and roads as contemplated by the plat and the guarantee of the payment of the cost of the maintenance.  
Sec. 30-3.40. - Enforcement. 
A.  Generally. No subdivision shall be made, platted or recorded, nor any building permit issued on subdivided lands, unless the subdivision meets all the requirements of this chapter and has been approved in accordance with the requirements provided in this chapter. The city or any aggrieved person may have recourse to such remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this chapter, and any rules and regulations adopted under this chapter. 
B.  Building permits and certificates of occupancy. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any lot or parcel of land subject to the provisions of this chapter, except as follows: 
1.  If the lot or parcel is within a subdivision for which a final plat has been approved by the city commission and recorded and the required subdivision improvements have been installed and accepted for maintenance by the city, both a building permit and a certificate of occupancy may be issued. 
2.  If the lot or parcel is within a subdivision for which a final plat has been approved by the city commission and recorded and security for the required subdivision improvements has been provided by the developer in accordance with this division, a building permit may be issued, but no certificate of occupancy may be issued unless the city manager determines that all required subdivision improvements serving such lot or parcel have been satisfactorily completed and that reasonable ingress and egress can be provided to the lot or parcel and the remaining portions of the subdivision until all improvements are complete and the required maintenance security is received and approved. 
3.  If the lot or parcel is within a minor subdivision that has been approved by the director of planning and development services, city engineer, city traffic engineer and deputy manager for utilities (or their designees) in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  If the lot or parcel is part of a legal lot split that has been approved by the city manager or designee in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
5.  If the lot or parcel is a nonconforming lot, then as provided in article X. 
C.  Violations. Any person who, in connection with a subdivision of lands, shall do or authorize any clearing and grubbing, or shall lay out, construct, open, or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, or drainage structure, or shall erect any building or transfer title to any land or building, without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter, or who performs any of such actions contrary to the terms of an approved subdivision plat, or who otherwise violates this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.  
DIVISION 8. - RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATIONS 
 
Sec. 30-3.41. - Right-of-way vacations. 
A.  Review procedures. 
1.  Application. An application to vacate a public right-of-way may be submitted by either the city commission or by all the owners of land abutting the subject right-of-way. 
2.  Board review. Applications to vacate a public right-of-way shall be reviewed by the city plan board and the city commission according to the criteria provided in this section, with notice of the board hearings provided in accordance with law and this article. The city plan board's review shall be a recommendation to the city commission. Prior to the public hearing before the city plan board, the application shall be reviewed by city staff in accordance with the development plan review process as stated in this article. 
B.  Review criteria. Rights-of-way may only be vacated by the city commission upon its finding that the criteria in both 1. and 2. as provided below have been met: 
1.  The public right-of-way no longer serves a public purpose and the vacation of the public right-of-way is in the public interest, which shall be based on a consideration of the following: 
a.  Whether the public benefits from the use of the subject right-of-way as part of the city street system; 
b.  Whether the proposed action is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 
c.  Whether the proposed vacation is consistent with the minimum block size requirements and other applicable street connectivity standards; 
d.  Whether the proposed action would deny access to private property; 
e.  The effect of the proposed action upon public safety; 
f.  The effect of the proposed action upon the safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic; 
g.  The effect of the proposed action upon the provision of municipal services including, but not limited to, emergency service and waste removal; 
h.  The necessity to relocate utilities both public and private; and 
i.  The effect of the proposed action on the design and character of the area. 
2.  If the public right-of-way is a street, the city shall not vacate the right-of-way except if the following additional criteria are met: 
a.  The loss of the street will not foreclose reasonably foreseeable future bicycle/pedestrian use; 
b.  The loss of the street will not foreclose non-motorized access to adjacent land uses or transit stops; 
c.  The loss of the street is necessary for the construction of a high density, mixed-use project containing both residential and non-residential uses or creating close proximity of residential and non-residential uses; and 
d.  There is no reasonably foreseeable need for any type of transportation corridor for the area.  
DIVISION 9. - DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW 
 
Sec. 30-3.42. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to promote harmonious, functional relationships among the various elements within any development such as the location of activities, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, and visual form. Development plan review is intended to permit maximum flexibility in reviewing each plan on its merits and encourage variety and innovation within the intent and purpose specified for each zoning district and the minimum requirements specified in the Code of Ordinances.  
Sec. 30-3.43. - Generally. 
A.  This division sets forth the application and review procedures required for obtaining development orders and certain types of permits. Development activity may be undertaken only when the activity is authorized by a final development order and any required development permits are issued by the city. A final development order shall be issued only when all applicable procedures, inspections, and reviews have been completed as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Development orders are transferable. However, so long as the land or structure or any portion thereof covered under the site development order continues to be used for the purposes for which it was issued, then no person (including successors and assigns of the person who obtained the site development order) may make use of the land except in accordance with the conditions and requirements of the site development order. The provisions of the site development order run with and burden the real property to which it relates until release or amended in accordance with formal action of the city.  
Sec. 30-3.44. - Exemptions. 
The following development activities do not require development review under this article: 
A.  Signs. New signs and modifications or removal of existing signs that are authorized by a sign permit issued by the city. 
B.  Removal of regulated trees. The removal of regulated trees that is authorized by a tree removal permit issued by the city and is not associated with a development plan.  
Sec. 30-3.45. - Levels of development review. 
All development shall require rapid, intermediate, or major development review in accordance with the thresholds set forth in the table below. Any development activity below the thresholds identified for rapid review shall be reviewed in conjunction with a building permit application. Development that includes components within different thresholds shall be reviewed as one submittal in accordance with the highest threshold that is triggered by the development. 
Table III-2. Levels of development review. 
	RAPID 	INTERMEDIATE 	MAJOR 
Residential 	Developments of 3 to 10 multiple-family dwelling units. 	Developments of 11 to 99 multiple-family dwelling units. 	Developments of 100 or more multiple-family dwelling units. 
Non-residential 	New construction or expansions of 1,001 and up to 10,000 square feet of building area. 	New construction or expansions of 10,001 to 50,000 square feet of building area. 	New construction or expansions over 50,001 square feet of building area. 
Parking; other impervious areas; construction activity 	Parking areas that include 8—40 new parking spaces. Impervious areas: 1,000—20,000 square feet. Excavation, filling, or removal of more than 200 cubic yards of material for the purpose of development. 	Parking areas that include 41—100 new parking spaces. Impervious areas: 20,001—50,000 square feet. 	Parking areas that include more than 100 new parking spaces. Impervious areas: More than 50,000 square feet. 
 
Notes to Table: 
Development plan review by the appropriate board shall be required when the development includes one or more requests for a variance per this article. 
Table III-3. Summary of development review process. 
	RAPID 	INTERMEDIATE AND MAJOR 	MASTER PLAN 
First-step meeting 	Required. 	Required. 	Required. 
Neighborhood workshop 	Not required. 	Required. 	Required. 
Technical review committee (TRC) 	Required. 	Required. 	Required. 
Board review 	Required if requesting a variance. 	Required if requesting a variance. 	Required if requesting a variance. 
Final TRC review 	Required if either TRC or board, as applicable, issued applicant a preliminary development order. 	Required if either TRC or board, as applicable, issued applicant a preliminary development order. 	Required if either TRC or board, as applicable, issued applicant a preliminary development order. 
  
Sec. 30-3.46. - Review criteria. 
An application for a development plan or amendment to any previously approved development plan may be approved only if the application meets both of the following criteria: 
A.  The plan meets submittal requirements of the Land Development Code, including payment of fees, and complies with submittal schedules to provide adequate notice and review; and 
B.  The proposed development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and complies with the Comprehensive Plan, the Land Development Code, and other applicable regulations.  
Sec. 30-3.47. - Review procedures. 
A.  First-Step meeting. Prior to filing an application for development plan review, the applicant shall attend a first-step meeting to discuss the development review process, code requirements, and to confer with staff about the development process. Comments made by staff at a first-step meeting are made solely for preliminary informational purposes and shall not be construed as an approval or denial or agreement to approve or deny any development order. 
B.  Application. A completed application, on the form provided by the city, shall be signed and notarized by all owners of the property and by any agents of the owners. Applicable fees, attachments, and other information as deemed necessary by the city shall be submitted as part of the application. The city manager or designee shall determine completeness based on level of review required, the nature of the proposed development and other requirements as set forth in this chapter, the Comprehensive Plan, and other city requirements deemed necessary to provide a professional and complete review and evaluation of the application. 
C.  Review. If the application is determined to be complete, the application and associated materials shall be reviewed according to this section. 
1.  Board review not required. The technical review committee shall review the application in accordance with the review criteria provided in this division and provide comments, findings, and conclusions supporting the committee's final decision, which may include one of the following: 
a.  Find that all requirements of the review criteria provided in this division have been met and issue a final development order; 
b.  Find that all requirements of the review criteria provided in this division can be met with conditions specified in writing and issue a preliminary development order, which requires final technical review committee review as provided in this section; or 
c.  Deny the application based upon a determination that the proposed development, even with reasonable modifications and conditions, does not meet the review criteria set forth in this division. 
2.  Board review required. If board review is required, the Technical Review Committee shall prepare a recommendation to the board to: 1) approve; 2) approve with specified conditions; or 3) deny based upon a determination that the proposed development, even with reasonable modifications and conditions, does not meet the review criteria set forth in this division. The reviewing board shall consider the recommendation of the technical review committee and other relevant information pertaining to the application and, using the review criteria provided in this division, shall decide one of the following: 
a.  Find that all requirements of the review criteria provided in this division have been met and issue a final development order; 
b.  Find that all requirements of the review criteria provided in this division can be met with conditions specified in writing and issue a preliminary development order, which requires final technical review committee review as provided in this section; or 
c.  Deny the application based upon a determination that the proposed development, even with reasonable modifications and conditions, does not meet the review criteria set forth in this division. 
3.  Final review by technical review committee. If the applicant was issued a preliminary development order, as opposed to a final development order, the applicant shall timely submit all materials and information as deemed necessary by the city for final review. Upon receipt of a complete application, as determined by the city manager or designee, the technical review committee shall review the application in accordance with the review criteria provided in this division and: 
a.  Find that all requirements of the review criteria and the preliminary development order have been met and issue a final development order; 
b.  Inform the applicant in writing of the changes necessary for the development to comply with the requirements of the review criteria and the preliminary development order; or 
c.  Find that the plan as submitted fails to meet the requirements of the review criteria or the preliminary development order and not issue a final development order. 
D.  Preliminary development orders. 
1.  A preliminary development order shall contain the following: 
a.  An approved development plan, with a listing of conditions and modifications, if required, in order for a final development order to be issued. The modifications shall be described in sufficient detail and exactness to inform the applicant to amend the plan accordingly. However, the failure to list all requirements of this chapter and other regulations of the city shall not relieve the applicant from complying with such requirements and regulations at the time of issuance of a final development order. 
b.  Notice that the preliminary development order does not constitute a final development order and that subsequently adopted ordinances, regulations, and laws may require additional amendments to the proposal. 
c.  An initial determination of concurrency. 
2.  A preliminary development order shall be effective for six months from the date of approval. During this six-month period, the applicant shall seek final development approval. At the request of the applicant and for good cause shown, the reviewing authority may extend the period for obtaining final development order approval for a period of up to 12 months from the date of approval of the preliminary development order. 
E.  Final development orders. 
1.  A final development order shall contain the following: 
a.  An approved development plan. 
b.  A certificate of final concurrency. 
c.  The expiration date for the final development order. A final development order shall remain valid only if development commences and continues pursuant to an active building permit to completion with due diligence and in good faith according to the terms and conditions of approval. 
2.  A final development order shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval unless otherwise specified in the order.  
Sec. 30-3.48. - Amendments to approved development plans. 
After a final development order has been issued, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter, or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of the order without first obtaining an amendment to the approved development order. Amendment of the development plan shall be made in accordance with the process for development review.  
Sec. 30-3.49. - Master plans. 
A.  Purpose. Master plan review is an optional step for projects that fall within the intermediate or major level of development review. A master plan is intended to provide for large area planning for phased developments. The intent of the master plan is to identify internal and external connectivity, regulated natural and archeological resources, and developable areas. 
B.  Review and effect. Master plans are reviewed by the technical review committee in accordance with the process set forth in this division for development plan review, and must demonstrate that the completed development will be consistent with this chapter and with the Comprehensive Plan. Each phase must include a proportionate share of any required recreational and open space, and other site and building amenities of the entire development, except that more than a proportionate share of the total amenities may be included in the earlier phases with corresponding reductions in the later phases. An approved master plan will serve as a basis for review of future development plans in the phased development, and individual phases or portions of the project must be consistent with the approved master plan. 
C.  Expiration of master plan. A master plan shall be effective for up to five years from the date of approval. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 2, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-3.50. - Concept review. 
Concept review is optional for all intermediate and major development. Concept review is intended for the applicant to receive public input and city comments on a concept for development prior to the preparation of detailed plans and data and to alert an applicant to issues with, or objections to, a particular proposed development. Concept plans should address conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, zoning standards, site design, environmental concerns, concurrency, and transportation issues. The concept plan is reviewed by the technical review committee and by the appropriate reviewing board. Comments made by the technical review committee and the reviewing board during concept review are made solely for informational purposes and shall not be construed as an approval or denial or agreement to approve or deny a development order. The reviewing board shall issue no order, finding or other indication of approval or disapproval of the proposal.  
Sec. 30-3.51. - Affordable housing concept review. 
Affordable housing concept review is encouraged for all certified affordable housing developments and is intended solely to assist affordable housing developers with meeting the application requirements for the State of Florida Housing Tax Credit program, in support of the state housing strategy stated at F.S. Ch. 420. The review will alert an applicant to problems with, or objections to, a particular proposed development. This concept plan shall address conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, zoning, environment concerns, and concurrency. The appropriate reviewing board may grant a non-binding conceptual approval. The conceptual approval does not grant to the applicant any development rights and does not represent a development order. This conceptual approval is only an indication that the development proposal appears to be consistent with general requirements for development approval and that a development order will only be granted after the requirements for a final development plan have been met.  
DIVISION 10. - BUILDING PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
 
Sec. 30-3.52. - Building permit. 
No building shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered, or extended unless a building permit has been issued indicating that the proposed use is in compliance with the provisions and regulations of this chapter; and there shall be no excavation, cut, or fill of earth or debris, no curb shall be cut or access opened onto a public street, no land shall be used for purposes other than agricultural, no signs shall be erected, and no building shall be moved unless all applicable required development permits have been obtained in accordance with this chapter.  
Sec. 30-3.53. - Certificate of occupancy. 
No land, water, building, or any part thereof shall be used and no existing use of land, water, or building shall be changed unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued for such land, water, building, or part thereof.  
DIVISION 11. - MODIFICATIONS AND VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 30-3.54. - Modifications. 
A.  Purpose. In order to provide flexibility for the unique circumstances of individual developments, certain modifications from the standards provided in this chapter, as provided in this section, may be requested by an applicant as part of the development review process. 
B.  Review procedures. All requests for modifications shall be submitted in writing with the application for development review on forms provided by the city. If an applicant requests multiple modifications, each modification shall be evaluated independently. The city manager or designee shall have the authority to approve the modifications specifically set forth in this section. The request shall be approved or denied during development plan review and, if approved, shall be noted on the final development plan. No administrative appeals are available for any decision to approve or deny a modification. 
C.  Review criteria. The city manager or designee may approve a modification if the request meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  The request is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and meets the intent of this chapter and the zoning district. 
2.  The applicant is providing a compensating enhancement of the public realm. 
3.  The request will not have a material negative impact on adjacent uses, and is not injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
D.  Available modifications. 
REQUESTED MODIFICATION 	MIN. COMPENSATING ENHANCEMENT OF PUBLIC REALM 
Variation in required street setback up to 3 feet. 	1. 10% increase above required 1 st floor glazing. 
Reduction in required glazing percentages up to 10%. 	2. Increase of 2 feet above required sidewalk width. 
Reduction in required building frontage percentages up to 10%. 	3. 10% increase above required building frontage. 
Reduction in required landscape zones up to 2 feet; however, in no case shall a landscape area be less than 4 feet in depth. 	4. Increase of 4 feet above min. 1 st floor height. 
	5. Increase of 2 feet above min. landscape zone. 
  
Sec. 30-3.55. - Variances. 
A.  Generally. Variance from strict compliance with the requirements of the Land Development Code is provided for in this section. 
B.  Authorized variances. Variances may be approved only for height of structures; size of yard setbacks; driveway widths; building form standards in transect zones; building design standards for transect zones (dimensional standards only); landscaping requirements for vehicular use areas; landscape buffer requirements for buffer strip areas; landscape zones; street setbacks; glazing percentages; and minimum first floor height. Under no circumstances may a variance be granted to allow a use not permitted generally or by special use permit in the district involved, or any use expressly or by necessary implication prohibited in the district by the terms of this chapter. 
C.  Review criteria. A variance from the terms of this chapter or building chapters shall not be granted unless the appropriate reviewing board affirmatively finds that each of the following criteria have been met: 
1.  Special conditions and circumstances exist that are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and that are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
2.  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action of the applicant. 
3.  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this section to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
4.  Literal enforcement of the provisions of the Land Development Code or building chapters would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of the Land Development Code or building chapters. 
5.  The variance requested is the minimum variance required to make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
6.  The variance is in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the regulation at issue and the Land Development Code, and such variance will not be injurious to the abutting lands or to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
D.  Prohibited considerations. The following factors shall not be considered in any variance request: 
1.  The presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or adjoining districts. 
2.  Financial loss or business competition. 
3.  Whether the property was purchased with the intent to develop or improve the property, whether or not it was known at the time of purchase that such development would be a violation. 
E.  Review procedures. 
1.  Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting is not required; however, the applicant is encouraged to attend a meeting with staff to review procedural and regulatory requirements. 
2.  Application submittal. The applicant shall submit a complete application on a form prescribed by the city and accompanied by the applicable fee and plans. 
3.  Staff review. The city manager or designee shall review the application and prepare a staff report for submittal to the appropriate review board. 
4.  Board hearing. The appropriate reviewing board shall hold a public hearing to consider the request according to the review criteria provided in this section. 
F.  Conditions and limitations. In granting any variance, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the Land Development Code or building chapters. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable according to applicable law. If a variance request is denied, the same variance may not be considered for the property for a period of two years from the date of denial. 
G.  Expiration. Any variance granted shall expire one year after the date of variance approval, unless a building permit based upon and incorporating the variance is issued within the aforesaid one-year period and construction has begun thereunder.  
DIVISION 12. - APPEALS 
 
Sec. 30-3.56. - Land use hearing officer. 
A.  Establishment and purpose. There is hereby created the position of City of Gainesville Land Use Hearing Officer (Hearing Officer), which has the purpose of providing an administrative process for appealing certain decisions regarding the administration and enforcement of the Land Development Code, as provided in this division. No party may be deemed to have exhausted his or her administrative remedies for the purpose of seeking judicial review unless the party first obtains review by a Hearing Officer as provided in this division. 
B.  Appointment and removal. 
1.  The city commission, through a competitive selection process, may appoint by contract one or more hearing officers, who will be compensated as determined by the city commission, for a definite term of office not to exceed four years, and may be reappointed at the conclusion of any term. In addition, the city may elect to use a hearing officer appointed by the State of Florida or any agency thereof that meets the qualifications provided in this section. 
2.  During his/her term of service, a hearing officer appointed by the city commission may be removed only for cause by the city commission. Cause for removal of a hearing officer includes, but is not limited to, violations of the standards set forth in the Code of Judicial Conduct adopted by the Florida Supreme Court or the State of Florida Code of Ethics for Public Officers and Employees in F.S. Ch. 112. 
C.  Minimum qualifications. Hearing officers must meet the following minimum qualifications: 
1.  A licensed attorney who is an active member of the Florida Bar in good standing. 
2.  At least three years of professional experience in land use or local government law. 
3.  Not an employee of or office holder with the city. 
D.  General authority. The hearing officer has all powers necessary to perform the functions prescribed by this division, including the power to interpret and administer this division, the power to dispose of procedural requests or similar matters, the power to issue notices of hearings and subpoenas requiring attendance, and the power to administer oaths. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 3, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-3.57. - Administrative decisions. 
A.  Authority of hearing officer. The hearing officer has authority to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged a city administrative official charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Land Development Code or building chapter (chapter 6 of the Code of Ordinances) erred in issuing or denying a final decision, order, requirement, interpretation, determination, or action. The hearing officer is not authorized to hear appeals based on the following: 
1.  Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made regarding code enforcement, including notice of violations and civil citations. 
2.  Acts of administrative officials pursuant to the orders, resolutions, or directives of the city commission. 
3.  Zoning verification letters. 
4.  Challenges to a development order controlled by F.S. § 163.3215. 
5.  Appeals that circumvent procedures required by this chapter, including those that are more appropriately addressed in an application for a modification, variance, or rezoning. 
B.  Standing to appeal. 
1.  Decisions of general applicability. Any resident, landowner, or person having a contractual interest in land in the city shall have standing to appeal an administrative decision that is of general applicability and that is not specifically related to a particular parcel of real property or project. 
2.  Decisions relating to particular property. The following persons shall have standing to appeal an administrative decision that is not of general applicability and that is specifically related to a particular project or parcel of real property: 
a.  An applicant who is adversely affected by the decision. 
b.  A property owner whose property is the subject of the decision. 
c.  All owners of real property that lies within 400 feet of the property that is the subject of the decision. 
d.  Any resident, landowner, or person having a contractual interest in land in the city who demonstrates a direct adverse impact from the decision that exceeds in degree the general interest in community good shared by all persons. 
C.  Appeal procedures. 
1.  A notice of appeal of an administrative decision, together with the applicable fee as set forth in appendix A and any submittal requirements established by the city, shall be filed with the city within 30 calendar days of the date the administrator signed the decision at issue or the decision is otherwise rendered in writing. The notice of appeal shall set forth a detailed basis for the appeal. 
2.  Stay during appeal. The filing of a timely notice of appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the decision being appealed, including the issuance of any building permit or development order, until the appeal has been concluded in accordance with this division. The applicant may file applications, plans, or other information with the city pending the outcome of the review, but the filing of such shall create no rights to any related approval by the city. 
3.  Within 20 calendar days of the filing of a notice of appeal pursuant to this section, any person with standing may intervene and become a party to the appeal by filing a notice of appeal in accordance with this section. 
4.  The matter shall be set for a public hearing within 50 calendar days of the date of the notice of appeal. This period may be extended by agreement of the city and all parties appealing the decision. 
5.  The hearing shall be limited to the record on appeal and shall consist of oral argument by city staff and parties with standing, each of whom may be represented by legal counsel, and the party challenging the administrative decision shall have the burden of proof. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with established Florida law for quasi-judicial hearings. 
6.  Record on appeal. 
a.  The record on appeal shall consist of the following: 1) the application and accompanying information; and 2) the written decision of the administrative official and accompanying information. 
b.  All parties may freely refer to provisions from the following: 
i.  The Comprehensive Plan, Land Development Code, and any other City of Gainesville ordinance, resolution, or rule; and 
ii.  Any federal or state statute, rule, or decision. 
c.  If any party desires to admit any additional evidence, the additional evidence shall be disclosed to the other parties and the hearing officer not less than five calendar days before the hearing. At the beginning of the hearing, the hearing officer shall rule on whether such additional evidence may be presented and shall freely allow the evidence when such evidence is relevant to the issue on appeal. 
7.  The hearing officer shall make a decision based on the appeal criteria provided in this section, and may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision or action of the administrative official. In making a decision, the hearing officer may take any action that the administrative official was authorized to take. 
8.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be rendered in writing not later than seven calendar days after the date of the hearing's conclusion, and shall include findings of fact, if any, and conclusions of law. 
9.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, and may be subject to judicial review as provided in law. 
D.  Appeal criteria. The hearing officer shall give deference to the administrative official's final decision, order, requirement, interpretation, determination, or action, and may only reverse or modify such when the hearing officer finds that the administrative official's final decision, order, requirement, interpretation, determination, or action: 
1.  Was clearly erroneous or patently unreasonable and will result in a miscarriage of justice; 
2.  Has no foundation in reason, meaning the absence of a situation where reasonable minds could disagree, and is a mere arbitrary or irrational exercise of power having no substantial relation to the public health, morals, safety, or welfare; or 
3.  Was an ultra vires act, meaning the administrative official clearly lacked the authority to take the action under statute or the City of Gainesville Charter Laws or Code of Ordinances. 
The hearing officer shall use binding, and may use persuasive, Florida case law as it relates to this standard of review.  
Sec. 30-3.58. - Board decisions. 
A.  Authority of hearing officer. The hearing officer has authority to hear and decide appeals of the decisions of the boards established by or administering the Land Development Code, including the city commission and the reviewing boards provided in this article, when all of the following criteria are met: 
1.  The board decision was quasi-judicial, meaning the board applied established policy or law to a specific, individualized situation. Quasi-judicial board decisions include but are not limited to rezonings, special use permits, subdivisions, and development plan review. Quasi-judicial board decisions do not include legislative decisions such as land use changes or text amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code. 
2.  The board decision was final, and not advisory. 
3.  The appeal is not a challenge to a development order controlled by F.S. § 163.3215. 
B.  Standing to appeal. The following persons shall have standing to appeal a board decision pursuant to this section: 
1.  An applicant who is adversely affected by the decision. 
2.  A property owner whose property is the subject of the decision. 
3.  All owners of real property that lies within 400 feet of the property that is the subject of the decision. 
4.  Any resident, landowner, or person having a contractual interest in land in the city who demonstrates a direct adverse impact from the decision that exceeds in degree the general interest in community good shared by all persons. 
C.  Appeal procedures. 
1.  A notice of appeal of a board decision, together with the applicable fee as set forth in Appendix A and any submittal requirements established by the city, shall be filed with the city within 30 calendar days of the effective date of the board decision at issue. The notice of appeal shall set forth a detailed basis for the appeal. 
2.  Stay during appeal. The filing of a timely notice of appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the decision being appealed, including the issuance of any building permit or development order, until the appeal has been concluded in accordance with this division. The applicant may file applications, plans, or other information with the city pending the outcome of the review, but the filing of such shall create no rights to any related approval by the city. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  Within 20 calendar days of the filing of a notice of appeal pursuant to this section, any person with standing may intervene and become a party to the appeal by filing a notice of appeal in accordance with this section. 
5.  The matter shall be set for a public hearing within 50 calendar days of the date of the notice of appeal. This period may be extended by agreement of the city and all parties appealing the decision. 
6.  The hearing shall be limited to the record on appeal and shall consist of oral argument by city staff and parties with standing, each of whom may be represented by legal counsel. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with established Florida law for quasi-judicial hearings. 
7.  Record on appeal. The record on appeal shall consist of an exact replication of the information that was before the board for the decision being appealed, which may include the following: 
a.  The application and accompanying information. 
b.  Staff reports and recommendations, and any accompanying information. 
c.  All exhibits and documentary evidence. 
d.  The summary, findings, conclusions, and decision of the board that is the subject of the appeal. 
e.  Any audio or video recording of the board hearing that is the subject of the appeal. 
f.  Any verbatim transcript available of the board hearing that is the subject of the appeal. 
8.  The hearing officer shall make a decision based on the appeal criteria provided in this section, and may either affirm the board decision or remand the decision back to the reviewing board with specific issues for the reviewing board to address. 
9.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be rendered in writing not later than seven calendar days after the date of the hearing's conclusion, and shall include findings of fact, if any, and conclusions of law. 
10.  If the hearing officer affirms the board decision at issue, the hearing officer's decision shall be final and may be subject to judicial review as provided in law. 
11.  If the hearing officer remands the board decision at issue, the reviewing board shall reconsider its decision and shall consider the issues specified by the hearing officer and may accept, reject, or modify the hearing officer's findings and conclusions in making the final decision. After considering the hearing officer's findings and conclusions, the reviewing board's decision shall be final and may be subject to judicial review as provided in law. 
D.  Appeal criteria. The hearing officer shall affirm the board decision unless an appealing party with standing demonstrates that any one of the following three requirements was not met. The hearing officer shall use established Florida law as it relates to this standard of review. 
1.  The appealing parties were afforded procedural due process, which includes: 
a.  Notice of the board hearing that is the subject of the appeal; 
b.  A fair hearing before an impartial decision-maker; 
c.  An opportunity to be heard and present evidence at the hearing; and 
d.  The opportunity to cross-examine any witnesses. 
2.  The reviewing board observed the essential requirements of law. 
a.  A departure from the essential requirements of law is something more than mere legal error. A decision made according to the form of the applicable law and the rules prescribed for rendering it, although it may be erroneous in its conclusion as applied to the facts, is not an act that amounts to a departure from the essential requirements of law. 
b.  The hearing officer shall examine the seriousness of any error and exercise discretion only when there has been a violation of a clearly established principle of law that results in a miscarriage of justice. 
3.  The reviewing board's decision was supported by competent substantial evidence. 
a.  Competent substantial evidence means such evidence that may establish a substantial basis from which the fact at issue can be reasonably inferred, or material and relevant evidence that a reasonable mind could accept as adequate to support a conclusion. The opinions and recommendations of experts, including city staff, are deemed expert testimony and constitute competent substantial evidence. Citizen testimony during any public comment portion of a hearing may constitute competent substantial evidence if it is fact-based and not a mere generalized statement of support or opposition. 
b.  The hearing officer may not reweigh the evidence or substitute his or her judgment for that of the reviewing board, but rather shall rule upon only whether the reviewing board's decision was supported by any competent substantial evidence.  
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-4.1. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
The following zoning districts are established to implement the Comprehensive Plan, to promote orderly urban growth, and to classify and regulate the use of land, water, buildings and structures within the city: 
Transects 
U1 	Urban 1 
U2 	Urban 2 
U3 	Urban 3 
U4 	Urban 4 
U5 	Urban 5 
U6 	Urban 6 
U7 	Urban 7 
U8 	Urban 8 
U9 	Urban 9 
DT 	Downtown 
Residential 
RSF-1 to 4 	Single-Family 
RC 	Residential Conservation 
MH 	Mobile Home 
RMF-5 	Single/Multi-Family 
RMF-6 to 8 	Multi-Family 
Mixed-Use and Nonresidential 
MU-1 	Mixed-Use Low-Intensity 
MU-2 	Mixed-Use Medium-Intensity 
OR 	Office Residential 
OF 	General Office 
CP 	Corporate Park 
BUS 	General Business 
BA 	Automotive-Oriented Business 
BT 	Tourist-Oriented Business 
BI 	Business Industrial 
W 	Warehousing and Wholesaling 
I-1 	Limited Industrial 
I-2 	General Industrial 
Special Districts 
AGR 	Agriculture 
AF 	Airport Facility 
CON 	Conservation 
ED 	Educational Services 
MD 	Medical Services 
PD 	Planned Development 
PS 	Public Services and Operations 
Airport Hazard Zoning Overlay 
Heritage Overlay 
Historic Preservation/Conservation Overlay 
  
Sec. 30-4.2. - Correspondence with future land use categories. 
The following table establishes the zoning districts allowable within the future land use categories from the Comprehensive Plan: 
Future Land Use Category 	Zoning Districts 	Special Districts 
Single-Family (SF) 	U1, RSF-1 to 4, RSF-R 	PD, CON, PS 
Residential Low-Density (RL) 	U2, RSF-4, RMF-5, MH, RC 	PD, CON, PS 
Residential Medium-Density (RM) 	RMF-6 to 8 	PD, CON, PS 
Residential High-Density (RH) 	N/A 	PD, CON, PS 
Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) 	U5 	PD, CON, PS 
Mixed-Use Office/Residential (MOR) 	U4, U3 	PD, CON, PS 
Mixed-Use Low-Intensity (MUL) 	MU-1 	PD, CON, PS 
Mixed-Use Medium-Intensity (MUM) 	MU-2, CP 	PD, CON, PS 
Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) 	U6, U7, U8 	PD, CON, PS 
Urban Mixed-Use High-Intensity (UMUH) 	U9 	PD, CON, PS 
Urban Core (UC) 	DT 	PD, CON, PS 
Office (O) 	OR, OF, CP 	PD, CON, PS, MD 
Commercial (C) 	W, BA, BT, BUS, BI 	PD, CON, PS 
Business Industrial (BI) 	BI, CP 	PD, CON, PS 
Industrial (IND) 	W, I-1, I-2, BI 	PD, CON, PS 
Education (E) 	N/A 	PD, CON, PS, ED 
Recreation (REC) 	N/A 	PD, CON, PS 
Conservation (CON) 	N/A 	PD, CON, PS 
Agriculture (AGR) 	N/A 	PD, CON, PS, AGR 
Public and Institutional Facilities (PF) 	N/A 	PD, CON, PS, AF 
Planned Use District (PUD) 	N/A 	PD 
  
Sec. 30-4.3. - Zoning map. 
A.  Zoning map adopted. The zoning map of the city, as adopted and amended from time to time by ordinance, shall establish and identify a particular zoning district on all real property in the city. Such map is hereby made a part of this chapter, and shall be maintained by the city. 
B.  Effect. The regulations of this chapter concerning the use of land within particular zoning districts shall apply within the boundaries of each zoning district as shown on the zoning map. 
C.  Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the various districts on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Centerlines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following streets shall be construed to follow the centerlines of such streets. 
2.  Lot and section lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines or section lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
3.  Municipal boundaries. Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal boundaries shall be construed as following such municipal boundaries. 
4.  Railroad lines. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed as following the right-of-way centerlines for such railroad lines. 
5.  Water lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, creeks, canals or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
6.  Parallel lines. Boundaries that are approximately parallel to the centerlines of alleys or the centerlines or right-of-way lines of streets or any other line shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning maps. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map. 
7.  Bisecting lines. Boundaries that approximately bisect a block, lot or tract shall be construed to follow the median lines of such blocks as indicated by rear property lines or as measured between the centerlines of boundary streets in the absence of rear property lines or, in the absence of both of the above, by use of the scale appearing on the zoning map. 
D.  Parcels divided by district boundaries. Where any parcel of land is divided into two or more zoning districts or transects, the regulations of each individual district apply to that part of the parcel so zoned, except that the permitted density of development may be averaged over the entire parcel. 
E.  Unzoned property generally. If property in newly annexed territory is unzoned; or if the zoning of any property is vacated or invalidated for any reason, either judicially or legislatively, then the classification of any of such properties shall be deemed to be conservation district (CON), unless and until a different zoning is provided for such property by ordinance amending the zoning map; and, until such amendment is provided for, no use may be made of any such property except in accordance with the regulations for the CON district. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 4, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-4.4. - Annexed territory. 
When lands are annexed into the city, such lands shall be rezoned in accordance with this chapter to an appropriate city zoning district(s). The county zoning district and applicable regulations shall apply prior to rezoning to a city zoning district.  
Sec. 30-4.5. - Interpretation of uses. 
Any use that is not permitted by right, special use permit, or as an accessory use in a zoning district shall be prohibited in such district. In any case where the city manager or designee interprets whether a particular proposed or existing use is in fact a use that is permitted by right, special use permit, or as an accessory use in a particular zoning district, the city manager or designee may consider factors including but not limited to the following: 
A.  Hours of operation (including hours for service and deliveries); 
B.  Building and site arrangement relative to the neighboring permitted uses; 
C.  Types of vehicles used and parking requirements; 
D.  The number of vehicle trips generated; and 
E.  Whether the activity is likely to be found independent of the other activities on the site.  
Sec. 30-4.6. - Utility uses. 
The following utility uses shall be allowed as permitted uses in all zoning districts: 
A.  Electric, cable, or fiber optic facilities. 
1.  All underground transmission facilities; 
2.  All overhead utility transmission facilities not exceeding three feet in diameter and 75 feet in height; 
3.  All transformers, meters and associated appurtenances; and 
4.  Any electric structure or facility that is sited on property 10,000 square feet or less and no more than 20 feet in height (utility poles, light poles and telemetry towers shall not be considered a structure). 
B.  Water facilities. All water mains, valves, hydrants, services, backflow preventers or any other appurtenances required to distribute and deliver potable water and to satisfy fire safety requirements. 
C.  Wastewater facilities. 
1.  All underground wastewater collection facilities including gravity sewers, force mains, service laterals, manholes, valves or other appurtenances required to collect wastewater; and 
2.  Any lift station or similar structure that is sited on property 10,000 square feet or less with a structure height of 20 feet or less. 
D.  Gas facilities. 
1.  All gas distribution facilities including gas mains, valves, services, meters or any other appurtenances required to distribute and deliver natural or LP gas; and 
2.  Any gate station, regulator station or similar structure that is sited on property 5,625 square feet or less with a structure height of 20 feet or less. 
E.  Chilled water. 
1.  All distribution facilities including mains, valves, services, meters or any other appurtenances required to distribute and deliver chilled water; and 
2.  Chiller plants consistent with the screening and design requirements of article VI. 
F.  Utility uses exceeding the above requirements shall require PS zoning and special use permit approval.  
Sec. 30-4.7. - Phasing. 
Development phases shall be required to meet code independently from other phases. No phase shall be dependent on the completion of subsequent phases to be consistent with any required approvals and/or conditions, including but not limited to setbacks, building frontage, and building placement, configuration, function and design. The required landscaping and parking improvements shall be provided within each phase.  
Sec. 30-4.8. - Development compatibility. 
A.  Setbacks. 
1.  Whenever a zero foot setback is allowed in a zoning district, it may only be used if the abutting property is within a district that allows the same setback. 
2.  The minimum required side and rear setback for nonresidential and multi-family buildings located on property abutting a single-family zoning district or the U1 district shall be the same as the setback required on the adjacent residential lot or as determined by the required buffer, whichever is greater. 
B.  Limitations on uses. All industrial or commercial activity and uses, except storage of equipment and parking, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings when located within 300 feet of any property that is in a single-family zoning district or the U1 district. 
C.  Building height and massing. 
Within 100' of the Following Districts: 	Max. Building Height 
Single-Family Zoning 	3 stories and 36' 	Building facades shall not exceed 60' unless a substantial volume break is provided, such as a volume recess with a minimum 10' depth. 
U1 	• Measured to the roof peak with a hip, gable, mansard or similar roof where the 3 rd floor is above the roof line, or 	
Historic District (except University Heights-South) 		
	• Measured to the top plate of the 3 rd floor with a flat or similar roof. 	
University Heights-South Historic District 	4 stories and 60' 
	• Measured to the top plate of the 4 th floor. 
Within the Following Districts: 	Max. Building Height 
Pleasant Street Historic District 	3 stories and 36' 
Power District 	6 stories, but 
3 stories when adjacent to residential zoning, with a step-back of 15' per additional building story up to max. permitted. 
 
Figure 1: Height Compatibility Pitched Roof Example
 
Figure 2: Height Compatibility Flat Roof Example
 
Figure 2: Height Compatibility University Heights
 
 
D.  Multi-family developments. 
1.  Generally. Multi-family development shall contain no more than six dwelling units per building and shall be in the form of single-family dwellings, attached dwellings, or small-scale multi-family when located within 100 feet of any property that is in a single-family zoning district, the U1 district, or a designated historic district. 
2.  Abutting single-family property. All new multi-family projects, whether stand alone or part of a mixed-use project, abutting property in a residential district or a planned development district with predominantly residential uses shall comply with the following regulations: 
a.  There shall be no outdoor recreation areas or uses allowed within any required building setback area or landscape buffer between abutting multi-family development and single-family designated properties. 
b.  Active recreation areas (including swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball, and volleyball courts) shall be located away from abutting single-family designated properties and shall be oriented in the development to minimize noise impacts on single-family designated properties. 
c.  There shall be no car washing areas, dumpsters, recycling bins, or other trash/waste disposal facilities placed in the required setback area between multi-family development and properties zoned for single-family use. 
d.  Parking lots and driveways located in the area between multi-family and abutting single-family designated properties shall be limited to a single-loaded row of parking and a two-way driveway. 
e.  A decorative masonry wall (or equivalent material in noise attenuation and visual screening) with a minimum height of six feet and a maximum height of eight feet plus a Type B landscape buffer shall separate multi-family residential development from properties designated single-family residential. However, driveways, emergency vehicle access, or pedestrian/bicycle access may interrupt a continuous wall. If, in the professional judgment of city staff or other professional experts, masonry wall construction would damage or endanger significant trees or other natural features, the appropriate reviewing authority may authorize the use of a fence and/or additional landscape buffer area to substitute for the required masonry wall. There shall be no requirement for a masonry wall or equivalent if buildings are 200 or more feet from abutting single-family properties. In addition, the appropriate reviewing authority may allow an increased vegetative buffer and tree requirement to substitute for the required masonry wall. 
f.  The primary driveway access shall be on a collector or arterial street, if available. Secondary ingress/egress and emergency access may be on or from local streets. 
3.  Bedroom limit. Maximum number of bedrooms in multi-family developments located within the University of Florida Context Area. 
a.  Multi-family developments shall be limited to a maximum number of bedrooms based on the development's maximum residential density allowed by the zoning district multiplied by a 2.75 multiplier. 
b.  If additional density is approved through a special use permit, then the multiplier is applied to the total approved density inclusive of any additional units approved by special use permit. 
c.  The bedroom mix in the development (i.e., the number of units with a specific number of bedrooms) is not regulated by these provisions. 
d.  Developments with planned development (PD) zoning are not subject to the bedroom multiplier. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 5, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-4.9. - Development bonus system. 
A.  Available bonuses. In accordance with this section and up to the limit allowed with bonuses as specified for the applicable zoning district, development projects may be eligible for: 1) additional building stories and the corresponding increase in overall building height; and 2) increased residential density. The bonus may be approved based on the provision of certain development improvements that exceed the minimum standards of this article, as follows: 
B.  Additional building stories/height. 
1.  Usable open space. If a development provides onsite usable open space that is accessible to the public (minimum size of 20' × 20'), additional building square footage above the number of stories allowed by right (and up to the maximum allowed by bonus) may be provided according to the following formula: 
Square feet of public open space X number of stories allowed by right = additional square feet. If the total additional square footage meets or exceeds 20% of the total development site, one additional story is available. If the total additional square footage meets or exceeds 30% of the total development site, two stories are available. 
Developments receiving a height bonus must provide at least one form of open space from the figures and associated standards below: 
Green 	 
A green is an open space for unstructured recreation. Greens consist of lawns, trees, paths, benches, and open shelters, all informally arranged. 	
1. Greens may be spatially defined by landscaping rather than building frontages. 	
2. Greens must front on at least two streets. 	
Square 	 
A square is an open space for recreation and civic purposes consisting of paths, lawns, and trees, all formally arranged. A square is spatially defined by abutting streets and building frontages. 	
1. Squares shall be located at the intersections of important thoroughfares. 	
2. Squares must front on at least 3 streets. 	
3. Façades facing the square should have at least 40% of their first floor's primary façade in transparent windows. 	
Plaza 	 
An open space for commercial and civic purposes consisting primarily of paved surfaces. A plaza is spatially defined by building frontages. 	
1. Plazas should be located at the intersection of important streets. 	
2. Plazas must front on at least one street. 	
3. Façades facing the plaza should have at least 40% of their first floor's primary façade in transparent windows. 	
Playground 	 
A fenced open space designed and equipped for the recreation of children. 	
1. Playgrounds shall be located within ¼ mil surrounding neighborhoods. 	
2. Playgrounds may be freestanding or located within parks and greens. 	
Pocket Plaza 	 
A formal open space available for civic purposes and commercial activities. Pocket Plazas are typically hardscaped and include landscaping in lawns or permanent planters. 	
1. Pocket plazas should be located on side streets. 	
2. Pocket Plazas must front on at least one street. 	
3. Pocket Plazas may be used to provide seating for outdoor cafes or similar publicly accessible gathering space. 	
Promenade 	 
A linear pedestrian open space between streets that extends through successive blocks. The space largely hardscaped and lined with trees at the edges. 	
1. Promenades must be a minimum of 16' wide. 	
2. Promenades may include outdoor seating or other similar public amenities. 	
 
2.  Tree preservation. If a development dedicates an area onsite to preserve one or more heritage trees, the additional building square footage above the number of stories allowed by right (and up to the maximum allowed by bonus) may be provided according to the following formula: 
Square feet of tree preservation area X number of stories allowed by right = additional square feet. If the total additional square feet meets or exceeds 20 percent of the total development site, one additional story is available. If the total additional square footage meets or exceeds 30 percent of the total development site, two stories are available. 
3.  Structured parking. If a development provides structured parking, the maximum number of bonus stories is available. Additionally, within U9 and DT, up to two levels of parking that are constructed within a habitable building are not counted as stories for the purposes of calculating the total number of stories, provided the footprint of the parking structure falls within 75 percent to 100 percent of the footprint of the habitable floors directly above the parking levels. 
4.  Transit support facilities. If a development provides onsite facilities, beyond what otherwise is required, to serve existing or planned public transit, including but not limited to bus bays, super bus stops, bus stations, bus lanes, and park and ride lots, one bonus story is available. 
5.  Undergrounding/relocating utility lines. If a development undergrounds overhead utility lines beyond what otherwise is required, or relocates existing underground lines in order to facilitate the appropriate placement of street trees or buildings along streets, up to two stories are available for every street segment completed (from intersection to intersection); one story is available for the undergrounding/relocation of utilities along the street frontage of the development. 
6.  Provision of affordable housing. One story is available for providing at least five percent of the total development units (total calculated including the additional units achieved with height bonus) as affordable housing units reserved for occupancy by eligible households and affordable to households whose household annual income does not exceed 80 percent of the Alachua County median household income, adjusted for household size, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and no more than 30 percent of the monthly household income is paid for monthly housing expenses (mortgage and mortgage insurance, property taxes, property insurance and homeowners dues). 
Two stories are available for either providing: 1) ten percent of the total development units as affordable housing units reserved for occupancy by eligible households and affordable to households whose household annual income does not exceed 80 percent of the Alachua County median household income, adjusted for household size, as determined by HUD, and no more than 30 percent of the monthly household income is paid for monthly housing expenses (mortgage and mortgage insurance, property taxes, property insurance and homeowners dues); or 2) five percent of the total development units as affordable housing units reserved for occupancy by eligible households and affordable to households whose household annual income does not exceed 50 percent of the Alachua County median household income, adjusted for household size, as determined by HUD, and no more than 30 percent of the monthly household income is paid for monthly housing expenses (mortgage and mortgage insurance, property taxes, property insurance and homeowners dues). 
C.  Increased residential density. 
1.  Tree preservation. 
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BONUS 
High Quality Heritage Tree Preservation (fair or better condition): 
Tree DBH 	20"—30" 	31"—50" 	51"—70" 	71"+ 
Bonus DU/Acre 	0.5 	1 	5 	10 
Regulated Tree Cluster Preservation (fair or better condition): 
Number of trees in cluster 	3—5 	6—8 	9—11 	12+ 
Bonus DU/Acre 	0.5 	1 	5 	10 
 
The city manager or designee may grant a density bonus for preserving tree clusters that, in his or her discretion, reasonably meet the following standards: 
a.  Species within the cluster must be on the Gainesville Tree List. 
b.  Trees within a cluster must have a minimum average DBH of 8 inches. 
c.  Trees within a cluster must be sufficiently spaced as to not have overlapping root plates. 
d.  Laurel oaks, water oaks, slash pines, and loblolly pines may not be included as part of a cluster. 
D.  Review and approval. Each request for a bonus is subject to the approval of the city manager or designee, based on the criteria outlined above in this section, the criteria used to review special use permits, and the following criteria: 
1.  The improvement proposed by the applicant provides a significant public benefit in light of the bonus requested; and 
2.  The proposed design, intensity, and any mix of uses relating to the requested bonus will meet the intent of the transect and will be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 170971 , § 1, 2-21-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 170971 , § 1, adopted February 21, 2019, amended § 30-4.9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 30-4.9, pertained to building height bonus system. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 30-4.10. - Occupancy limitation. 
In certain districts, an increase in the number of persons occupying a dwelling beyond one family, as defined in this chapter, is detrimental to the health, welfare, safety, and morals of the citizens of this community, and is a public nuisance that causes deterioration of the surrounding property values. 
A.  Applicable districts. The following zoning districts shall be subject to this section: RSF-1; RSF-2; RSF-3; RSF-4; RC; all PDs designed for residential use at a density of no more than eight dwelling units per acre; and all other PDs as may be specified in the rezoning ordinance. 
B.  Unlawful acts. No owner or landlord shall enter into any agreement, contract, lease, or sublease that allows the occupancy of any dwelling unit in a designated district by more than one family, as defined in this chapter. Any agreement, contract, lease, or sublease that allows such occupancy by more than one family is unlawful and is hereby declared to be contrary to public policy. 
C.  Enforcement. In addition to any other remedy provided for herein, the city manager or designee, upon reasonable cause to believe that this section is being violated, may request the city attorney to take any appropriate action to correct the violation. 
D.  Public nuisance. Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance, and may result in abatement or enjoinder as provided in F.S. §§ 60.05(1) and 60.06.  
DIVISION 2. - TRANSECTS 
 
Sec. 30-4.11. - Generally. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this division is to establish development standards that will encourage a more efficient and sustainable urban form by allowing a range of housing, employment, shopping and recreation choices and opportunities in a compact, pedestrian-friendly environment. 
B.  Transects. A transect is a geographical cross-section of a region that reveals a sequence of environments that ranges from rural to urban. Using the transect to regulate development ensures that a community offers a full diversity of development types, and that each has appropriate characteristics for its location. There are typically six transects organizing the components of place-making: Natural zone, rural zone, urban neighborhood zone, general urban zone, urban center zone, and urban core. This code assigns transects that are tailored to the unique character of the City of Gainesville. The allowable uses, dimensional standards, and development requirements for these zones are described within this division. 
	ZONE DESCRIPTION 	INTENDED SITE LAYOUT 
 
Urban Zone 1 
Consists of predominantly low to medium density residential areas, adjacent to higher intensity zones where neighborhood services and mixed use are permitted. 	 
		Buildings typically occupy the center of the lot with setbacks on all sides. The front yard is intended to be visually continuous with the yards of adjacent buildings. 
 
Urban Zones 2 - 5 
Consists of a wide range of residential building types. Higher number zones provide for the integration of offices and neighborhood services within an increasingly urban fabric. Setbacks and landscaping are variable. Streets with curbs and sidewalks define medium-sized blocks. 	 
		Buildings typically occupy one side of the lot leaving a setback to the other side to allow for access or privacy. In many instances, the building occupies the entire lot frontage. A shallow frontage setback defines a more urban condition. 
 
Urban Zones 6 - 9 
Consists of higher density mixed use buildings that accommodate retail, offices, and apartments. It has a tight network of streets, with wide sidewalks, steady street tree planting and buildings set close to the sidewalks. 	 
		The building typically occupies the full frontage, leaving the rear of the lot as the sole yard. The continuous facade steadily defines the public street. In its residential form, this type is the attached dwelling. The rear yard can accommodate substantial parking. 
 
Downtown 
Consists of the highest density and height development, with the greatest variety of uses, and civic buildings of regional importance. Streets have steady street tree planting and buildings are set close to wide sidewalks. 	 
		The building occupies the boundaries of its lot while internally defining one or more private patios. This is the most urban of types, as it is able to shield the private realm from all sides while strongly defining the public street. 
 
C.  Streets. Within the transects, new developments shall connect to the existing street network. Where the existing street network is deficient with respect to gridded connectivity, the development shall provide new street connections to meet the block perimeter requirements. 
The zoning map identifies a hierarchy of street types that determine the relationship of buildings to the street and the standards for the design of street landscaping and sidewalks. Street types include: Storefront, Principal, Thoroughfare, and Local Streets. All undesignated existing streets are assumed to be Local Streets. Below is a detailed description of the general function, character, and elements of each street type. Final street design for new development shall be in accordance with this article and the Design Manual, subject to review and approval by the city manager or designee in the development review process. In the event of a conflict between the standards in this article and the Design Manual, the Design Manual shall govern. 
a.  Storefront. Storefront streets are designed to encourage a high level of pedestrian activity. Higher intensity and density uses front this street type. Due to the level of pedestrian activity on this street type, minimum sidewalk widths are increased and first floor residential development requires a one and one-half foot elevation above grade (three feet recommended) for the privacy and comfort of residents. Building front entrances shall be oriented to this street type when there are multiple street frontages for the property. 
 
b.  Principal. Principal streets include lower levels of pedestrian activity compared to storefront streets. This street type is located in mixed-use areas where the traffic volume is anticipated to be higher than on local streets. This street type allows for some auto-oriented uses with a special use permit. 
 
c.  Thoroughfares. Thoroughfares are streets that carry high volumes of through traffic at higher speeds with less pedestrian activity and higher vehicular speeds than other street types. These streets are often fronted by larger scale commercial development and are usually four-lane or six-lane streets. 
 
d.  Local. Local streets are intended to have slow speeds and provide for connections within neighborhoods and between residential areas and commercial areas. Local streets are not identified on the zoning map, but make up the vast majority of the street types within the transects. Any street that is not identified as a storefront, principal, or thoroughfare street should be assumed to be a local street. 
 
e.  Urban walkways. Urban walkways are pedestrian/bicycle pathways that serve to improve pedestrian/bicycle connectivity, delineate blocks and provide for expanded pedestrian space. These may be established as alternatives to new streets in some locations. 
 
f.  Alleys. Alleys are narrower streets that are primarily used for service access to developments, or vehicular access to rear parking areas. Alleys are encouraged to be preserved, improved, or established in conjunction with development. 
 
(Ord. No. 170831 , § 3, 4-5-18)  
Sec. 30-4.12. - Permitted uses. 
The following table contains the list of uses allowed, and specifies whether the uses are allowed by right (P), accessory to a principal use (A), or by special use permit approval (S). Blank cells indicate that the use is not allowed. No variances from the requirements of this section shall be allowed. 
Table V-1: Permitted Uses within Transects. 
	Use
Stan-
dards 	U1 	U2 	U3 	U4 	U5 	U6 	U7 	U8 	U9 	DT 
RESIDENTIAL 
Single-family dwellings 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Attached dwellings (up to 6 attached units) 		- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Multi-family, small-scale (2—4 units per building) 		- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Multi-family dwellings 		- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Accessory dwelling units 	30-5.33 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 
Adult day care homes 	30-5.2 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Community residential homes (up to 6 residents) 	30-5.6 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 
Community residential homes (more than 6 residents) 	30-5.6 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 
Dormitory (small) 	30-5.8 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dormitory (large) 	30-5.8 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Family child care homes 	30-5.10 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 
NONRESIDENTIAL 
Alcoholic beverage establishment 	30-5.3 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Assisted living facility 		- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Bed & Breakfast establishments 	30-5.4 	- 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Business services 		- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Car wash facilities 	30-5.5 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 
Civic, social & fraternal organizations 		S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Day care center 	30-5.7 	- 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Drive-through facility 	30-5.9 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Emergency shelter 		- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Equipment rental and leasing, light 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Exercise studios 		- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Farmers market 	30-5.11 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Food distribution for the needy 	30-5.12 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	S 	S 
Food truck 	30-5.35 	- 	- 	- 	A 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Funeral homes and crematories 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Gasoline/alternative fuel station 	30-5.13 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 1 	P 	P 	- 	- 
Health services 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Hotel 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Laboratory, medical & dental 		- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Library 		- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Light assembly, fabrication and processing 	30-5.16 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Medical marijuana dispensing facility 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Microbrewery Microwinery Microdistillery 2 	30-5.17 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Mini-warehouse/self-storage 	30-5.18 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 
Museums and art galleries 		- 	- 	- 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Office 		- 	- 	- 	P 	P 3 / S 4 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Office - medical, dental, & other health related services 		- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Parking, surface (principal use) 	30-5.20 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	S 
Parking, structured (principal use) 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Passenger transit station 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 
Personal services 		- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Places of religious assembly 	30-5.21 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Professional school 		- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public administration buildings 		- 	- 	- 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public parks 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Recreation, indoor 2 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Recreation, outdoor 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Research development & testing facilities 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Residences for destitute people 	30-5.22 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	S 	S 
Restaurant 		- 	- 	- 	S 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Retail sales 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
School, elementary, middle & high (public & private) 		S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Scooter and electric golf cart sales 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	- 
Simulated gambling establishments 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Social service facilities 	30-5.25 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 
Skilled nursing facility 		- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Vehicle sales and rental (no outdoor display) 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Vehicle services 	30-5.28 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 
Vehicle repair 	30-5.28 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 
Veterinary services 	30-5.29 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Vocational/Trade school 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Wireless communication services 	See § 30-5.30 
 
LEGEND: 
P = Permitted by right; S = Special Use Permit; A = Accessory; Blank = Use not allowed. 
1 = When located along a Principal Street. 
2 = Prohibited where adjacent to single-family zoned property. 
3 = Office uses as a home occupation. 
4 = Office uses up to 20 percent of the building square footage and shall be secondary to a principal residential use. No outdoor storage allowed. 
(Ord. No. 160685 , § 2, 3-15-18; Ord. No. 170975 , § 1, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-4.13. - Building form standards. 
This section contains the building form standards that determine the location, scale and massing of all buildings within the transects. 
Table V-2: Building Form Standards within Transects. 
TRANSECT 	U1 	U2 	U3 	U4 	U5 	U6 	U7 	U8 	U9 	DT 
A. BLOCK STANDARDS 
Block perimeter (max. feet) 	2,600' 	2,000' 	1,600' 
B. LOT CONFIGURATION 
Lot width (min. feet) 	34' 	18' 	18' 	18' 
C. DEVELOPMENT INTENSITY 
Nonresidential building coverage (max) 	60% 	80% 	90% 	100% 
Residential density by right/with bonus 2 (max. units per acre) 	8 	15 	20 	20 	75 	50/60 	50/60 	60/80 	100/125 	150/175 
D. BUILDING FRONTAGE 
Primary frontage (min) 	50% 	60% 	70% 	80% 
Secondary frontage (min) 	30% 	40% 	50% 	60% 
E. BUILDING PLACEMENT 
min-max. from curb 				
min. landscape/min. sidewalk/min. building frontage 				
Storefront Street 	20'-25' 
5'/10'/5' 	20'-25' 
5'/10'/5' 	20'-25' 
5'/10'/5' 	20'-25' 
4'/10'/5' 
Principal Street 	17'-37' 
6'/6'/5' 	17'-27' 
6'/6'/5' 	17'-27' 
6'/6'/5' 	17'-27' 
6'/6'/5' 
Thoroughfare Street 	19'-100' 
6'/6'/5' 	19'-100' 
8'/6'/5' 	19'-100' 
8'/6'/5' 	19'-100' 
8'/6'/5' 
Local Street 	15'-35' 
5'/5'/5' 	15'-20' 
5'/5'/5' 	16'-21' 
5'/6'/5' 	15'-20' 
4'/6'/5' 
F. BUILDING SETBACKS 
Side interior setback (min) 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	0' 	0' 	0' 
Rear setback (min) 	15' 	3' (alley) 10' (no alley) 	3' (alley) 5' (no alley) 	3' (alley) 0' (no alley) 
 
LEGEND: 
1 = See section 30-4.8 for development compatibility standards. 
TRANSECT 	U1 	U2 	U3 	U4 	U5 	U6 	U7 	U8 	U9 	DT 
	 
G. BUILDING HEIGHT 
Min. feet 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	18 	18 	18 	18 
Max. stories (by right 1 /with bonus 2 ) 	3 	3 	3 	3 	4 	4/5 	4/6 	5/6 	6/8 	12/14 
Max. feet (by right/with bonus 2 ) 	36 	36 	36 	42 	60 	60/74 	60/88 	74/88 	88/116 	172/200 
H. FLOOR HEIGHT 
Min. first floor height (residential/nonresidential) 	NA/10' 	NA/12' 	NA/12' 	NA/12' 	NA/12' 	NA/12' 	12'/12' 	12'/15' 	12'/15' 	12'/15' 
I. GLAZING 
Min. first floor - nonresidential 	- 	30% 	50% 	65% 
Min. first floor - multi-family 	- 	30% 
Min. upper floors - nonresidential and multi-family 	- 	15% 
 
LEGEND: 
1 = See development compatibility standards in section 30-4.8. 
2 = See bonus system requirements in section 30-4.9. 
A.  Block standards. 
1.  Maximum block perimeter. Maximum block perimeters are defined Table V-2 for each transect. When development cumulatively includes 50% or more of the total project area, it shall be required to include new local streets or urban walkways and the resulting block(s) shall not exceed the prescribed maximum block perimeter. Figure V-1 below depicts a recommended approach to breaking down large blocks to provide a new street grid on a large site. 
Figure V-1: Creating Blocks
 
Step 1-original site; Step 2-introduce streets; Step 3-introduce alleys; Step 4-introduce lots. 
2.  Construction of new streets. 
a.  The required local streets or urban walkways shall be constructed at the expense of the owner/developer as part of the development review process and shall be constructed according to the appropriate city standards, but may be sited and configured in a manner so that they provide the most appropriate access to the development. Where a street is planned to continue beyond the extent of a development, the development shall provide for the continuation of the street by stubbing out the improvements as close as is practicable to edge of the property boundary. 
b.  The required local streets, multi-use paths or urban walkways shall provide for public access and may be dedicated for public right-of-way after construction, if the city desires to accept same for maintenance. 
c.  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, a development may receive final approval prior to construction of the required local streets or urban walkways if the city, upon approval of the city commission, has executed a binding agreement with the owner/developer that: 
i.  Requires the city and/or the community redevelopment agency to construct the required local streets as public streets within two years of final approval; and 
ii.  Provides for the conveyance or dedication of the associated right-of-way from the property owner to the city, at no cost to the city. 
The city may enter into such an agreement only when the city determines that doing so would be in the public interest and when the city and/or the community redevelopment agency has budgeted legally available funds for the construction of the required local streets. The form and content of the agreement shall be provided by and acceptable to the city in its sole discretion. 
d.  Board modifications from the requirement to construct new streets may be granted in accordance with the procedures and criteria for a variance, with specific consideration given to situations where the construction of a street is limited by: access management standards, regulated environmental features, regulated natural or archeological resources, public stormwater facilities, existing utility facilities, contamination sites, inconsistencies with plans for a future city street network, parks, or schools. Where a variance from these requirements is approved, the block perimeter shall be completed with the provision of sidewalk and bicycle connections, and multi-use paths or urban walkways, subject to approval by the city. 
3.  Urban walkways. When required new streets or urban walkways are constructed as part of a subdivision or development, their design and construction shall conform to the following standards and applicable design manual standards: 
a.  New streets or urban walkways shall connect to existing streets on abutting properties, or be constructed in alignment with planned public streets on abutting properties. 
b.  Where a portion of a new street or urban walkway is newly constructed, it shall be designed to be extended to abutting property. Stub-outs shall extend to the property line. 
c.  Urban walkways shall be a minimum of 26 feet wide and may be designed with a single or divided paved pathway. The pathway(s) shall be at least ten feet wide in total width and shall provide for both bicycles and pedestrians. An urban walkway shall be landscaped with shade trees on minimum 50-foot centers on both sides of the paved path. Unpaved areas may also contain stormwater facilities. Urban walkways may contain benches, fountains, outdoor cafes or other outdoor uses as long as a minimum sidewalk width as specified above is maintained. 
B.  Building frontage. Building frontage requirements shall create a continuous building presence along streets. 
1.  The building frontage standards are a proportion of the building length relative to the width of the development site measured at the site frontage line, (see Figure V-3). 
Figure V-3: Building Frontage
 
2.  Frontage hierarchy. 
a.  Where a development has frontage along multiple street types that do not include a thoroughfare, the urban street (storefront or principal, in that order of hierarchy) shall be considered the primary street for the front face of the building. 
b.  Where a development has frontage on a thoroughfare and any other street type, the thoroughfare shall be considered the primary street. 
c.  Where a development has frontage on two streets of equal type, then the city manager or designee shall make a determination as to which street frontage shall be considered primary. 
Figure V-4: Example of Gateway
 
3.  In the case where the required building frontage cannot be met due to the need to provide vehicular access from the primary frontage, a gateway, arch or similar feature may be provided to preserve the block continuity and may be counted toward meeting the building frontage requirement, (see Figure V-4). 
4.  A preserved high quality heritage tree canopy within the street setback range may count towards meeting the building frontage requirement. 
5.  The ground floor along the street frontages shall contain active uses oriented to the street. Active uses may include, but are not limited to, display or floor areas for retail uses, waiting and seating areas for restaurants, atriums or lobbies for offices, lobbies or dining areas for hotels or multi-family residential buildings, and hotel rooms or multi-family residential units with street facing entrances. 
C.  Building placement and setbacks. The placement of a building on a site is critical to creating a vital and coherent public realm. The building placement and setback standards shall shape the public realm and strengthen the physical and functional character of the area. Figure V-5 depicts the types of setbacks. 
Figure V-5: Building Setbacks
 
1.  Building placement requirements shall be measured from the back of curb instead of the front property line, with the following exceptions: 
a.  In the absence of curbs, shall be measured from the edge of pavement. 
b.  Where the required building placement falls within a public right-of-way, it shall be shifted to the property line instead. 
2.  Building placement requirements shall be comprised of a landscape zone, a public sidewalk zone and a building frontage zone. Figure V-6 depicts the required configuration of these zones in relation to the street curb and building. The required minimum widths for the landscape and sidewalks zones are listed within Table V-2. The building frontage zone shall be a minimum of five feet in all locations. Section 30-4.13 D. contains additional standards for the design of the building frontage zone. 
Figure V-6: Public Realm Zones
 
3.  Side and rear setbacks are minimums and shall be measured from shared property lines. 
4.  The following shall not be located within the public sidewalk zone; utility poles including electrical transmission and distribution poles; light poles; mechanical equipment as defined in section 30-6.10; signs included in section 30-9.2A; and street furniture including benches, trash receptacles, and bicycle racks. 
5.  Where multiple buildings are proposed within a development, the placement of buildings at the rear of a site is allowed as long as one or more buildings are placed along the front of the site meeting the building placement and setback and building frontage requirements of this division. Figure V-7 depicts the required configuration of multiple buildings on a site, such as within a shopping center. Streets or access drives shall be incorporated into the site to break it down into smaller lots/blocks (platting will not be required). The primary access drive shall be centered on the anchor building and shall be lined with buildings, which shall meet the required frontage standards along the street and access drive. 
Figure V-7: Multiple Buildings on a Site
 
D.  Building frontage zone requirements. All development shall provide a minimum five-foot wide building frontage zone behind the public sidewalk, and buildings shall have at least one type of building frontage incorporated into its design. Table V-3 contains the dimensional requirements for the various types of building frontages allowed. The intent of the building frontage zone is to provide a transition between the public street/sidewalk and the building. The type of activity conducted in the private frontage zone depends on the nature of the proposed use (Figure V-8). For a commercial building, the intent of the private frontage zone is to attract customers into the business. For a residential site, the intent of the private frontage zone is to provide for a private outdoor space and establish a separation from the public sidewalk for the ground floor rooms. 
Figure V-8: Examples of Building Frontage Zone Activity
 
Table V-3: Building Frontage Dimensional Standards 
Storefront 	Gallery 	Arcade 
 
 
 
1. Width: 25% of façade width min. 	1. Width: 75% of façade width min. 	1. Width: 75% of façade width min. 
2. Depth: 5' min. 	2. Depth: 8' min. 	2. Depth: 8' min. 
3. Clear Height: 8' min. 		
3. Clear Height: 12' min. (1st floor) 	3. Clear Height: 12' min. (1st floor) 	
Courtyard 	Stoop 	Porch 
 
 
 
1. Width: 10' min. to 50% of façade width max. 	1. Width: 5' min. to 16' max. 	1. Width: 12' min. 
2. Depth: 10' min/20' max. 	2. Depth: 5' to 8' 	2. Depth: 8' min. 
3. Elevation: 18" max. above grade. 	3. Clear Height: 8' 	3. Clear Height: 8' min. 
	4. Elevation: 21" min. above grade. 	4. Elevation: 21" min. above grade. 
 
Note: See Article II for definitions of frontages. 
1.  Building frontage standards, general. 
a.  In addition to the encroachments shown in Table V-3, cantilevered balconies, bay windows and roof overhangs are allowed to encroach into the building frontage zone. 
b.  Street furniture such as benches, trash receptacles, or bicycle racks may be installed within the building frontage zone; however, permanent fencing is prohibited. 
2.  Standards for storefronts, awnings and canopies. 
a.  Storefront doors shall not be recessed more than five feet from the front façade. Recessed doors shall have angled walls leading to the door to promote the visibility of the entrance. 
b.  Awnings and canopies shall not cover building architectural elements including but not limited to cornices or ornamental features. 
c.  High gloss or plasticized fabrics and aluminum are not allowed for awnings. 
d.  Backlit awnings are not permitted. 
e.  Awning shall match the width of the window or door opening and shall enhance the architectural features of the building. 
3.  Standards for galleries and arcades. 
a.  Along urban Storefront streets, gallery/arcade openings shall align with storefront entrances. 
b.  Galleries may be one or two stories. 
c.  Arcades and galleries shall have consistent depth along a frontage. 
4.  Standards for courtyards. 
a.  Courtyards shall be paved and a minimum of 20 percent of the total courtyard area shall be enhanced with either above-ground or in-ground landscaping. 
5.  Standards for stoops and porches. 
a.  Stoops shall align directly with the building entry. 
b.  Porches may be one or two stories. 
c.  Porches may encroach into the building frontage zone. 
E.  Building height. 
Figure V-9: Building Height
 
1.  The heights of parking structures shall be limited in accordance with the maximum feet within each district, but shall not be limited to the maximum number of stories. 
2.  Mezzanines that meet the definition and requirements of the Florida Building Code shall not be counted as an additional story. 
3.  The building height limitations contained in Table V-2 do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances required to be placed on the roof and not intended for human occupancy. Other exceptions include: 
a.  Roof structures above eave line can vary in height up to a maximum of 15 feet above eave line. 
b.  Trellises may extend above the maximum height up to eight feet. 
F.  Floor height. 
1.  Floor height shall be measured as provided in the Florida Building Code. 
2.  Parking garages are exempt from the minimum floor height requirements. 
(Ord. No. 170831 , § 4, 4-5-18; Ord. No. 170971 , § 2, 2-21-19; Ord. No. 170974 , § 6, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-4.14. - Building design standards. 
A.  Building massing. Large building volumes shall be divided to appear as smaller volumes grouped together. Volume breaks may be achieved by volume projections and recesses, and varying heights and roof lines. Therefore, building facades shall not exceed 60 feet along a street frontage without providing a substantial volume break such as a volume projection or recess, a tower or bay, or an architecturally prominent public entrance. The recesses and projections shall have a minimum depth and width of ten feet. 
Figure V-16: Building Massing
 
B.  Facade articulation. The standards contained in this section apply to multi-family, nonresidential and mixed-use buildings. Building facades along streets shall maintain a pedestrian scale by integrating the following architectural elements: 
 
1.  Façades shall not exceed 20 horizontal feet without including at least one of the following elements: 
a.  A window or door. 
b.  Awning, canopy or marquee. 
c.  An offset, column, reveal, void, projecting rib, band, cornice, or similar element with a minimum depth of six inches. 
d.  Arcade, gallery or stoop. 
e.  Complementary changes in façade materials or texture. 
2.  An expression line shall be provided between the first and second stories delineating the transition between ground and upper floors. 
3.  Architectural treatments on the façade, such as cornices or expression lines, shall be continued around the sides of the building visible from a street. 
4.  All building elevations (including secondary/interior side façades) shall use similar materials and appearance as the front/street facade. 
C.  Glazing requirements. 
1.  Glazing percentages shall be calculated as follows: 
 
a.  Nonresidential first floor: The area of glass between three feet and eight feet above finished floor, divided by the area of the building façade also between three feet and eight feet above finished floor. 
b.  Nonresidential above first floor: The combined area of glass on all floors above the first divided by the total area of the building façade for those floors. 
c.  Residential: The area of glass divided by the area of the façade. 
2.  The approving authority may allow reduced glazing and/or glass transmittance for places of religious assembly and schools. 
3.  There is no maximum limit on how much glazing may be provided. However, if glass walls are used, an architectural feature, such as a canopy/marquee, overhang, or a horizontal change in plane shall be provided between the first and second floors to ensure pedestrian scale at the sidewalk level. 
4.  Windows and glass doors shall be glazed in clear glass with 80 percent minimum transmittance. The use of reflective glass and reflective film is prohibited on the ground floor of all buildings. 
D.  Building entrances. 
1.  Each building shall provide a primary public entrance oriented toward the public right-of-way, and may be located at the building corner facing the intersection of two streets. Additional entrances may be provided on other sides of the building. 
2.  Primary public entrances shall be operable, clearly-defined and highly-visible. In order to emphasize entrances they shall be accented by a change in materials around the door, recessed into the façade (alcove), or accented by an overhang, awning, canopy, or marquee. 
3.  Building frontages along the street shall have functional entrances at least every 150 feet.  
Sec. 30-4.15. - Parking requirements. 
A.  Parking amounts. 
Transect 	Min. Vehicle Spaces 	Min. Bicycle Spaces 	Min. Scooter Spaces 
	Nonresidential Use 	Residential Use 	Nonresidential Use 	Residential Use 	
DT 	- 	- 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 6 bedrooms 
U9 	- 	- 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 6 bedrooms 
U8 	- 	- 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 6 bedrooms 
U7 	- 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 6 bedrooms 
U6 	- 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 6 bedrooms 
U5 	- 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	- 
U4 	Per parking code 	
U3 		
U2 		
U1 		
 
B.  Location of parking facilities. 
1.  Surface parking lots shall be located to the rear or side of buildings, but no more than 50 percent of the total parking area may be located to the side of buildings. 
Figure V-10: Ground-Floor Parking under Building
 
2.  Surface parking in the form of a single level of ground floor parking located within the building footprint (see Figure V-10) must include a minimum of 25 feet of active ground floor commercial, residential, or office uses along Storefront and Principal streets, or in the event that all of the abutting roadways are local streets, must include a minimum of 25 feet of active ground floor uses along the most primary local street as determined by pedestrian traffic. All other street frontages must include decorative screening walls, perimeter parking landscaping per Article VII, or a combination thereof to shield ground floor parking areas. 
3.  Surface and structured parking areas shall be accessed from rear alleys or rear lanes where available (see Figure V-11), from an adjacent property (see Figure V-12), or from local streets, in that order of hierarchy. Vehicular access from other street types shall only be allowed in the absence of these options. 
4.  Within the DT district, any surface parking areas abutting a public street or urban walkway shall be screened from street view by a masonry garden wall with a height between three and five feet. In the other T-zones, the parking lot may be screened in accordance with the perimeter parking landscaping standards per article VII. 
5.  A minimum of ten percent of the provided bicycle parking shall be located between the building and the street. 
Figure V-11: Parking Access from Alley
  
C.  Design of parking structures. 
1.  Parking structures located along Storefront streets shall be concealed by liner buildings, which may be attached or detached from the parking structure (see Figure V-13). The liner building shall have a minimum of two stories and a minimum height of 30 feet and a minimum depth of 25 feet along the entire length of the parking structure. 
Figure V-13: Parking Structures on Storefront Streets
 
2.  Parking structures located along Principal streets shall be required to provide ground floor commercial or office space along the street frontage (see Figure V-14). 
Figure V-14: Parking Structures on Principal Streets
 
3.  On all other streets, any structured parking that is not concealed behind a liner building or ground floor commercial or office space shall have decorative screening walls, perimeter parking landscaping per Article VII, or a combination thereof to screen ground floor parking (see Figure V-15). 
Figure V-15: Parking Structures on Other Streets
 
4.  Parking structures shall meet setback, height, and façade articulation standards applicable to the transect, but are exempt from the minimum floor-to-ceiling height requirement and the building frontage zone requirement. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 7, 2-21-19)  
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 30-4.16. - Permitted uses. 
The following table contains the list of uses allowed, and specifies whether the uses are allowed by right (P), accessory to a principal use (A), or by special use permit approval (S). Blank cells indicate that the use is not allowed. No variances from the requirements of this section shall be allowed. 
Table V-4: Permitted Uses in Residential Districts. 
USES 	Use Standards 	RSF-1 to 4 	RC 	MH 	RMF-5 	RMF-6 to 8 
Accessory dwelling units 	30-5.33 	- 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Adult day care homes 	30-5.2 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Assisted living facilities 		- 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Attached dwellings (up to 6 attached units) 		- 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Bed and breakfast establishments 	30-5.4 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Community residential homes (up to 6 residents) 	30-5.6 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Community residential homes (7 to 14 residents) 	30-5.6 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Community residential homes (over 14 residents) 	30-5.6 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Day care centers 	30-5.7 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dormitory, small 	30-5.8 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Dormitory, large 	30-5.8 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 
Emergency shelters 		- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Family child care homes 	30-5.10 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Fowl or livestock (as an accessory use) 	30-5.36 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Mobile homes 		- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Multi-family dwellings 		- 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Multi-family, small-scale (2-4 units per building) 		- 	P 1 	- 	P 	P 
Places of religious assembly 	30-5.21 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Libraries 		- 	S 	S 	S 	S 
Public parks 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Schools (elementary, middle and high) 		S 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Simulated gambling establishments 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Single-family dwellings 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Skilled nursing facility 		- 	- 	- 	- 	S 
Social service homes/halfway houses 	30-5.26 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 
 
LEGEND: 
P = Permitted by right; S = Special use permit; A = Accessory; Blank = Use not allowed. 
1 = No more than two dwellings units per building are permitted in the RC district. 
(Ord. No. 170975 , § 2, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-4.17. - Dimensional standards. 
The following tables contain the dimensional standards for the various uses allowed in each district: 
Table V-5: Residential Districts Dimensional Standards. 
	RSF-1 	RSF-2 	RSF-3 	RSF-4 	RC 	MH 	RMF-5 	RMF-6 	RMF-7 	RMF-8 
DENSITY/INTENSITY 
Residential density (units/acre) 	
 Min. 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 	8 1 	8 1 	8 1 
 Max. by right 	3.5 	4.6 	5.8 	8 	12 	12 	12 	10 	14 	20 
 With density bonus points 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	See 
Table 
V-6 	See 
Table 
V-6 	See 
Table 
V-6 
Nonresidential building coverage 	35% 	35% 	40% 	40% 	50% 	50% 	50% 	50% 	50% 	50% 
LOT STANDARDS 
Min. lot area (sq. ft.) 	8,500 	7,500 	6,000 	4,300 	3,000 	3,000 	3,500 	None 	None 	None 
Min. lot width (ft.) 										
 Single-family 	85 	75 	60 	50 	35 	35 	40 	40 	40 	40 
 Two-family 2 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	70 	NA 	75 	75 	75 	75 
 Other uses 	85 	75 	60 	50 	35 	35 	85 	85 	85 	85 
Min. lot depth (ft.) 	90 3 	90 3 	90 3 	80 3 	None 	None 	90 	90 	90 	90 
MIN. SETBACKS (ft.) 
Front 	20 3 	20 3 	20 3 	20 3 	10 4 	15 	10 min. 100 
max. 	10 min. 100 
max. 	10 min. 100 
max. 	10 min. 100 max 
Side (street) 	10 	10 	7.5 	7.5 	NA 	NA 	15 	15 	15 	15 
Side (interior) 5, 6 	7.5 	7.5 	7.5 	7.5 	5 	5 	10 	10 	10 	10 
Rear 6, 7 	20 	20 	15 	10 	20 	15 	10 	10 	10 	10 
Rear, accessory 	7.5 	7.5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT (stories) 
By right 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 
With building height bonus 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	5 	5 	5 
 
LEGEND: 
1 = Parcels 0.5 acres or smaller existing on November 13, 1991, are exempt from minimum density requirements. 
2 = Assumes both units on one lot. Lot may not be split, unless each individual lot meets minimum lot width requirement for single-family. 
3 = Lots abutting a collector or arterial street shall have a minimum depth of 150 feet and a minimum building setback of 50 feet along that street. 
4 = Attached stoops or porches meeting the standards in sections 30-4.13 and 30-4.14 are permitted to encroach up to five feet into the minimum front yard setback. 
5 = Except where the units are separated by a common wall on the property line of two adjoining lots. In such instances, only the side yard setback for the end unit is required. 
6 = Accessory pre-engineered or pre-manufactured structures of 100 square feet or less and one story in height may be erected in the rear or side yard as long as the structure has a minimum yard setback of three feet from the rear or side property line, is properly anchored to the ground, and is separated from neighboring properties by a fence or wall that is at least 75 percent opaque. 
7 = Accessory screened enclosure structures, whether or not attached to the principal structure, may be erected in the rear yard as long as the enclosure has a minimum yard setback of three feet from the rear property line. The maximum height of the enclosure at the setback line shall not exceed eight feet. The roof and all sides of the enclosure not attached to the principal structure shall be made of screening material.  
Sec. 30-4.18. - Density bonus points. 
Development criteria described in the density bonus points manual, when met, shall allow increases in development intensity based upon the limits in this section. These increases in intensity shall be allowed should a developer propose to undertake a project that will result in a development sensitive to the unique environmental and developmental needs of the area. For each criterion met by the developer, certain points shall be credited to the project. Those points, calculated in accordance with the Density Bonus Points Manual, shall determine the maximum allowable density. 
Table V-6: Permitted Density Using Density Bonus Points 
RMF-6 	RMF-7 	RMF-8 
Points 	Max. residential density (du/ac) 	Points 	Max. residential density (du/ac) 	Points 	Max. residential density (du/ac) 
0 	10 	0 	14 	0 	20 
26 	11 	20 	15 	16 	21 
52 	12 	39 	16 	30 	22 
79 	13 	59 	17 	46 	23 
108 	14 	79 	18 	59 	24 
138+ 	15 	98 	19 	75 	25 
  
DIVISION 4. - MIXED-USE AND NONRESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 30-4.19. - Permitted uses. 
The following table contains the list of uses allowed, and specifies whether the uses are allowed by right (P), accessory to a principal use (A), or by special use permit approval (S). Blank cells indicate that the use is not allowed. No variances from the requirements of this section shall be allowed. 
Table V-7: Permitted Uses in Mixed-Use and Nonresidential Districts. 
	Use Standards 	MU-1 	MU-2 	OR 	OF 	CP 	BUS 	BA 	BT 	BI 	W 	I-1 	I-2 
RESIDENTIAL 
Single-family house 		P 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Attached dwellings 		P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Multi-family dwellings 		P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Accessory dwelling units 	30-5.33 	A 	A 	A 	A 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Adult day care homes 	30-5.2 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 
Community residential homes (up to 6 residents) 	30-5.6 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Community residential homes (more than 14 residents) 	30-5.6 	- 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Community residential homes (7 to 14 residents) 	30-5.6 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Dormitory, large 	30-5.8 	- 	- 	- 	S 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Dormitory, small 	30-5.8 	S 	S 	S 	P 	- 	S 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Family child care homes 	30-5.10 	P 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
NONRESIDENTIAL 
Alcoholic beverage establishments 	30-5.3 	S 	S 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 	- 	P 	P 
Assisted living facility 		P 	P 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Armor systems manufacturing and assembly 	30-5.16 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Bed and breakfast establishments 	30-5.4 	P 	P 	S 	S 	- 	P 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Business services 		P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Car wash facilities 	30-5.5 	S 	S 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Civic, social & fraternal organizations 		P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 
Daycare center 	30-5.7 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 
Drive-through facility 	30-5.9 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Emergency shelters 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Equipment sales, rental and leasing, heavy 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Equipment sales, rental and leasing, light 		- 	P 	P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Food distribution center for the needy 	30-5.12 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	- 	S 	S 	- 	- 	- 
Food truck 	30-5.35 	P 	P 	A 	A 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Fuel dealers 		S 	S 	- 	- 	- 	S 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Funeral homes and crematories 		P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Gasoline/alternative fuel stations 	30-5.13 	S 	S 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	S 	S 
Go-cart raceway and rentals (indoor and outdoor) 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	S 
Health services 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Hotels and motels 		S 	S 	- 	- 	S 	P 	- 	P 	P 	S 	- 	- 
Ice manufacturing/vending machines 	30-5.38 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	S 	S 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Industrial 	30-5.14 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Job training and vocational rehabilitation services 		- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	- 
Junkyard/Salvage Yard 	30-5.15 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	P 
Laboratories, medical and dental 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Large-scale retail 		- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 
Libraries 		- 	P 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Light assembly, fabrication, and processing 	30-5.16 	P 	P 	- 	S 	S 	S 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Liquor stores 		P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Medical marijuana dispensing facility 		P 	P 	A 1 	A 1 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	S 
Microbrewery 
Microwinery 
Microdistillery 3 	30-5.17 	S 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Mini-warehouses, self-storage 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Museums and art galleries 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 
Offices 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Offices, medical and dental 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	P 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Outdoor storage, principal use 	30-5.19 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	P 	P 	P 
Parking, surface (as a principal use) 	30-5.20 	- 	S 	- 	- 	- 	S 	P 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 
Passenger transit or rail stations 		S 	S 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 
Personal services 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Places of religious assembly 	30-5.21 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 
Public administration buildings 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 
Public maintenance and storage facilities 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public parks 		S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Recreation, indoor 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Recreation, outdoor 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	P 	P 	S 	- 	P 	P 
Recycling centers 		- 	S 	- 	- 	- 	S 	- 	- 	- 	S 	S 	P 
Rehabilitation centers 	30-5.24 	S 	S 	S 	S 	- 	S 		- 	S 	- 	S 	
Research, development and testing facilities 		- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Residences for destitute people 	30-5.22 	S 	S 	S 	S 	- 	S 	- 	S 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Restaurants 		P 	P 	- 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Retail nurseries, lawn and garden supply stores 		P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	- 
Retail sales (not elsewhere classified) 		P 	P 	- 	- 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	S 
Schools, elementary, middle & high (public & private) 		P 	P 	S 	S 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Schools, professional 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Schools, vocational and trade 		- 	P 	P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Scooter or electric golf cart sales 		P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	- 	P 	- 	P 	- 
Sexually-oriented cabarets 	30-5.23 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Sexually-oriented motion picture theaters 	30-5.23 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Sexually-oriented retail store 	30-5.23 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Simulated gambling establishments 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Skilled nursing facility 		P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Social service facility 	30-5.25 	S 	S 	S 	S 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	S 	S 
Solar generation station 	30-5.27 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 
Truck or bus terminal/maintenance facilities 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Vehicle repair 	30-5.28 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	- 	P 	P 
Vehicle rental 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 
Vehicle sales (no outdoor display) 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 	P 	- 
Vehicle sales (with outdoor display) 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 
Vehicle services 	30-5.28 	S 	S 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 
Veterinary services 	30-5.29 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Warehouse/distribution facilities (<100,000 SF) 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Warehouse/distribution facilities (>100,000 SF) 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Waste management facilities 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	- 	P 	P 
Wholesale trade 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Wireless communication facilities 	30-5.30 												
 
LEGEND: 
P = Permitted by right; S = Special use permit; A = Accessory; Blank = Use not allowed. 
1 = Only when accessory to and in the same building as health services or offices of physicians, dentists, and other health practitioners. 
2 = Accessory to and in the same building as health services and comprising less than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the building. 
3 = Prohibited where adjacent to single-family zoned property. 
(Ord. No. 160685 , § 3, 3-15-18; Ord. No. 170975 , § 3, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-4.20. - Dimensional standards. 
The following tables contain the dimensional standards for the various uses allowed in each district: 
Table V-8: Mixed-Use and Nonresidential Districts Dimensional Standards. 
	MU-1 	MU-2 	OR 	OF 	CP 	BUS 	BA 	BT 	W 	BI 	I-1 	I-2 
DENSITY/INTENSITY 
Residential density (units/acre) 	
 Min. 1 	8 	12 	None 	None 	10 	None 	None 	None 	8 	None 	None 	None 
 Max. 	30 	30 	20 	20 	30 	None 	None 	None 	30 	None 	None 	None 
Nonresidential building coverage 	60% 	75% 	40% 	50% 	50% 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Nonresidential GLA (max) 	100,000 2 	None 2 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 
LOT STANDARDS 
Min. lot area (sq. ft.) 	None 	None 	6,000 	6,000 	None 	None 	None 	6,000 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Min. lot width (ft.) 	None 	None 	60 	60 	None 	None 	None 	60 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Min. lot depth (ft.) 	None 	None 	90 	90 	None 	None 	None 	90 	None 	None 	None 	None 
SETBACKS (ft.) 
Front 	10 min. 
100 
max. 	10 
min. 
100 
max. 	10 
min. 
100 
max. 	10 
min. 
100 
max. 	10 
min. 
100 
max. 	10 
min. 
100 
max. 	15 
min. 	10 
min. 
100 
max. 	25 
min. 	25 
min. 	25 
min. 	25 
min. 
Side-street (min) 	15 	15 	10 	10 	10 	10 	15 	10 	25 	20 	25 	25 
Side-interior (min) 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 4 	10 	10 4 	20 4 
Rear (min) 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	15 	10 	10 4 	20 	10 4 	10 4 
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT (stories) 
By right 	5 	5 	3 	3 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 
With building height bonus 	8 	8 	- 	8 	8 	8 	- 	8 	- 	- 	- 	- 
 
LEGEND: 
1 = Lots that existed on November 13, 1991, as recorded in the city and that are less than or equal to 0.5 acres in size are exempt from minimum density requirements. 
2 = Developments of 50,000 sq. ft. or more of gross leasable area shall be located along arterials or collectors, as defined in the official roadway map. 
3 = Where the yard abuts and is used for access to a railroad siding, the minimum setback shall be zero feet. 
4 = Where the rear or side yard abuts U1 or single-family residential zoning or a historic district, section 30-4.8 development compatibility standards shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 8, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-4.21. - Design standards. 
A.  Parking. 
1.  Motor vehicle parking is required in accordance with article VII. All motor vehicle parking except a double-loaded row of parking shall be located in the rear and/or interior side of the building, unless such a location is prevented by topography, stormwater retention or significant trees, as determined by the appropriate reviewing board, city manager or designee. In no case shall more than 50 percent of the parking be located between the front facade and the primary abutting street, unless modified by the appropriate reviewing board, city manager or designee. However, driveway entrances and exits to parking areas shall be allowed on the front side of the building. There shall be no limit on the number of parking spaces in parking structures. 
2.  Bicycle parking spaces shall be installed as required by article VII. Such parking may encroach into the public right-of-way and may be located within the building frontage and/or landscape zones. Bicycle parking requirements may be waived if public bicycle parking exists to serve the use. 
B.  Sidewalks. 
1.  All developments, unless provided otherwise in this chapter, shall provide sidewalks along all street frontage. All developments shall provide pedestrian connections from the public sidewalk to the principal building. Entrance sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet of clear width. 
2.  Minimum sidewalk widths. 
Multi-Family Residential/Industrial 	Commercial/Institutional/Office/Mixed-Use 
7 feet 	8 feet 
 
The minimum unobstructed width shall be two feet less than the required sidewalk width, as long as at least five feet of unobstructed width is retained. At transit stops, the minimum width is eight feet of unobstructed width. 
C.  Building orientation. The main entrance of buildings or units shall be located on the first floor on the more primary street. 
D.  Glazing. Building walls facing the more primary street shall have non-reflective, transparent windows or glazed area covering at least 25 percent of their surface at pedestrian level (between three feet and eight feet above grade) on the first floor. Operable transparent entrance doors may be included in the calculation of total facade surface area. 
E.  Mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment shall be placed on the roof, in the rear or side of the building, and shall be screened with parapets or other types of visual screening. 
(Ord. No. 170831 , § 5, 4-5-18)  
DIVISION 5. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 30-4.22. - Purpose and standards. 
A.  Agriculture (AGR). 
1.  Purpose. The AGR district is established for the purpose of providing for a diversity of agricultural activities, including limited processing and sale of agricultural products raised on the premises and including some agricultural activities that may be objectionable if conducted in close proximity to residential developments. 
2.  Objectives. The provisions of the AGR district are intended to: 
a.  Protect watersheds, wilderness and scenic areas and conserve wildlife, as well as preserve open space. 
b.  Promote forestry, the growing of crops and grazing. 
c.  Provide for spacious developments. 
d.  Encourage the orderly expansion of urban development. 
B.  Airport facility (AF). See section 30-4.25. 
C.  Conservation (CON). 
1.  Purpose. The CON district is established for the purpose of conserving, restoring and protecting environmentally significant lands within the city and for establishing natural buffers between incompatible uses. It is intended that this district shall protect, restore and preserve natural features and open space so that the present and future residents of the city shall be able to enjoy the benefits of the natural environment of the city. 
2.  Objectives. The provisions of the CON district are intended to: 
a.  Conserve parks, recreational areas, open space, floodplains and unique natural features. 
b.  Protect and restore the natural features of the city, environmentally significant lands along creeks, wetlands, uplands and lakes, areas subject to detrimental erosion, and areas subject to noise disturbance due to aircraft-generated sound levels in close proximity to an airport or under a flight path. 
c.  Restrict the development of lands upon which a more intensive development would cause adverse environmental impact. 
d.  Provide the assurance of natural buffering between incompatible land uses. 
D.  Educational services (ED). 
1.  Purpose. The ED district is established to identify and locate public educational facilities at appropriate locations throughout the community. 
2.  Objectives. The provisions of the ED district are intended to locate such uses so as to provide easy accessibility and convenience to the users. 
E.  Medical services (MD). 
1.  Purpose. The MD district is established to provide adequate space in appropriate locations suitable for accommodating the health and related medical needs of the community. 
2.  Objectives. The provisions of the MD district are intended to: 
a.  Encourage such development to locate in close proximity to the community's major transportation arteries so as to provide maximum accessibility for emergency vehicles and the general public. 
b.  Discourage encroachment by unrelated retail and office activities and other incompatible uses. 
c.  Ensure through development plan review that development is undertaken in a manner compatible with less intense uses of land or buildings in the area. 
F.  Planned development (PD). See article III. 
G.  Public Services and Operations (PS). 
1.  Purpose. The public services and operations (PS) district is established for the purpose of identifying and providing suitable locations for the necessary public and private utility, public-private partnerships or other legal arrangements where the land title is vested in a government and the use(s) serves a public purpose, and recreation activities that serve and are used directly by the public for their own benefit and are necessary to the normal conduct of the community's activities. This district may be isolated and surrounded by any other zoning district compatible with the intended use of the facility. 
2.  Objectives. The provisions of the PS district are intended to: 
a.  Accommodate utilities, recreation and public facilities, at appropriate locations, necessary to serve the public. 
b.  Ensure public awareness of the location of existing or potential utilities, recreation and public facilities. 
c.  Ensure, by requiring development plan review where necessary, that such uses are designed to minimize negative impacts on surrounding properties. 
3.  Additional requirements. The following criteria shall apply to all uses within the PS district: 
a.  Site design. 
i.  Building scale and massing shall relate to that of adjacent buildings to the extent practical. 
ii.  Public developments shall be exemplary in their use of signage and landscaping and in the preservation of existing trees. 
iii.  Pedestrian areas shall be separated from vehicular areas wherever possible. Traffic circulation should be safe, convenient and designed according to sound engineering practices. 
iv.  The design of the site and facilities shall promote energy conservation through proper solar access, shading and other measures, where appropriate. 
v.  Appropriate access for emergency vehicles, garbage trucks and other service vehicles shall be provided. 
vi.  All site elements shall be designed to protect natural and community resources, such as wildlife habitats, historic structures and ecologically sensitive areas. 
b.  External compatibility. 
i.  Buffering and screening of public service facilities shall be provided commensurate with the facility's degree of impact and incompatibility with surrounding developments. 
ii.  Electrical transformers and other utility equipment shall be screened from public view. 
iii.  Site illumination and public address systems, particularly for recreation areas, shall be designed so as to create no interference with the privacy of adjoining properties. 
iv.  Adverse impacts on adjacent properties, such as noise, smoke, glare and odor, shall be mitigated through site design. Where necessary, building construction methods or mechanical equipment should also be used to mitigate these adverse impacts. 
c.  Preliminary development plan in conjunction with rezoning. When a property is rezoned to the PS district, the plan board shall recommend to the city commission whether a preliminary development plan is required before the property is rezoned or the uses permitted on the property are changed. The city commission may require such development plan, or those specific items or portions of a preliminary development plan that the city commission deems necessary, to be included as part of any petition to rezone property to this classification or to change the permitted uses on the property if the newly permitted use has not been previously approved. Should the city commission deem a preliminary development plan is needed to judge whether the proposed use can be accommodated on the site without detriment to the health, safety and general welfare of surrounding properties, the development plan shall meet the requirements of this chapter. 
A preliminary development plan is intended to help further the purpose of this district by providing the plan board and city commission with additional information on site-specific conditions that will assist the city plan board and city commission in their decision-making process relating to the accommodation of the proposed use(s) at appropriate locations necessary to serve the public; the assurance of public awareness of the proposed location of potential public facilities, utilities and recreation; and the assurance that the conditions placed upon the rezoning are designed to minimize any potential negative impacts on surrounding properties.  
Sec. 30-4.23. - Permitted uses. 
The following table contains the list of uses allowed, and specifies whether the uses are allowed by right (P), accessory to a principal use (A), or by special use permit approval (S). Blank cells indicate that the use is not allowed. No variances from the requirements of this section shall be allowed. 
Table V-9: Permitted Uses in Special Districts. 
Use 	Use Standards 	AGR 	AF 	CON 	ED 	MD 	PS * 
Agricultural, forestry and fishing uses 		P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Airports 		- 	S 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Animal specialty services 		P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Arboreta and botanical or zoological gardens 		- 	- 	P 	- 	- 	P 
Armor systems manufacturing and assembly 		- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Assisted living facility 		- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Business services 		- 	P 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Campgrounds 		P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Cemeteries 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Community residential homes (up to 6 residents) 	30-5.6 	P 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 
Correctional institutions 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Day care center 	30-5.7 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Drive-through facilities 	30-5.9 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Emergency shelters 		- 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Equipment rental and leasing, heavy 		P 	P 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Equipment rental and leasing, light 		P 	P 	- 	P 	P 	- 
Farmers markets 		P 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Food distribution center for the needy 	30-5.12 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Food trucks 	30-5.35 	- 	P 	- 	P 	P 	A 
Fuel dealers 		- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Funeral service and crematories 		S 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Gasoline/alternative fuel stations 	30-5.13 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Golf courses 		P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Health services 		- 	P 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Heliports 		- 	P 	- 	- 	S 	- 
Hospitals 		- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Hotels and motels 		- 	P 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Libraries 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Light assembly, fabrication and processing 		- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Medical and dental laboratories 		- 	P 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Medical marijuana dispensing facility 		- 	P 	- 	- 	A 	- 
Membership sports and recreation clubs 		P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Mini-warehouses, self-storage 		- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Museums and art galleries 		- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 
Offices 		- 	P 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Offices, medical and dental 		- 	P 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Outdoor storage, principal use 	30-5.19 	S 	S 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Parking, surface (as a principal use) 	30-5.20 	- 	S 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Pet services 		P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Places of religious assembly 	30-5.21 	- 	P 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Public administration buildings 		- 	P 	- 	P 	- 	P 
Public maintenance and storage facilities 		- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Public parks and recreational facilities 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Recreation, indoor 		P 	P 	- 	P 	- 	P 
Recreation, outdoor 		- 	P 	- 	P 	- 	P 
Recreational vehicle parks and campsites 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Rehabilitation centers 	30-5.24 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Research, development and testing service 		- 	P 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Residences for destitute people 	30-5.22 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Restaurants 		- 	P 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Retail nurseries, lawn and garden supply stores 		S 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Retail sales 		- 	P 	- 	- 	A 	- 
Sale of agricultural products 		A 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Schools, elementary, middle & high (public & private) 		- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Schools, professional 		- 	P 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Schools, vocational and trade 		- 	P 	- 	P 	- 	- 
Shooting ranges, outdoor 	30-5.24 	S 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Simulated gambling establishments 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Single-family dwellings 		P 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 
Skilled nursing facility 		- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Social service facilities (not elsewhere classified) 	30-5.25 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 	- 
Solar generation station 	30-5.27 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Stadiums and athletic/sports arenas 		- 	- 	- 	P 	- 	P 
Theaters, drive-in 		- 	S 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Truck, train or bus terminal/maintenance facilities 		- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Utilities 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Vehicle repair 	30-5.28 	- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Vehicles sales and rental 		- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Veterinary services 	30-5.29 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Warehouse/distribution facilities (=50,000 SF) 		- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Warehouse/distribution facilities (>50,000 SF) 		- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Waste management facilities 		- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	S 
Water conservation areas, water reservoirs and control structures, drainage wells and water wells. 		- 	- 	P 	- 	- 	P 
Wholesale trade 		- 	P 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Wireless communication facilities 	See 30-5.30 						
 
LEGEND: 
P = Permitted by right; S = Special use permit; A = Accessory; Blank = Use not allowed. 
* = Other uses may be allowed as designated by the ordinance rezoning a property to PS. 
(Ord. No. 160685 , § 4, 3-15-18; Ord. No. 170975 , § 4, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-4.24. - Dimensional standards. 
The following table contains the dimensional standards for the various uses allowed in each special district: 
Table V-10: Dimensional Standards for Special Districts. 
	AGR 	AF 	CON 	ED 	MD 	PS 5 
DENSITY/INTENSITY 
Max. density (units/acre) 	0.2 		0.2 			
Max. lot coverage 	20% 	None 	10% 1 	None 	40% 2 	
LOT STANDARDS 
Min. lot area 	5 acres 	None 	5 acres 	None 	6,000 sq. ft. 	
Min. lot width (ft.) 	300 	None 	None 	None 	60 	
Min. lot depth (ft.) 	300 	None 	None 	None 	None 	
MIN. SETBACKS (ft.) 
Front 	50 4 	25 	50 	25 7 	20 	
Side-street 	50 4 	6 	50 	25 7 	15 	
Side-interior 	25 4 	6 	25 	15 7 	15 	
Rear 	50 4 	6 	50 	50 	15 	
BUILDING HEIGHT (stories) 
Max. 	3 	None 	3 	None 	5 	
With SUP 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	14 8 	
 
LEGEND: 
1 = By impervious cover of any kind. 
2 = 50 percent when a minimum of 75 percent of parking is accommodated within a parking structure. 
3 = Intensive recreation uses such as fairgrounds, stadia, community assembly buildings, performing arts halls, arenas, etc. 
4 = Hog raising operations, buildings for commercial poultry raising, dog kennels and open runs or cages, and stables shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any property line. 
5 = Development standards to be determined at the time of rezoning. 
6 = Per FAA and airport regulations. 
7 = If the development abuts land shown as SF or RL on the future land use map, the setback along that property line shall be 50 feet plus an additional ten feet setback per every floor above the second. 
8 = Building heights for hospitals and large-scale medical office facilities may be increased to a maximum of 14 stories through the special use permit process. All other uses may be increased to a maximum of eight stories through the special use permit process. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 9, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-4.25. - Airport facility (AF). 
A.  Purpose. The airport facility (AF) district is established to ensure the proper and safe operation of the Gainesville Regional Airport, to protect the public investment in the airport, and to protect and promote the public utility of the airport. Recognizing the unique conditions pertaining to the airport, this district provides a means of balancing local concerns with conformance to applicable state and federal regulations. 
B.  Objectives. The provisions of the AF district are intended to: 
1.  Ensure public health, safety, and welfare by adherence to all applicable local, state, and federal standards and regulations. 
2.  Protect the public investment through development plan review, where applicable, to accommodate efficient and harmonious use of the facility. 
3.  Be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and be compatible with surrounding land uses through adoption and implementation of the airport facility zoning map. 
C.  Additional requirements. 
1.  Airport facility zoning map. The airport facility zoning map shall be adopted and amended by ordinance, and shall be processed in the same manner as an application for rezoning. 
2.  Rezoning. 
a.  Applications for rezoning to the AF district shall be accompanied by an airport facility zoning map as described herein, which shall become and be made a part of the ordinance rezoning the property. Additionally, the Gainesville-Alachua County Regional Airport Authority (GACRAA) or city commission may require a development plan to be included as part of any petition to rezone property to this classification, provided GACRAA or city commission find that such a plan is essential to the orderly development of the airport and necessary to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the flying public and surrounding properties. 
b.  The petition shall be initially reviewed by GACRAA, and shall be primarily in the context of: The relationship of the proposed rezoning to the adopted airport master plan, the relationship and effect of the proposed rezoning to or on any existing land use on the airport, and the impact of the proposed rezoning on the airport. After such review, which shall be made within 60 calendar days of the filing of the application for rezoning, GACRAA shall submit a written recommendation to the city plan board as a permanent part of the public record. The application shall then continue to be processed as any other zoning map amendment petition under the procedures set forth in this Land Development Code. If a written recommendation is not made within the time provided, then the city plan board may act on the application. 
c.  The airport facility zoning map shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
i.  Scale, date, north arrow, and general location map showing the boundaries of the area for rezoning. 
ii.  Within the site and within 300 feet of the surrounding area, the location of all existing or proposed runways. 
iii.  All areas proposed for exemption from the parking or landscaping requirements. 
3.  Development plan approval. Development plan approval pursuant to this chapter shall be required for all development, except that GACRAA shall review any development plans within the AF district, excluding wireless communications facilities. Wireless communications facilities used exclusively for aeronautical purposes to serve the airport are subject to development plan approval by GACRAA. GACRAA shall specify any objections to the development plans and may make recommendations for modifications. In addition to the development plan review requirements of this chapter, GACRAA shall also review the development plan in the context of: The relationship and effect of the proposed development plan to or on the adopted airport master plan; the relationship and effect of the proposed development plan to or on any standard, rule, regulation, or applicable contractual agreements on the airport; and the impact of the proposed use on the airport. Upon completion of its review of a development plan, GACRAA shall either: 
a.  Find that all requirements have been met and issue a preliminary development order; or 
b.  Find that all requirements can be met with reasonable modifications that the developer proffers at the hearing and issue a preliminary development order; or 
c.  Refuse to issue a preliminary development order because the plan as presented fails to meet the requirements of this chapter, the Comprehensive Plan, or other federal, state, or regional laws and regulations as applicable. 
4.  Parking. Any development within the AF district shall comply with the parking requirements as set forth in this chapter, except GACRAA may waive or modify the off-street parking requirements during development plan review if GACRAA finds that the necessity or desirability of such parking is inappropriate due to the unique nature of the proposed use or the location upon the airport. 
5.  Landscaping. Any development within the AF district shall comply with the landscaping requirements as set forth in this chapter, except GACRAA may waive or modify the off-street parking requirements during development plan review if GACRAA finds that such landscaping is in conflict with Federal Aviation Administration safety requirements.  
Sec. 30-4.26. - Airport zoning overlay. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of these airport zoning regulations is to provide both airspace protection and land use compatibility in relation to the normal operation of public-use airports located within the city. These regulations promote: 
1.  The maximum safety of residents and property within the areas surrounding the airport; 
2.  The maximum safety of aircraft arriving at and departing from the Gainesville Regional Airport and all public-use airports; 
3.  The full utility of the public-use airport; 
4.  Compatible development standards for land uses within the prescribed airport zones of influence associated with the normal operation of the airport; 
5.  Building/structure height standards for use within the airport zones of influence and other zones prescribed in the Federal Aviation Regulations; and 
6.  Proper enforcement of these regulations in compliance with state and federal laws in a manner that provides the greatest degree of safety, comfort, and well-being to both the users of the airport facility and the property owners within the vicinity of the airport. 
B.  Findings. The regulations set forth herein are adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by F.S. Ch. 333. It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of the airport and of occupants of land in its vicinity and also, if of the obstruction type, reduces the size of areas available for the taking off, maneuvering, or landing of aircraft, thus impairing or destroying the utility of the airport and the public investment therein. It is further found that certain activities and uses of land in the immediate vicinity of airports, as enumerated in F.S. § 333.03(2), are not compatible with normal airport operations and may, if not regulated, endanger the lives of the participants, adversely affect their health, or otherwise limit the accomplishment of normal activities. Accordingly, it is declared that: 
1.  The creation or establishment of an airport hazard that reduces the size of the areas available for such operations, or that inhibits the safe and efficient use of airspace or the airport, creates a public nuisance and injury to the city. 
2.  It is therefore necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare that the creation of airport hazards and incompatible use of land within the airport overlay district or the airport noise zones be prevented. 
3.  The creation or establishment of anything affecting the safety of aircraft or pilots or passengers, or that inhibits the safe operation of aircraft operating to or from the airport, shall be prevented. 
4.  The prevention of these hazards and incompatible land uses is desirable and should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by exercise of the police power, without compensation, in accordance with F.S. Ch. 333. 
5.  The prevention of the creation of airport hazards and incompatible land uses, and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards, are public purposes for which the political subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land or air rights thereover. 
C.  Definitions. Throughout these regulations, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated unless the text of the ordinance clearly indicates otherwise: 
Aeronautical study means a Federal Aviation Administration study, conducted in accordance with the standards of 14 C.F.R. Part 77, Subpart C, and Federal Aviation Administration policy and guidance, on the effect of proposed construction or alteration upon the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe and efficient use of navigable airspace. 
Aircraft means any motor vehicle or contrivance now known, or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation of or flight in the air. 
Airport means any areas of land or water designed or set aside for the landing and taking-off of aircraft, and used or to be used in the interest of the public for such purpose. 
Airport authority means the Gainesville-Alachua County Regional Airport Authority. 
Airport hazard means an obstruction to air navigation that affects the safe and efficient use of navigable airspace or the operation of planned or existing air navigation and communication facilities. 
Airport hazard area means any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established. 
Airport land use compatibility zoning means airport zoning regulations governing the use of land on, adjacent to, or in the immediate vicinity of airports. 
Airport layout plan means a set of scaled drawings that provides a graphic representation of the existing and future development plan for the airport and demonstrates the preservation and continuity of safety, utility, and efficiency of the airport. 
Airport master plan means a comprehensive plan of an airport that typically describes current and future plans for airport development designed to support existing and future aviation demand. 
Airport protection zoning regulations means airport zoning regulations governing airport hazards. 
Airport reference point means the approximate geometric center of the runways of an airport, expressed by its latitude and longitude, as shown on the approved airport layout plan of the Gainesville Regional Airport, and identified as the "future airport reference point." 
Approach, transitional, horizontal and conical zones means zones that apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal and conical surfaces defined in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR). 
Avigation easement means the permanent grant of airspace rights over and above the surface of property in order to permit airport operations and operation of aircraft, despite the associated nuisance effects on the underlying surface property, such as but not limited to, noise, vibration, fumes, and fuel particles. 
Day night average sound level (DNL) means the sound exposure level generated by aircraft operations, as defined in Federal Aviation Regulation Part 150 entitled "Airport Noise Compatibility Planning" (FAR Part 150) codified under 14 C.F.R. Part 150, estimated using the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Integrated Noise Model (INM) in a manner that complies with the requirements set forth in Part 150. 
Decision height (or decision altitude) means the lowest AMSL altitude to which descent is authorized on final approach in execution of a standard precision instrument approach where electronic glide slope is provided. 
Department means the department of transportation as created under F.S. § 20.23. 
Educational facility means any structure, land, or use that includes a public or private kindergarten through 12th grade school, charter school, magnet school, college campus, or university campus. The term does not include space used for educational purposes within a multitenant building. 
Landfill has the same meaning as provided in F.S. § 403.703. 
Minimum descent altitude (MDA) means the lowest AMSL altitude to which descent is authorized on final approach or during circling-to-land maneuvering in execution of a standard instrument approach procedure where electronic glide slope is not provided. 
Noise exposure map means documentation identifying aircraft-related noise exposure around an airport that is developed in a manner that FAA finds compliant with the requirements set forth in FAR Part 150. 
Noise level reduction (NLR) means a measurement standard for the reduction in sound level transmission between the exterior and interior of a structure. NLR standards are used to evaluate the effectiveness or establish requirements of techniques to limit sound transmission in order to prevent or mitigate adverse noise impacts through incorporation of noise attenuation into the design and construction of a structure. 
Nonconforming use, airport means any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of land that was in compliance with the provisions of this chapter that were in effect when the structure, object, or use was established, but which no longer conforms to one or more of the provisions of this chapter or an amendment thereto. 
Nonprecision instrument runway means any runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, or for which no precision approach facilities are planned. 
Object of natural growth means any organism of the plant kingdom, including trees. 
Obstruction means any existing or proposed object, terrain, or structure construction or alteration that exceeds the federal obstruction standards contained in 14 C.F.R. Part 77, Subpart C, or, regardless of height, may otherwise be hazardous to or interfere with the taking off, maneuvering, or landing of aircraft. The term includes: 
1.  Any tree or object of natural growth or terrain; 
2.  Permanent or temporary construction or alteration, including equipment or materials used and any permanent or temporary apparatus; or 
3.  Alteration of any permanent or temporary existing structure by a change in the structure's height, including appurtenances, lateral dimensions, and equipment or materials used in the structure. 
Occupied rooms means rooms within enclosed structures that are, or may reasonably be expected to be, used for human activities including, but not limited to, sound communications, education or instruction, sleeping, eating, entertainment, or the use of telephones and other audio devices. 
Occupied structure means a structure with at least one occupied room. See "occupied rooms." 
Other-than-utility runway means any existing or planned runway that is constructed for, and intended to be used by, all types of aircraft, including those having gross weights greater than 12,500 pounds. 
Person means individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or political body, including the trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other similar representative. 
Political subdivision means the local government of any county, municipality, town, village, or other subdivision or agency thereof, or any district or special district, port commission, port authority, or other such agency authorized to establish or operate airports in the state. 
Precision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system, microwave landing system, or a precision approach radar or other approach procedure defined by FAA as "Precision" whereby vertical guidance information is provided, or any runway for which a precision approach system is planned. 
Primary surface means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway extending 200 feet beyond each end of that runway's prepared surface. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in FAR Part 77 for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
Public-use airport means an airport, publicly or privately owned, licensed by the state, which is open for use by the public. 
Runways means those existing or planned portions of the airport prepared for the landing and take-off of aircraft, as shown on the approved airport layout plan of the Gainesville Regional Airport, or those portions of each privately-owned airport prepared for the landing and take-off of aircraft, and identified as such by the Florida Department of Transportation. 
Runway end elevation means the elevation at each runway end centerline, expressed in "feet Above Mean Sea Level (AMSL)," as shown on the approved airport layout plan of the Gainesville Regional Airport. For each airport runway, the runway end elevation is that value reported by the Florida Department of Transportation for each respective runway. 
Runway Protection Zone (RPZ) (formerly known as the runway clear zone) means an area at ground level beyond the runway end to enhance the safety and protection of people and property on the ground. The lateral dimensions of the RPZ are as defined in the most current FAA Airport Design Circular or the most recent FAA-approved Airport Layout Plan. Where there is a conflict, the more stringent standard shall apply. 
Sound level means the quantity, in decibels, measured by an instrument satisfying the requirements of the American Standard Specification for Type I sound level meters. The sound level is the frequency-weighted sound pressure level obtained with the frequency weighting "A" and the standardized dynamic characteristic "SLOW." 
Statute mile means a distance of 5,280 feet. 
Structure (for the purpose of airport zoning regulations) means any object constructed erected, altered, or installed, including but not limited to, antennae, buildings, cranes, towers, smoke stacks, power generation equipment, utility poles and overhead transmission lines. 
Substantial modification means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of a structure when the actual cost of the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of the structure equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure. 
Utility runway means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by only propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
Visual runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA airport layout plan, or by any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority. 
D.  Administration. All airport zoning regulations shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or designee. Per F.S. § 333.04, in the event of conflict between the airport zoning regulations adopted herein and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or vegetation, the use of land, or any other matter, and whether such regulations were adopted by the city or by some other political subdivision having jurisdiction, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
E.  Airport zones of influence. The City of Gainesville hereby adopts three airport zones of influence. The location of these airport zones of influence and their associated regulations are hereby established to protect the public safety and interest and ensure conformance with Code of Federal Regulations 14 CFR Part 77 and F.S. Ch. 333. Unless otherwise provided for herein, the boundaries of said zones and their associated regulations may only be amended by the City Commission of the City of Gainesville. Any application for land development within these airport zones of influence shall comply with these regulations, any applicable state or federal regulations, and any applicable requirements of the land development regulations of the City of Gainesville. The airport zones of influence established in these regulations include the following: 1) airport height notification zone; 2) airport runway protection zone; and 3) airport noise zone. 
1.  Airport height notification zone. 
a.  Establishment. The airport height notification zone is hereby established as an overlay zone on the adopted city zoning map. The airport height notification zone is established to regulate the height of structures and objects of natural growth in areas around the Gainesville Regional Airport. The airport height notification zone consists of two subzones, defined as follows: 
i.  Airport height notification subzone 1: The area surrounding the Gainesville Regional Airport extending outward 20,000 feet from the ends and each side of all active runways. 
ii.  Airport height notification subzone 2: The area within the city limits not within airport height notification subzone 1. 
For the Gainesville Regional Airport, the boundary of the airport height notification zone established in these regulations is based on the runway configuration that is planned and documented as such in its approved airport layout plan. 
The airport height notification zone map shall be adopted by ordinance. When future airport height notification zone maps are prepared, the city shall consider revisions to the boundary of the airport height notification zone and to these regulations. Any such revisions shall not be operative or effective for purposes of these regulations, until adopted by ordinance of the city. 
In the event of a discrepancy between an airport height notification zone boundary as depicted on the map and as located by application of the definition of said boundary as set forth in these regulations, the boundary as prescribed by the latter shall prevail. 
b.  Regulations. 
i.  Airport obstruction permit required. Any person proposing to construct, alter, or allow an airport obstruction within an airport height notification zone or who receives a notice of potential airport obstruction as described in this section shall apply for an airport obstruction permit. 
1)  Airport hazard. A permit may not be issued if it would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard. 
2)  Nonconforming obstruction. A permit may not be issued if it would permit a nonconforming obstruction to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was when the applicable airport zoning regulation was adopted that allowed the establishment or creation of the obstruction, or than it is when the application for a permit is made. 
ii.  Notice of potential airport obstruction. During the city's development review process, the city manager or designee shall issue a notice of potential airport obstruction to all applicants for development that the city manager or designee determines includes a "potential airport obstruction" and such applicants shall apply for an airport obstruction permit. For purposes of this section, development proposals shall be considered a "potential airport obstruction" if it would result in the construction or alteration of a structure or object of natural growth having a height that would exceed: 
1)  An imaginary surface extending outward and upward from the ends and sides of a runway at a slope of one foot vertically for every 100 feet horizontally, for a distance of 20,000 feet, in airport height notification subzone 1; or 
2)  Two hundred feet above ground level in airport height notification subzone 2. 
iii.  Permit procedures. 
1)  An airport obstruction permit applicant shall submit a completed application, as provided by the city, together with documentation showing both compliance with the federal requirement for notification of proposed construction or alteration and a valid aeronautical study. 
2)  Prior to any such permit request being scheduled for consideration by the city manager or designee, the applicant shall submit a copy of the final written determination, as issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) based on its review of the applicant's notice of proposed construction or alteration, in accordance with the provisions of 14 CFR Part 77. 
3)  Upon receipt of a complete application, the city shall provide a copy of the application to the Florida Department of Transportation's aviation office by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
iv.  Permit criteria. 
1)  No airport obstruction. If the FAA has reviewed a proposed development and determined it would not exceed any federal obstruction standard contained in 14 CFR Part 77, the city manager or designee shall grant an airport obstruction permit for the proposed development. 
2)  Airport obstruction is an airport hazard. If the FAA has reviewed a proposed development and determined that it includes an airport obstruction that constitutes an airport hazard, then no airport obstruction permit shall be granted by the city manager or designee. 
3)  Airport obstruction is not an airport hazard. If the FAA has reviewed a proposed land development and determined that it includes an airport obstruction that is not an airport hazard, then the city manager or designee shall not grant a permit based solely on such FAA determination but shall grant or deny an airport obstruction permit after considering the following criteria and in accordance with F.S. § 333.07: 
(a)  The safety of persons on the ground and in the air. 
(b)  The safe and efficient use of navigable airspace. 
(c)  The nature of the terrain and height of existing structures. 
(d)  The effect of the construction or alteration of an obstruction on the state licensing standards for a public-use airport contained in F.S. Ch. 330, and rules adopted thereunder. 
(e)  The character of existing and planned flight operations and development at public use airports within the city. 
(f)  Federal airways, visual flight rules, flyways and corridors, and instrument approaches as designated by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(g)  The effect of the construction or alteration of an obstruction on the minimum descent altitude or the decision height at the affected airport. 
(h)  The cumulative effects on navigable airspace of all existing obstructions and all known proposed obstructions in the area. 
(i)  Any comments received from the Florida Department of Transportation. 
4)  Permit conditions. Any permit granted under this section shall include conditions that require the owner of the obstruction to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, marking, lighting and/or flagging as required by F.S. Ch. 333, Chapter 14-60, Florida Administrative Code, or by the FAA in its written determination. No airport obstruction permit shall be issued after the expiration date indicated on the FAA's written determination. Each airport obstruction permit issued shall specify a reasonable expiration date as a condition. 
2.  Airport runway protection zone. 
a.  Establishment. There is hereby established the airport runway protection zone as an airport zone of influence. The airport runway protection zone is established to regulate the uses of land lying in specified areas above which aircraft shall routinely operate at low altitudes and climb from or descend to the runways of the Gainesville Regional Airport. Within the airport runway protection zone, certain land uses are restricted or prohibited due to land use characteristics which could result in further death, injury, and property damage in the event of an aircraft accident, as such areas are more likely, statistically, to be exposed to accidents involving aircraft climbing from, or descending to, the runway at low altitudes. 
The airport runway protection zone includes the area over which aircraft routinely operate at altitudes of 50 feet or less above the runway end elevation, and is defined as follows: that portion of the approach surface, as defined by 14 CFR Part 77.25, that extends outward from, and perpendicular to, its common boundary with the primary surface, as defined in 14 CFR Part 77.25, for a horizontal distance of: 1) 1,000 feet for utility/visual runways, 2) 1,700 feet for nonprecision instrument/other-than-utility runways, and 3) 2,500 feet for precision instrument runways. 
The airport runway protection zone map shall be adopted by ordinance. in the event a discrepancy arises between an airport runway protection zone boundary as depicted on the map and an airport runway protection zone boundary located by application of the definition of said boundary as set forth in these regulations, the boundary as prescribed by the latter shall prevail. 
b.  Regulations. The following types of land uses shall be prohibited within the established airport runway protection zone: 
i.  Educational facilities (including all types of schools, pre-schools, and child-care facilities). 
ii.  Hospitals, medical, and health-related facilities. 
iii.  Places of religious assembly. 
iv.  Hotels and motels (including transient lodging, recreational vehicle, and mobile home parks). 
v.  Other similar land uses wherein or whereabouts persons are assembled. 
Any use that is not prohibited in an airport runway protection zone, or otherwise deemed by the FAA as incompatible or a danger to persons on the ground, is allowable within such zone, subject to compliance with applicable airport noise and height notification zone and zoning district regulations. 
3.  Airport noise zone. 
a.  Establishment. There is hereby established the airport noise zone as an airport zone of influence. The airport noise zone is established around the Gainesville Regional Airport to regulate land uses sensitive to sound levels generated by the routine operation of the airport. Within the airport noise zone, land use restrictions and special construction standards are established to minimize impacts of airport-generated noise. The airport noise zone consists of three subzones, defined as follows: 
i.  Airport noise subzone A: The area commencing at the airport reference point and extending outward therefrom to that boundary which approximates a day night average sound level of 65 dB DNL. 
ii.  Airport noise subzone B: The area commencing at the airport reference point and extending outward therefrom to that boundary which approximates a day night average sound level of 60 dB DNL, excluding subzone A. 
iii.  Airport noise subzone C: The area commencing at the airport reference point and extending outward therefrom to that boundary which approximates a day night average sound level of 55 dB DNL, excluding subzones A and B. 
For the Gainesville Regional Airport, the boundary of the airport noise zone established in these regulations is based on the forecast of day night average sound level noise contours documented in the 2012 Noise Exposure Map prepared for the Gainesville Regional Airport by RS&H and determined compliant by the FAA on April 20, 2009. 
The airport noise zone map shall be adopted by ordinance. When future noise exposure maps are prepared and determined compliant by the FAA, the city shall consider revisions to the boundary of the airport noise zones and to these regulations. Any such revisions shall not be operative or effective for purposes of these regulations, until adopted by ordinance of the city. 
b.  Regulations. The provisions of this section shall apply to the construction, expansion, alteration, moving, repair, replacement, use, and changes of use or occupancy of any occupied structure located within any airport noise zone defined by these regulations and to any structure that is moved into or within any airport noise zone, and those proposed to be constructed within any airport noise zone. 
i.  Existing structures. Structures located within any airport noise zone at the time of the adoption of these regulations to which additions, expansions, alterations, repairs, replacement, and changes of use or occupancy are made shall comply with the requirements of these regulations, except for structures for which the cost of such additions, expansions, alterations, or repairs made within any five-year period does not exceed 50 percent of the value of such structures. 
ii.  Moved structures. Structures moved into or within any airport noise zone defined by these regulations shall comply with requirements of these regulations before permanent occupancy is permitted. 
iii.  New structures. New structures proposed within any airport noise zone defined by these regulations shall comply with the requirements of these regulations before permanent occupancy is permitted. 
iv.  Avigation easements. Property owners required or choosing to provide an avigation easement shall grant said easement to the City of Gainesville and to the Gainesville-Alachua County Regional Airport Authority, and to their respective successors and/or assigns. The easement shall be in the form provided by the city attorney and airport authority and shall be executed by the property owner and recorded by the property owner in the Public Records of Alachua County, prior to the earliest occurrence of the following: 1) release of a development site plan; 2) recording of a lot split, minor subdivision, or final plat; or 3) issuance of a building permit, as applicable. The property owner shall provide a copy of the recorded easement to the city and to the airport authority. 
v.  Regulated uses within the airport noise zone. Uses that are not specified in the following table may be allowed in the airport noise zone if permitted by the underlying zoning and other applicable land development regulations, provided all development shall provide a minimum of 25 dB of exterior-to-interior noise level reduction and the property owner shall provide the city and the Gainesville Regional Airport with a permanent avigation easement in accordance with this section. 
Table V-11: Airport Noise Zone Land Use Regulation. 
Subzones 	A
65 dB
DNL 	B
65-60 dB
DNL 	C
60-55 dB
DNL 
Dwelling, intended for residential occupancy (excluding hotels, motels, and similar short-term transient occupancies) 	Prohibited 	Restricted (1) 	Permitted (2) 
Places of religious assembly, auditoriums, concert halls, libraries and similar assembly uses (primarily indoor uses) 	Prohibited 	Restricted (1) 	Permitted (2) 
Hospital 	Prohibited 	Prohibited 	Permitted (2) 
Correctional institution 	Prohibited 	Restricted (1) 	Permitted (2) 
Nursing homes, assisted living facilities, social service facilities and halfway houses 	Prohibited 	Restricted (1) 	Permitted (2) 
Public and private school, daycare centers, and other educational facilities (excluding aviation-related schools) 	Prohibited 	Restricted (1) 	Permitted (2) 
Outdoor sports arenas, amphitheaters and similar uses (primarily outdoor uses) 	Prohibited 	Permitted (2) 	Permitted (2) 
(1) Development shall be allowed only on isolated lots within neighborhoods or developments that were constructed prior to December 3, 2009 (i.e., "infill development lots"). Any such development that is allowed shall provide a minimum of 25 dB of exterior-to-interior noise level reduction and the property owner shall provide the city and the Gainesville Regional Airport with a permanent avigation easement. 
(2) All development shall provide a minimum of 25 dB of exterior-to-interior noise level reduction and the property owner shall provide the City and the Gainesville Regional Airport with a permanent avigation easement. 
 
F.  Special requirements. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, no landfill shall be established or expanded and no use of land, air, or water shall be made in such a manner to interfere with the operation of any airborne aircraft or aircraft operation at the Gainesville Regional Airport. The following special requirements shall apply to proposed developments. 
1.  Aircraft bird strike hazard. No land use shall be permitted to store, handle, or process organic or any other materials that foster or harbor the growth of insects, rodents, amphibians, or other similar organisms, in such a way as to significantly increase the potential for aircraft bird strike hazard to aircraft operations at the Gainesville Regional Airport: 
a.  Within 10,000 feet of the nearest point of any runway used or planned to be used by turbine aircraft; 
b.  Within 5,000 feet of the nearest point of any runway used or planned to be used only by non-turbine aircraft; 
c.  Within the lateral limits of the airport imaginary surfaces defined in 14 CFR Part 77.19; 
d.  In locations where the passage of a significant volume of bird traffic originating from or destined to bird feeding, watering, or roosting areas is induced across any primary surface or approach surface, as defined in 14 CFR Part 77.19, of the airport; and 
e.  Where any landfill is located and constructed so that it attracts or sustains hazardous bird movements from feeding, water, or roosting areas into or across the runways or approach and departure patterns of aircraft, the operator of such a landfill shall be required to incorporate bird management techniques or other practices to minimize bird hazards to airborne aircraft. 
2.  In-flight visual or electronic interference. No land use shall produce smoke, steam, glare, or other visual impairment within three statute miles of any runway of the Gainesville Regional Airport. Furthermore, no land use shall: 
a.  Produce electronic interference with navigation signals or radio communications of any airborne aircraft or aircraft operations at the airport; 
b.  Use high energy beam devices that interfere with aircraft operations at the airport, and for which such energy transmission is not fully contained within a structure, or absorbing or masking vessel; or 
c.  Use lights or illumination arranged or operated in such manner that either misleads or obscures the vision of pilots during take-off and landing stages of aircraft operations at the airport. 
3.  Restrictions on the educational facilities of public and private schools. 
a.  Educational facilities restricted. The construction of any educational facility of a public or private school, with the exception of aviation school facilities, is prohibited within an area that extends five miles out from either end of any runway, along the extended runway centerline, and which has a width measuring one-half the length of the longest runway of the Gainesville Regional Airport. The restrictions on the educational facilities of public and private schools map shall be adopted by ordinance. When future restrictions on the educational facilities of public and private schools maps are prepared, the city shall consider revisions to the boundary of the restrictions on the educational facilities of public and private schools and to these regulations. Any such revisions shall not be operative or effective for purposes of these regulations, until adopted by ordinance of the city. 
b.  Existing educational facilities. These restrictions shall not be construed to require the removal, alteration, sound conditioning, or other change, or to interfere with the continued use or adjacent expansion of any non-conforming educational structure or site, or be construed to prohibit the construction of any new structure for which a site has been determined as provided in F.S. § 1013.36. 
i.  Exceptions. Exceptions approving construction of an educational facility within the delineated area(s) shall only be granted when the development review board makes specific findings detailing how public policy reasons for allowing the construction outweigh health and safety concerns prohibiting such a location. The development review board shall consider, at a minimum, the following criteria in determining whether or not to grant exceptions approving construction of educational facilities within the delineated area(s): 
1)  Physical attributes of the proposed site, including the nature of the terrain and topography, and the density of planned/existing land uses; 
2)  Situation of the proposed site relative to other geographic features, either natural or man-made, and other planned/existing land uses and activities; 
3)  Public and private interests and investments; 
4)  Safety of persons on the ground and in the air; 
5)  Any other applicable airport zoning restrictions; 
6)  Availability of alternate sites; 
7)  Any unique attributes of the proposed site; 
8)  Planned approach type of the runway: Either precision instrument, nonprecision instrument, or visual; 
9)  Type(s) of aircraft using the runway, including the number and type of engine(s) used by, and gross weight of, aircraft; and 
10)  Inbound approach or outbound departure bearing relative to the extended runway centerline. 
G.  Determination of boundaries. In determining the location of airport zone of influence boundaries, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Where boundaries are shown to follow streets or alleys, the centerline of such streets or alleys shall be the airport zone boundary; 
2.  Where boundaries are shown to enter or cross platted lots, property lines of the lots shall be the airport zone boundary; 
3.  Notwithstanding the above, where boundaries are shown on any platted lot, provisions of the more restrictive airport zone that crosses the platted lot shall apply to the entire platted lot; 
4.  Where boundaries are shown to enter or cross unsubdivided property of less than five acres in area, property lines of the unsubdivided parcel shall be the airport zone boundary; 
5.  Notwithstanding the above, where boundaries are shown on unsubdivided property of less than five acres in area, provisions of the more restrictive airport zone that crosses the unsubdivided parcel shall apply to the entire unsubdivided parcel; and 
6.  Where boundaries are shown on unsubdivided property of five or more acres in area, the location shall be determined by the airport noise zone boundary shown in attachment 3, or the airport height notification zone or airport runway protection zone boundary located by application of the definition of said zone boundaries set forth in these regulations. 
H.  Nonconforming uses. No use of land, structure, development, or object of natural growth is allowable in any airport zone of influence unless it conforms to the specific limitations set forth in these regulations. The general nonconformity provisions in the Land Development Code shall apply to nonconformities with the airport zoning regulations to the extent they are not in conflict with this section. If there is a conflict between the nonconformity provisions of this section and the general provisions of the Land Development Code, the provisions of this section shall govern. 
Except as otherwise stated in this section, any legal nonconformity that was allowable or permitted by the airport zoning regulations in existence at the time of its establishment shall be allowed to continue, and nothing herein shall be construed to require the removal, lowering, change or alteration, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any legal nonconformity. However, legal nonconformities shall not be allowed to exceed the height of said object at the time it was established as a legal nonconformity or to otherwise become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was at the time it was established as a legal nonconformity, unless an airport obstruction permit is issued by the city manager or designee in accordance with these airport zoning regulations. 
1.  If the city manager or designee determines that a nonconforming obstruction has been abandoned or is more than 80 percent torn down, destroyed, deteriorated, or decayed, then the following shall apply: 
a.  An airport obstruction permit may not be granted if it would allow the obstruction to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the airport zoning regulations in place at the time of permit application; and 
b.  The city manager or designee may require the owner of the nonconforming obstruction, at his or her own expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct, alter, or equip such obstruction as may be necessary to conform to the current airport zoning regulations. If the owner of the nonconforming obstruction neglects or refuses to comply with such requirement for ten calendar days after notice, the city may proceed to have the obstruction so lowered, removed, reconstructed, altered, or equipped and assess the cost and expense thereof upon the owner of the obstruction or the land whereon it is or was located. 
I.  Future uses. No change shall be made in the use of land, and no structure shall be altered or otherwise established in any airport zone of influence created by these regulations except in conformance with the requirements of this section. Land use and zoning changes that would allow a prohibited use within an airport zone of influence shall be prohibited. 
Properties with an incompatible land use and zoning map designation may be changed to a compatible land use and zoning by ordinance, planned use district (PUD) land use and planned development (PD) zoning may be used to designate new uses of properties within airport noise zones. 
J.  Conflicting regulations. Where there exists a conflict between any of the requirements or limitations prescribed in these regulations and any other requirements, regulations or zoning applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or objects of natural growth, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
K.  Penalties. In addition to other remedies for violation of these regulations provided in the Land Development Code, the city may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of F.S. Ch. 333, these regulations, or any order or ruling made in connection with their administration or enforcement. The court shall adjudge to the city such relief, by way of injunction (which may be mandatory) or otherwise, as may be proper under all the facts and circumstances of the case in order to fully effectuate the purposes of F.S. Ch. 333, and of these regulations, and the orders and rulings made pursuant thereto.  
Sec. 30-4.27. - Heritage overlay. 
A.  Purpose. The heritage overlay district is established as an overlay zoning district to maintain, protect, conserve and preserve residential areas with a distinct visual identity by regulating development to ensure compatibility with the existing style, character or identity of the district area. The purpose of this section is to create the process by which property owners can request that the city impose additional regulatory requirements upon their residential area in order to help conserve the design and visual characteristics that give the area a distinct identity and a harmonious appearance. 
B.  Objectives. The objectives of the heritage overlay district are to promote the economic, educational, aesthetic, cultural and general welfare of the city's residential neighborhoods by: 
1.  Encouraging property owners to participate in the development process within their general geographic areas; 
2.  Encouraging the use of existing buildings through adaptive rehabilitation; 
3.  Enhancing the diversity of the city's housing stock; 
4.  Encouraging construction that will lead to continuation, conservation and improvement that complements the scale and physical character of the original buildings; and 
5.  Protecting neighborhoods' distinct identities. 
C.  Effect. 
1.  The heritage overlay district classification is an overlay district classification. When the heritage overlay district is applied to any property, the underlying zoning district categories are neither abandoned nor repealed. The existing regulations remain in effect, with further restrictions on regulated work items as specified in the design standards report, and no building permit shall be issued for regulated work items without the approval of the heritage overlay district board. If there is a conflict between the provisions of the heritage overlay district and the underlying zoning district, the heritage overlay district prevails. 
2.  Design standards for regulated work items shall be specified in each ordinance that places the heritage overlay district on an area. 
3.  Whether or not the regulated work item is consistent with standards of the applicable heritage overlay district shall be determined by the heritage overlay district board, based on the adopted ordinance for that particular district. 
4.  The heritage overlay district shall be applied only to residential uses zoned RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, RSF-4, and RC. Changing the zoning of a parcel to a zoning district other than RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, RSF-4, or RC shall also require a simultaneous rezoning to remove the heritage overlay district. 
5.  Fees for petitions to designate an area as a heritage overlay district or to amend an existing district, for verification of petition signatures and for petitions for review of regulated work items shall be paid to the city in accordance with the schedule set out in appendix A and such payment shall be made at the time of submitting a petition to the city. 
D.  Criteria. An area shall meet all of the following criteria to be eligible for designation as a heritage overlay district: 
1.  It shall consist of at least 25 compact and contiguous parcels and shall not cause the creation of an enclave or pocket within the area, as those terms have been defined by Florida Statutes and case law relating to annexations; 
2.  Residences within the area shall consist only of one- and two-family dwellings; 
3.  All land within the area shall be zoned RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, RSF-4, or RC; 
4.  Each boundary of the area shall be one of the following identifiable landmarks: a street, alley, publicly owned right-of-way, platted subdivision boundary, or a creek; and 
5.  No area boundaries shall overlap the boundary of an existing heritage overlay district or historic district. 
E.  Additional criteria. In addition, an area shall meet one of the following criteria to be eligible for designation as a heritage overlay district: 
1.  Its visual characteristics give it a distinct identity; 
2.  It has distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style valuable for the study of a period, method of construction, or use of indigenous materials; or 
3.  It has character as a geographically definable area possessing a significant concentration of buildings or structures united by its plan or physical development. 
F.  Procedures. The procedures for application and designation are as follows: 
1.  Application and process. Any owner of property within a proposed heritage overlay district may apply by petition to have that area designated a heritage overlay district and impose special regulations on that area. The process for the imposition of the overlay district shall be as provided in article III of this chapter for zoning changes. The city plan board and the city commission may approve the overlay district boundaries and regulations only with a finding, supported by data and analysis, that the area has unique and identifiable features and characteristics, that those characteristics are or may be threatened by incompatible or inconsistent development, and that the proposed regulations are reasonably related to protecting those identified features and characteristics. 
2.  Petition requirements. In order to impose the heritage overlay district on an area, a petition requesting imposition of the overlay district on that area shall be submitted to the city on forms provided by the city. Each petition shall meet all of the following requirements: 
a.  The petitioner shall be an owner of legal title of property located within the proposed overlay district area and shall be the designated contact person responsible for processing the petition with the city; 
b.  The petition shall clearly and accurately describe the proposed boundaries of the area and shall include an accurate, reproducible map of the proposed overlay district area depicting all lot divisions, block divisions, roads and the boundaries of the area; 
c.  The petition shall include a design standards report, as described in subsection 4. below; 
d.  At a minimum, the petition shall contain authentic signatures of a majority of the homestead property owners (as further described in subsection 3. below) within the proposed overlay district area. To be verified by the city, signatures shall be accompanied by the legibly printed name of the signer, the address of the parcel owned by the signer, the parcel number of the parcel owned by the signer, and the date the petition was signed. Signatures dated more than six months prior to the date the petition is filed with the city are not acceptable. For the purpose of the petition, jointly owned parcels are considered owned by a single person, and any co-owner may sign a petition for the parcel. Only one owner of each parcel shall be included in the majority requirement stated above. If a person owns more than one parcel of property within the proposed district area, that person may sign the petition one time for each parcel owned; and 
e.  The petition shall advise each signer of the general type of restrictions that may be imposed on the property if the overlay district is imposed upon the area. 
3.  Petition verification. When the petition is submitted to the city, the city manager or designee shall verify the names, signatures, and homestead status of the property, and shall determine whether the petition meets the criteria of this section. For a signature and homestead status to be verified, the homestead status of the property and the printed name of the petition signer shall be consistent with the current records of the Alachua County Property Appraiser. If an insufficient number of acceptable homestead property owner signatures are submitted, the city shall return the petition and petition fee to the petitioner. However, the city shall retain the verification fee. 
4.  Design standards report. The petitioner shall submit a proposed design standards report for the proposed heritage overlay district area. If the heritage overlay designation is approved, the design standards report shall be included in the ordinance that imposes the overlay. The report shall include the following: 
a.  A map that clearly depicts the boundaries of the proposed area and identifies all lot divisions, block divisions and roads; 
b.  Architectural surveys that define the prior, current and likely future character of the area. This shall include a field survey containing written and visual information that documents items such as, but not limited to, distinctive building features, represented building style, typical building components, finishing materials, siting of buildings, degree of visual continuity, and degree of compatibility of new structures with architectural context; 
c.  A clear, decipherable data set of area features that describe the character of individual building types. This set shall define the relationships among features and shall serve as a tool to identify common elements in the area; and 
d.  Based on the data, identify important characteristics and features and specify the standards by which those characteristics will be preserved and continued, and specify the regulated work items that will require review by the heritage overlay district board. All design standards regulating a particular work item should be specific and measurable, such as by height, width, amount, spacing or location. Construction, installation, addition, enlargement, relocation or removal, of a regulated work item will be subject to review and approval by the heritage overlay district board as specified in the design standards report. This section does not require that each of the regulated work items listed below be addressed in a design standards report, only those items that are applicable or desirable to preserve the character of the area as determined in the design standards report. Regulated work items are limited to any one or more of the following: 
i.  Accessory structures; 
ii.  Building heights; 
iii.  Building height-to-width ratio; 
iv.  Building orientation; 
v.  Building setback and build-to lines; 
vi.  Bulk plane restrictions; 
vii.  Exterior building materials; 
viii.  Fences; 
ix.  Front porches and balconies; 
x.  Garage doors; 
xi.  Lot widths; 
xii.  Off-street parking design; 
xiii.  Percent of the lot covered by buildings; 
xiv.  Roof lines, shapes and materials; 
xv.  Screening of mechanical equipment; or 
xvi.  Windows and doors. 
e.  A heritage overlay district may not modify the list of permitted uses for its underlying zoning district(s). In addition, the following shall not be regulated in any manner by a heritage overlay district classification: 
i.  Colors of structures; 
ii.  Demolitions, in whole or in part; 
iii.  Interior layout or interior construction; 
iv.  Power generating solar panels; 
v.  Television satellite dishes or antennae; and 
vi.  Vegetation. 
5.  Amendments to district. Any property owner within a heritage overlay district may apply for an amendment to the district's design standards report. Any property owner whose land is contiguous to a heritage overlay district may apply for inclusion in the district through extension of the district's boundaries. Any land added to an existing heritage overlay district shall be subject to the adopted ordinance for that heritage overlay district and shall not be required to submit a new or revised design standards report with the petition for extension of the boundaries. All amendments shall be subject to review and consideration according to the applicable terms of this section and shall be processed as a zoning change (if amending the district boundaries) or as a text change (if amending the design standards report) in accordance with article III of this chapter. The city commission may amend or repeal any heritage overlay district from time to time in accordance with the same standards and procedures.  
Sec. 30-4.28. - Historic preservation/conservation overlay. 
A.  Findings. The city commission hereby finds as follows: 
1.  There are located within the city districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects and areas, both public and private, which are reminders of past eras, events and persons important in local, state or national history, or which provide significant examples of architectural styles of the past, or which are unique and irreplaceable assets to the city and its neighborhoods, or which provide for this and future generations examples of the physical surroundings in which past generations lived; 
2.  In recognition of these assets, the city has adopted the Comprehensive Plan historic preservation element; 
3.  The historic preservation element of the Comprehensive Plan by reference includes a survey of historic and cultural resources which has been adopted; 
4.  Through this and other dedicated efforts of local public and private groups and individuals, the value of a district and several sites, buildings, structures, objects and areas, both public and private, has been recognized by their inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places, the state inventory maintained by the division of archives, history and records management, department of state, the city's survey of cultural resources, and/or the county architectural survey; however, many other resources remain unidentified; 
5.  The recognition, protection, enhancement and use of such resources is a public purpose and is essential to the health, safety, morals and economic, educational, cultural and general welfare of the public, since these efforts result in the enhancement of property values, the stabilization of neighborhoods and areas of the city, the increase of economic benefits to the city and its inhabitants, the promotion of local interest, the enrichment of human life in its educational and cultural dimensions, serving spiritual as well as material needs, and the fostering of civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past; 
6.  It is the policy of the city to encourage beautification and general improvement of and cleanliness within the city by requiring the installation of appropriate landscaping which will enhance the community's ecological, environmental and aesthetic qualities and which will preserve the value of the property; 
7.  The city has for many years exerted efforts in an attempt to encourage redevelopment of the original center of the city and continues to do so; 
8.  The city commission desires to take advantage of all available state and federal laws and programs that may assist in the development of the city; 
9.  The federal government has established a program of matching grants-in-aid for projects having as their purpose the preservation for public benefit of properties that are significant in American history and architecture; 
10.  There are other federal programs providing monies for projects involving the rehabilitation of existing districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects and areas; 
11.  The policy of the city is to conserve the existing housing stock and extend the economic life of each housing unit through the rehabilitation of such units under housing and neighborhood development programs in selected areas; 
12.  The city, in applying for block grant funds under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, shall comply with the requirements of several federal laws relating to the protection of historical, architectural, archaeological and cultural resources as part of the environmental review process; 
13.  Inherent in the enactment and implementation of these federal mandates is the policy of the United States government that the spirit and direction of the nation are founded upon and reflected in its historic past; that the historical and cultural foundations of the nation should be preserved as a living part of our community life and development in order to give a sense of orientation to the American people; that in the face of the ever-increasing extensions of urban centers, highways, and residential, commercial and industrial developments, the present governmental and nongovernmental programs and activities are inadequate to ensure future generations a genuine opportunity to appreciate and enjoy the rich heritage of our nation; 
14.  It is the will of the people of the state as expressed in Article II, Section 7 of the 1968 Constitution, that the state's natural resources and scenic beauty be conserved and protected; and 
15.  It is the will of the state legislature, as expressed in F.S. Ch. 267, that the state's historic sites and properties, buildings, artifacts, treasure troves and objects of antiquity, which have scientific or historical value, or are of interest to the public, be protected and preserved. 
B.  Purpose. In recognition of these findings, the purpose of this section is to promote the health, morals, economic, educational, aesthetic, cultural, and general welfare of the public through: 
1.  The identification, protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects and areas that are reminders of past eras, events and persons important in local, state or national history, or which provide significant examples of architectural styles of the past, or which are unique and irreplaceable assets to the city and its neighborhoods, or which provide this and future generations examples of the physical surroundings in which past generations lived; 
2.  The enhancement of property values, the stabilization of neighborhoods and business centers of the city, the increase of economic and financial benefits to the city and its inhabitants, and the promotion of local interests; 
3.  The preservation and enhancement of varied architectural styles, reflecting the city's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history; and 
4.  The enrichment of human life in its educational and cultural dimensions in order to serve spiritual as well as material needs by fostering knowledge of the living heritage of the past. 
C.  Local register of historic places. 
1.  Creation. A local register of historic places is hereby created as a means of identifying, classifying and protecting various sites, buildings, structures, objects, and districts as historic or architecturally significant. 
2.  Process. 
a.  Nomination. The city commission, the historic preservation board, or the owner of a site, building, structure, or object may nominate such for placement on the local register by submitting a form provided by the city. Nominations of individually listed properties by the city commission or the historic preservation board shall have the consent of the property owner, or shall be approved with a six-sevenths vote of the city commission and a six-ninths vote of the historic preservation board. 
b.  Removal. Application may be made for the removal of a property from the local register, and the same procedure shall be employed as in the placement of a property on the local register. A property may be removed if the board makes a new and negative evaluation of the reasons for its original recommendation or for any other valid reason approved by the board. 
c.  Upon receipt of a completed nomination form, including necessary documentation, the city manager or designee shall place the nomination on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the historic preservation board. If the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board is too close in time to allow for the required notice to be given, the nomination shall be placed on the agenda of the succeeding regularly scheduled meeting. 
d.  The historic preservation board shall, within 90 calendar days from the date of the meeting at which the nomination is first on the board's agenda, review the nomination and write a recommendation thereon. The recommendation shall include specific findings and conclusions as to why the nomination does or does not meet the appropriate criteria for listing on the local register. The recommendation shall also include any owner's objection to the listing. If the nomination is of a district, the recommendation shall also clearly specify, through the use of maps, lists, or other means, those buildings, objects, or structures that are classified as contributing to the historical significance of the district. 
e.  The nomination form and the board's recommendation shall be sent to the city plan board. The nomination shall then be handled as any other rezoning and the procedure for amendments to the Land Development Code set forth in this chapter shall be followed. From the date the board recommends the nomination to the city plan board until the city commission either approves or denies the amendment to the Land Development Code, or until one year has elapsed, whichever shall occur first, no permit for the demolition or relocation of a structure nominated for individual listing on the local register or of a structure classified as contributing to the character of a district nominated for listing on the local register shall be issued unless the board follows the procedures and requirements for a certificate of appropriateness set forth in this section and finds that such a permit may be issued. 
3.  Review criteria. In order to be listed on the local register, a site, building, object, structure, or district shall be determined to be significant and to possess integrity. To be significant, a building, object, structure, or district shall meet at least three of the criteria listed below, or if approved by at least six members of the historic preservation board at least one of the criteria listed below. A site, building, object, structure, or district shall possess integrity as defined by the National Park Service in National Register Bulletin #15: How to Apply the National Register Criteria for Evaluation. The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, and culture is present in a district, site, building, structure, or object when the district, site, building, structure, or object: 
a.  Is associated with events that are significant to our local, state, or national history; 
b.  Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction; 
c.  Represents the work of a master; 
d.  Possesses high artistic values; or 
e.  Represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction. 
4.  Recording. Upon placement of a property or properties on the local register, the board shall cause this designation to be recorded in the official record books of the county. 
5.  Certificate and signs. The city manager or designee shall issue an official certificate of historic significance to the owner of properties listed individually on the local register or judged as contributing to the character of a district listed on the local register. The city manager or designee is additionally authorized to issue and place official signs denoting the geographic boundaries of each district listed on the local register. 
D.  Effect. 
1.  Modification of existing zoning requirements. Placement of sites, buildings, structures, objects, or districts on the local register of historic places is an overlay district classification, and the underlying zoning district categories are neither abandoned nor repealed. The existing regulations remain in effect and are modified only to the extent provided for in this section. 
2.  Modification of dimensional requirements. To facilitate new construction, redevelopment, rehabilitation, or relocation of buildings or structures in historic districts or individually listed on the local register, the city manager or designee or the appropriate board within the development review process may determine dimensional requirements such as front, side, and rear setbacks, building height, separation between buildings, floor area ratios, and maximum lot coverage for buildings and structures based on historic development patterns. Any change shall be based on competent demonstration by the petitioner of the following: 
a.  The proposed development will not affect the public safety, health, or welfare of abutting property owners or the district; 
b.  The proposed change is consistent with historic development, design patterns or themes in the historic district. Such patterns may include reduced front, rear, and side yard setbacks, maximum lot coverage and large floor area ratios; 
c.  The proposal reflects a particular theme or design pattern that will advance the development pattern of the historic district; and 
d.  The proposed complies with utility, stormwater, access requirements, and other requirements related to site design in the Land Development Code. 
Where the proposed modification would encroach into a side or rear yard setback that adjoins an existing lot, notice will be provided to the adjacent property owner. Staff or the appropriate reviewing board will document the basis for its decision. If staff makes the decision, it will provide a written determination on the complete modification request within 21 calendar days of receiving the request. If the adjacent property owner objects to the encroachment in writing within 16 calendar days of the date from which the notice was mailed, the request shall be referred to the development review board, which shall review the request using the same standards in this section used by staff. If the decision is to be made by a board, the board shall hear the objection of the adjacent property owner as part of its public hearing. The remainder of the requirements, regulations and procedures set forth in this chapter shall remain applicable. 
3.  Modification of building code requirements. Structures and buildings listed individually on the local register or deemed contributing to the character of a district listed on the local register shall be deemed historic and entitled to modified enforcement of the standard codes where appropriate. 
4.  Ad valorem tax exemption. Historic properties may be eligible for an exemption from ad valorem taxes resulting from an increase in value as specified by the provisions of chapter 25, article IV of the Code of Ordinances. 
5.  Demolition by neglect. The intent of this section is to stop the continuing deterioration of historic properties and neighborhoods through application of chapters 13 and 16 of the Code of Ordinances. 
a.  The historic preservation board may, on its own initiative, file a formal complaint with the codes enforcement division requesting repair or correction of defects to any designated structure so that it is preserved and protected. 
b.  The code enforcement division shall provide written notice to the staff member assigned to the historic preservation board when a building or structure that is either listed on the national or local historic register or is a contributing structure to either a nationally or locally designated historic district is deemed: 
i.  As having a minor or major housing code violation, or 
ii.  "Dangerous," as defined by chapter 16 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Upon receipt of this notice, the city manager or designee is authorized to access these properties accompanied by a code enforcement officer to assess the damage that formed the basis for the decision to find the building "dangerous." The assessment will be presented to the historic preservation board, which shall be allowed to appeal the determination to the development review board pursuant to section 16-27 of the Code of Ordinances and present evidence against the determination that the building is "dangerous." 
E.  Certificate of appropriateness. 
1.  Required. A certificate of appropriateness is required in accordance with this section for any sites, buildings, structures, objects, or districts on the local register of historic places. No final approval of development plans and no building or demolition permit shall be granted for any development that includes any of the actions specified in this section without the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. If a certificate of appropriateness is issued for demolition in conjunction with new construction, the applicant shall file a development plan or apply for a building permit prior to receiving a demolition permit. 
2.  Effective term. A certificate of appropriateness is effective for one year from the date of approval. After one year, the applicant shall reapply for a new certificate of appropriateness and shall be subject to any changes in the Historic Preservation Rehabilitation and Design Guidelines that took effect during the intervening period. 
3.  Applicability. A property owner/agent shall obtain a certificate of appropriateness before: 1) performing any of the following external work items on a structure listed individually on the local register or designated as contributing to a district listed on the local register, 2) performing work regarding fencing or additions to a lot or structure designated as noncontributing to a district listed on the local register, or 3) taking any of the actions listed in subsection 5. below. However, ordinary maintenance, as defined in this chapter, may be performed without first receiving a certificate of appropriateness. 
a.  Abrasive cleaning. Cleaning of exterior walls with high-pressure wash or blasting with abrasive materials. 
b.  Additions. New additions to structures or alterations that change the three-dimensional outline of a structure. 
c.  Appurtenances. Installation of air conditioning units, mechanical equipment, satellite dishes, solar collectors, and pool filtration systems. 
d.  Auxiliary structures. Installation of new auxiliary structure such as shed or pool enclosure. 
e.  Awnings or canopies. Installation, alteration or removal of awnings or canopies. 
f.  Decks. Installation of all decks or modification to existing decks. 
g.  Exterior doors and door frames. Installation or alteration of an exterior door or door frame, or the creation or infill of a door opening. 
h.  Exterior walls. Installation, alteration, or removal of any exterior wall or exterior wall material, including foundations and the enclosure of any porch or other outdoor area. 
i.  Fencing. Installation, relocation, or removal of fencing or garden walls. 
j.  Fire escapes, exterior stairs, and ramps. Installation, alteration, or removal of all fire escapes, exterior stairs or ramps, including those for disabled accessibility. 
k.  Landscape structures. Installation of swimming pools, garden structures, gazebos, and greenhouses. 
l.  Painting. Painting unpainted masonry, including stone, brick, terracotta, and concrete. Alteration to existing historic paint on decorative exterior building artwork such as stenciling, graining, trompe l'oeil, and glazing. 
m.  Porches, entry stairs, and balconies. Installation, alteration, or removal of porch and balcony fixtures, such as railings, columns, brackets, balustrades, screens, materials, and decorative elements. 
n.  Roofs and chimneys. Installation of new materials, or removal of existing materials. Installation of antennae and satellite dishes on the roof. 
o.  Security grilles. Installation or removal of security grilles, except that in no case shall permission to install such grilles be completely denied. 
p.  Setting/landscape features. Removal of features around a building that reflect a property's history and development, such as distinctive plantings, parks or gardens, site lighting, signs, benches, or historic paving materials. 
q.  Sidewalks and walkways. Installation, alteration, or removal of sidewalk, walkways, and their materials. 
r.  Siding. Installation of new materials, or removal of existing materials. 
s.  Skylights. Installation or removal of skylights. 
t.  Screen windows and doors. Installation of screen windows or screen doors. 
u.  Windows and window frames. Installation of a window or window frame, or the creation or infill of a window opening. Replacement or alteration of window, frame, or opening, including shutters, exterior screens, and louvres. 
v.  Rooftop solar. Installation of a rooftop solar photovoltaic power system. 
4.  Staff approval. The city manager or designee may issue a certificate of appropriateness if the work will either result in the original appearance of the structure, as defined in this chapter, or will meet the city's Historic Preservation Rehabilitation and Design Guidelines on file with the city. The city manager or designee shall refer the application to the historic preservation board if the work cannot be approved pursuant to this subsection. 
a.  Rooftop solar photovoltaic power systems. For the installation of a rooftop solar photovoltaic power system, as defined in this chapter, the city manager or designee may issue a certificate of appropriateness if the system: 1) will not be seen from any street frontage, 2) will meet the city's Historic Preservation Rehabilitation and Design Guidelines, and 3) will meet the following additional design criteria as applicable: 
i.  The system will be installed on a non-contributing accessory structure, such as a shed or garage, to a contributing or individually listed structure, or on a non-historic portion of a contributing or individually listed structure; 
ii.  The system will be located in a manner such that it does not affect the primary roof façade elevations; 
iii.  Installation will not result in the permanent loss of significant character-defining features of a historic resource, such as existing roof lines or dormers; 
iv.  Installation will not result in the removal or permanent alteration of historic fabric and is reversible; 
v.  The system will be flush to the roof or low profile, to the extent feasible; 
vi.  On flat roofs, the system will be set back from the edge. If there is a parapet, the system will be located behind the parapet walls; and 
vii.  The system will blend into the surrounding features of the historic resource. 
5.  Historic preservation board approval. A property owner/agent shall obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation board before: 1) performing any work items that cannot be approved by the city manager or designee pursuant to subsection 4. above, or 2) taking any of the following actions: 
a.  Erecting a new building, structure, or parking lot within a district listed on the local register. 
b.  Erecting a new auxiliary structure within a district listed on the local register when the action does not meet the guidelines for staff approval established in the city's Historic Preservation Rehabilitation and Design Guidelines. 
c.  Demolishing a building, structure or object listed individually on the local register or designated as contributing to a district listed on the local register. 
d.  Relocating a building, structure or object listed individually on the local register or designated as contributing to a district listed on the local register. 
e.  Increasing the size of either a contributing or noncontributing structure within a district listed in the local register by constructing an addition, adding an additional floor, or enclosing one or more porches, carports or any other architectural features that will increase the size of the structure or change the roof form, when the action does not meet the guidelines for staff approval established in the city's Historic Preservation Rehabilitation and Design Guidelines. 
F.  Review criteria for certificates of appropriateness. 
1.  Generally. The decision on all certificates of appropriateness, except those for demolition or relocation, shall be guided by the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and the following visual compatibility standards: 
a.  Height. Height shall be visually compatible with adjacent buildings. 
b.  Proportion of building, structure or object's front facade. The width of building, structure or object to the height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible to buildings and places to which it is visually related. 
c.  Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the width of the windows in a building, structure or object shall be visually compatible with buildings and places to which the building, structure or object is visually related. 
d.  Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of solids to voids in the front facade of a building, structure or object shall be visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related. 
e.  Rhythm of buildings, structures, objects or parking lots on streets. The relationship of the buildings, structures, objects or parking lots to open space between it and adjoining buildings and places shall be visually compatible to the buildings and places to which it is visually related. 
f.  Rhythm of entrance and porch projection. The relationship of entrances and projections to sidewalks of a building, structure, object or parking lot shall be visually compatible to the buildings and places to which it is visually related. 
g.  Relationship of materials, texture and color. The relationship of materials, texture and color of a parking lot or of the facade of a building, structure or object shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in the buildings to which it is visually related. 
h.  Roof shapes. The roof shape of the building, structure or object shall be visually compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related. 
i.  Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building, structure, object or parking lot such as walls, fences and landscape masses shall, if necessary, form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street, to ensure visual compatibility of the building, structure, object or parking lot to the building and places to which it is visually related. 
j.  Scale of building. The size of the building, structure, object or parking lot; the building mass of the building, structure, object or parking lot in relation to open space; and the windows, door openings, porches and balconies shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually related. 
k.  Directional expression of front elevation. A building, structure, object or parking lot shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually related in its directional character. 
2.  Review criteria for relocations. In addition to the guidelines provided in subsection 3. below concerning demolition, issuance of certificates of appropriateness for relocations shall be guided by the following factors: 
a.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting; 
b.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding areas will be; 
c.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and 
d.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure or object. 
3.  Review criteria for demolitions. A decision by the historic preservation board approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, or objects other than those in the Pleasant Street Historic District shall be guided by: 
a.  The historic or architectural significance of the building, structure or object; 
b.  The importance of the building, structure or object to the ambience of a district; 
c.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure or object because of its design, texture, material, detail or unique location; 
d.  Whether the building, structure or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood, the county or the region; 
e.  Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; 
f.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure or object from collapse; and 
g.  Whether the building, structure or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
4.  Review criteria for demolitions in Pleasant Street Historic District. A decision by the historic preservation board approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, or objects in the Pleasant Street Historic District shall be guided by: 
a.  The significance of the property. Significance concerns historic or architectural aspects of the building, structure, or object. A property shall be considered to be significant if it meets one the following criteria: 
i.  The property is located on an important street and within a cluster of historic buildings. Cluster of historic buildings is defined by the presence of three historic buildings adjacent to each other on the same block as the property proposed for demolition, either on the same side of the street, across the street, or on adjacent side street of the block containing the property. Important streets is defined as NW 2nd, 3rd, or 4th Street, NW 2nd, 3rd, or 4th Avenue, NW 4th or 6th Place, the 200—600 block of NW 1st Street, the 200—400 block of NW 7th Avenue, and the 300 block of NW 5th Avenue. 
ii.  The property is located on an important street or within a cluster of historic buildings, and meets one of the following criteria: 1) It maintains its basic plan and additions, if any, were made to nonprominent elevations and porches were not enclosed; 2) Its features are unique and there are few remaining occupied buildings of its type in the neighborhood; or 3) It is associated with an important person based on original ownership documentation contained in the nomination of Pleasant Street to the National Register of Historic Places. 
iii.  The property is not on an important street and not within a cluster of historic buildings, but it has been evaluated for its architectural quality and structural condition and merits preservation. 
b.  Plans for redevelopment. Demolition of historic building without definitive plans for redevelopment is discouraged. This factor evaluates the proposed reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
c.  Condition of the building. The historic preservation board will evaluate the structural integrity, weathertightness and the economic feasibility of rehabilitation based on the condition of the roof, foundation and walls as well as the cost of replicating features and details on the historic building in any proposal for new development, and will determine if reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, or object from collapse. The applicant shall allow the city manager or designee to inspect the structure with reasonable notice. 
5.  Consideration of economic impact on property owner. If an owner claims that the decision of the historic preservation board will cause economic hardship, he or she may petition the board for a hearing to consider relevant evidence of hardship. The owner shall submit all evidence to the city manager or designee within 60 calendar days of the board's original decision. The hearing shall then be held at the next regular board meeting taking place at least 24 calendar days after the evidence is submitted. 
The historic preservation board shall review all the evidence presented at the public hearing and make a determination no later than 30 calendar days after the hearing. The applicant shall show by competent substantial evidence that the denial or conditional approval of the certificate of appropriateness or demolition permit has caused or will cause an economic hardship. If the board determines that the applicant has proved economic hardship, it shall consider whether relief is available that will not result in economic hardship and will provide minimal adverse effect to the historic building or structure. If found, the board may grant this relief, or grant the relief requested with conditions that ensure the minimum adverse effect and does not result in unreasonable economic hardship. 
Relevant evidence includes the following: 
a.  A written estimate from a licensed engineer, contractor or architect with experience in rehabilitation of the cost of the proposed construction, or alteration, and a written estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred in order to comply with the recommendation of the historic preservation board. "Experience in rehabilitation" means work on certified rehabilitation projects where federal tax credits for historic preservation were received, or work on a building or structure in Florida which required a local certificate of appropriateness; 
b.  A written report from a licensed engineer, contractor or architect with experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of the subject structure and its suitability for rehabilitation. The report shall include detailed documentation (including scope of work, and cost of materials and labor) of the cost of complying with the recommendation of the historic preservation board; 
c.  An independent written appraisal by an appraiser with competent credentials of the estimated market value of the property in its current condition; after completion of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition, or removal; after any changes recommended by the historic preservation board; and, in the case of a proposed demolition, both after renovation of the existing property for continued use and after demolition and new construction (an appraiser shall at least have a state license to be considered competent); 
d.  In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from a licensed architect, contractor, certified appraiser or other professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure on the property. Estimates of the proposed construction cost shall include the cost of replacing the historic structure with one of similar design and character-defining interior and exterior features; and 
e.  The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner of record or applicant and the person from whom the property was purchased, and any terms of financing between the seller and buyer. 
If the property is income-producing the historic preservation board may also consider the following information in determining economic hardship: 
f.  The annual gross income from the property for the previous two years; itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years; and depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period. 
g.  All appraisals performed by a certified appraiser within the previous two years for the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the property. 
h.  Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked, and offers received, if any, within the previous two years. 
i.  The assessed value of the property according to the two most recent assessments. 
j.  The real estate taxes for the previous two years. 
k.  The form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture or other. 
l.  Any other information, including the income tax bracket of the owner, applicant or principal investors in the property, considered necessary by the preservation board to a determination as to whether the property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owners. 
G.  Review procedure for certificates of appropriateness. 
1.  Application. A person wishing to undertake any of the actions specified in this section as requiring a certificate of appropriateness shall file an application on a form provided by the city. 
2.  Pre-application conference. 
a.  The prospective applicant shall confer with the city manager or designee concerning the nature of the proposed action and requirements related to it. The city manager or designee shall advise the applicant of the nature and detail of the plans, designs, photographs, reports, or other exhibits required to be submitted with the application. Such advice shall not preclude the historic preservation board from requiring additional material prior to making its determination in the case. 
b.  Following the conference with the city manager or designee, a pre-application conference shall be held with the historic preservation board if requested by the applicant. 
3.  Referral to historic preservation board. Upon receipt of a completed application and all required submittals and fees, the city manager or designee shall place the application on the next regularly scheduled meeting of the historic preservation board, as applicable, allowing for notice as required herein. Applications for certificates of appropriateness may be heard at specially called meetings of the historic preservation board provided all notice requirements are met. Upon mutual agreement between the applicant and the city manager or designee, the application may be set for hearing at a public meeting later than the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
4.  Hearings. 
a.  The hearing shall be held at the time and place indicated in the notice. All parties shall be given the opportunity to present evidence through documents, exhibits, testimony, or other means. All parties shall be given the opportunity to rebut evidence through cross-examination or other means. 
b.  The decision of the historic preservation board shall be made at the hearing, or no later than 45 calendar days after said hearing. The time period for reaching a decision may be extended by mutual written agreement between the applicant and the historic preservation board. Such agreement may be made at any time within the 45-day period indicated, and may be subsequently extended. The historic preservation board shall make written findings and conclusions that specifically relate the criteria for granting certificates of appropriateness. 
c.  The city shall record and keep records of all meetings. The records shall include the vote, absence, or abstention of each member upon each question, all official actions of the historic preservation board, and the findings and conclusions of the historic preservation board. All records shall be filed with the city. 
5.  Board decision. The historic preservation board shall use the criteria set forth in this section to review the completed application and accompanying submittals. After completing the review of the application and fulfilling the public notice and hearing requirements set forth above, the historic preservation board shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Grant the certificate of appropriateness with an immediate effective date; 
b.  Grant the certificate of appropriateness with special modifications and conditions; 
c.  Grant the certificate of appropriateness with a deferred effective date, which date shall not exceed one year from the date of issuance; 
d.  Deny the certificate of appropriateness; or 
e.  Grant the certificate of appropriateness if the historic preservation board finds that the property cannot be put to a reasonable beneficial use without the approval of the proposed work; in the case of income-producing property, the historic preservation board shall, before making its decision, determine whether the applicant can obtain a reasonable return from the property without the approval of the proposed work. 
6.  Action on denial or deferral. Where the certificate is denied or issued with a deferred effective date, the historic preservation board shall take or promote the taking of an action desirable for the conservation or preservation of the structure, building, object or area. Such action shall include impressing the desirability of preservation and/or conservation upon the property owner and recommending to him various alternatives that would make the project acceptable. 
7.  Effect of failure to decide within time limit. Failure of the historic preservation board to act within the time limits established shall be deemed an approval of the application, and, upon request of the applicant, the building official shall issue any permit dependent upon the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. 
8.  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision rendered by the historic preservation board may appeal the decision to the appeals reviewing authority as provided in this chapter. 
9.  Posting requirement. No work for which a certificate of appropriateness is required may be undertaken unless a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the work is conspicuously posted on the property with appropriate building permits where the work is to be performed. 
H.  Emergency issuance of certificates of appropriateness. The following procedure shall be used when the building official or designee determines that a building or structure listed on the local register of historic places or located within a district on the local register of historic places is in imminent danger of structural failure or collapse due to an event or events outside the control of the owner of the structure. 
1.  The building official or designee shall convene a meeting of an emergency committee which shall consist of the building official or designee, the city manager or designee and a member of the historic preservation board who is an architect, engineer or building contractor. Every reasonable measure shall be taken to notify the owner of the structure, as determined by the records of the Alachua County Property Appraiser. In addition, the property on which the structure is located shall immediately be posted with the time and place of the emergency meeting. 
2.  At the meeting, the building official or designee shall present evidence of the imminent danger of structural failure or collapse. The owner and members of the public shall be given the opportunity to present evidence. 
3.  If the majority of the emergency committee finds that the structure is in imminent danger of structural failure or collapse due to an event or events outside the control of the owner, it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness for work to secure the structure in an economically efficient manner that causes the least impact to the historic and architectural integrity of the building. 
4.  Actions taken by the emergency committee to preserve a structure in an emergency situation that deviate from the standards or practice of the historic preservation board shall not be considered a precedent for future actions of the board. 
I.  Violations; penalties; stop work orders. Any person failing to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9 of the Code of Ordinances. In addition, a stop work order shall be issued by the code enforcement official in any case where work has commenced, or preparation for work has commenced, which requires a certificate of appropriateness under this section and where no such certificate has been obtained. The stop work order shall be issued to the property owner, the occupant or any person, company or corporation commencing work or preparation for work in violation of this section. The stop work order shall remain in full force and effect until a certificate of appropriateness has been obtained and posted on the property, or it has been determined by the historic preservation board that no certificate of appropriateness is required.  
ARTICLE V. - USE STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - PRINCIPAL USES 
 
Sec. 30-5.1. - Applicability. 
A.  The requirements of this article shall be applicable to each specific use identified herein, regardless of the zoning district in which the use is located, regardless of whether the use is permitted as of right or by special use permit, and regardless of any less restrictive requirements generally applicable to the district in which the use is located. However, when any particular requirement or limitation generally applicable in any zoning district, or when any requirement or limitation imposed by the approving board as a condition of a special use permit approval or variance, is additional to or more restrictive than the requirements and limitations contained in this article, the additional and more restrictive requirements or limitations shall apply. 
B.  In any district where a use is permitted as a special use permit and the dimensional requirements for such use are not specified, any dimensional limitation shall be as required by the approving board. Such dimensional limitations shall be established in consideration of the general requirements for the particular zoning district and the general limitations on uses permitted by special use permit, but in no event shall they be less restrictive than any particular dimensional limitation specified in this article. 
C.  Development plan approval, in accordance with the requirements of article III, is required prior to the issuance of a building permit for any of the uses regulated in this article.  
Sec. 30-5.2. - Adult day care homes. 
A.  The total number of natural persons who are cared for or supervised shall not exceed five persons at any one time. In no event shall more than eight natural persons be permitted at the home at any one time. Such use shall not include nursing and personal care facilities, rehabilitation centers, social service homes or halfway houses, or other similar activities or facilities that are not customarily incidental to residential use. 
B.  Adult day care homes shall be located no closer than 200 feet from any other adult day care home. 
C.  The use shall be conducted in conformance with all applicable county, state and federal laws.  
Sec. 30-5.3. - Alcoholic beverage establishments. 
A.  No alcoholic beverage establishment may be located within 300 linear feet of an established place of religious assembly, which distance shall be measured by extending a straight line from the main entrance of the alcoholic beverage establishment to the main entrance of the place of religious assembly. This spacing requirement shall not apply in the U9 or DT district. 
B.  No alcoholic beverage establishment may be located within 400 linear feet of any public or private school, duly accredited and offering any grades from kindergarten through the twelfth grade, which distance shall be measured by a straight line from the main entrance of the alcoholic beverage establishment to the nearest part of the school grounds normally and regularly used in connection with such school program. This spacing requirement shall not apply in the U9 or DT district. 
C.  No entrance or exit, except for emergency entrances or exits, connected to any portion of a building normally used by patrons of an alcoholic beverage establishment as a continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be located within 100 linear feet of the district boundary line of a residential zoning district, which distance shall be measured by extending a straight line from the entrance or exit of the alcoholic beverage establishment to the district boundary line. 
D.  Special use permit. If required by this chapter to have special use permit approval, the city plan board shall consider, in addition to all of the above specific requirements, the factors and standards for special use permits stated in article III and may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards as stated in article III. In granting a special use permit for an alcoholic beverage establishment, the city plan board shall consider the standard criteria for all special use permits, in addition to the following factors regarding the effect on surrounding properties (particularly surrounding properties that are in residential districts or districts that contain dwelling units): 
1.  Noise generated by the proposed establishment, considering placement of doors, windows and open spaces and any plans for music or entertainment; 
2.  Amount of traffic generation and the pattern of its dispersal from the site, considering likely impacts on residential areas or conflicts with other uses; and 
3.  Hours of activity.  
Sec. 30-5.4. - Bed and breakfast establishments. 
The following standards shall apply to all bed and breakfast establishments: 
A.  The owner or manager shall live on the premises. 
B.  Separate toilet and bathing facilities for the exclusive use of guests shall be provided. 
C.  Cooking facilities shall be approved by the county health department. In residential zoning districts, cooking shall be for overnight guests and residents only. No cooking facilities shall be allowed in guest bedrooms. 
D.  Bed and breakfast establishments shall comply with appropriate health permits, building and fire codes, and business licenses, including but not limited to a license from the division of hotels and restaurants applicable to such use. 
E.  In addition to the parking required for the residence, one parking space shall be provided for each guestroom. The city manager or designee may vary the parking requirement for those properties listed on the local register of historic places based on site constraints, including small yards, inadequate space for parking, and the availability of on-street parking. 
F.  Any sign for a bed and breakfast located in a local historic district or listed on the local register of historic places shall be reviewed by the applicable city staff according to the general signage regulations and by the historic preservation board in accordance with the preservation design guidelines.  
Sec. 30-5.5. - Carwash, automated or self-service. 
All principal and accessory structures used for carwash service shall be located and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  When the use is located in an accessory structure, the structure shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
B.  All bay openings shall be oriented away from any property in a residential district (including MH, mobile home residential district) or other existing, conforming residential use. 
C.  Bay openings shall be located to the side or rear of the building and shall be screened from the street. 
D.  All outdoor lighting shall be oriented away from any property in a residential district (including MH, mobile home residential district) or other existing conforming residential use. 
E.  All uses shall comply with the requirements of article VIII for buffering. 
F.  Accessory automotive detailing within enclosed parking structures may be allowed consistent with section 30-5.32.  
Sec. 30-5.6. - Community residential homes. 
In addition to applicable state licensing requirements, all community residential homes shall meet the following standards: 
A.  Distance requirements. The following separation distances shall be required between community residential homes: 
Type of Facility 
Number of Residents 	Community Residential Homes
(1 to 6)*	Community Residential Homes
(7 to 14)*	Community Residential Homes
(Over 14)**	Social Service Homes and Halfway Houses** 	Residence for Destitute** 
1 to 6 	1,000' 	1,000' 	1,000' 	N/A 	N/A 
7 to 14 	1,000' 	1,200' 	1,200' 	N/A 	N/A 
Over 14 	1,000' 	1,200' 	1,320' 	1,320' 	1,320' 
 
* All distances are measured between principal structures. 
** Measured from the nearest property line of the existing facility to the nearest property line of proposed facility. 
B.  Residents. Residents of community residential homes shall be limited to those classes of persons included in F.S. § 419.001(1)(e).  
Sec. 30-5.7. - Day care centers. 
Day care centers shall comply with applicable state and county requirements and the following standards: 
A.  Loading area. There shall be provided a turnaround driveway or other vehicular area for the safe loading/unloading of passengers. The walking distance from the loading/unloading area to the main building entrance shall be minimized, and a paved pedestrian path that is at least five feet wide and includes marked crosswalks shall be provided between the loading/unloading area and the main entrance.  
Sec. 30-5.8. - Dormitories, small and large. 
A.  Locational requirements. Dormitories are not permitted on sites adjacent to property zoned for single-family use. 
B.  Dimensional requirements. All principal and accessory structures for dormitories shall be located and constructed in accordance with the dimensional requirements for the particular district in which located, except that the required lot area shall be at least 10,000 square feet.  
Sec. 30-5.9. - Drive-through facilities. 
A.  Standards for all drive-through facilities. 
1.  The maximum number of drive-through lanes shall be based on the operating conditions of the impacted public streets and operational and safety concerns at the site. Drive-through uses that propose four or more drive-through lanes shall require special use permit approval, unless they are located within a shopping center or a mixed-use center, having a minimum of 20,000 square feet of gross floor area, and providing centralized motorized vehicle access. 
2.  Adequate queuing space shall be provided for drive-through windows and order stations in compliance with the following minimum specifications: 
a.  An adequate number of queuing spaces for service windows, receiving windows, drive-up or drive-through windows or order stations shall be required, so that there will be no back-up of traffic onto adjacent roadways. The number of spaces required will be based on a determination of traffic volume by the city manager or designee using the latest edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual. This determination shall consider the nature of the use, its intensity, size, location of driveways, other parking facilities provided and other traffic generating characteristics; 
b.  Queuing spaces dimensions and the configuration of the drive-through lane shall be in accordance with the specifications in the design manual; and 
c.  Sufficient driveway area or a by-pass lane shall be provided so that vehicles may circulate freely around the site. 
3.  The number of access points to public streets shall be minimized. This may be accomplished through the provision of joint driveway access from the street between adjacent uses, or by providing access through a shopping center or mixed-use development. 
4.  Vehicular cross access or paved stub-outs shall be provided with any abutting non-residential and multi-family developments. 
5.  Safe pedestrian and bicycle routes shall be provided which connect to the street sidewalk and adjacent developments and do not cross drive-through lanes. 
6.  Drive-through lanes shall be located along the side or rear of buildings, away from street frontages. 
7.  The visibility of drive-through lanes shall be minimized from the street and adjacent properties through the use of vegetative buffers, garden walls, berms or other screening. 
B.  Additional standards for drive-through facilities in the transect zones. In addition to the above standards, drive-through facilities in the transect zones shall not directly access a principal or storefront street, and shall meet one of the following: 
1.  The drive-through facility shall be limited to one drive-through lane only; 
2.  Drive through lanes and windows shall be designed so that they integrated into a building (see Figure V-1); or 
3.  The drive-through facility shall be located within a shopping center or a mixed-use center. Mixed-use centers shall be defined as developments regulated by a unified development plan, having a minimum of 20,000 square feet of gross floor area, and providing centralized motorized vehicle access. 
Figure V-1: Drive-through integrated into a building
  
Sec. 30-5.10. - Family child care homes, large. 
In addition to compliance with applicable state and county requirements, large family child care homes shall meet the following conditions: 
A.  Spacing. Large family child care homes shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any other large family child care home. 
B.  Primary residence on site. The residence containing the large family child care home shall be the occupied and the primary residence of the operator. 
C.  Absence of code violations. There shall be no active code violations associated with the site or any structures on the site. 
D.  Location of outdoor play areas. All outdoor play areas shall be located between the primary structure and the rear property line. 
E.  Paved driveways. All driveways shall be paved. 
F.  Staff approval of a plot plan. The operator shall submit for approval a plot plan showing all structures, dimensions, distances, driveways, play areas, parking areas, and other similar relevant information. The plan shall show that the existing paved driveway is used and not a new or altered driveway.  
Sec. 30-5.11. - Farmers markets. 
A.  Permit. The city manager or designee is authorized to issue a revocable permit to allow the operation of a farmers market on public or private property for one year at a maximum of four days per week. 
1.  Requirements. The applicant for the permit shall provide a scaled plan of the proposed site showing the location of any tents in relation to rights-of-way, sidewalks, businesses, entryways to businesses, and any other features that affect accessibility to the site. The plan shall show any tables, display areas, or other equipment that will not be under tents. Tents and other structures or objects associated with the farmers market, such as chairs, tables, or displays, shall be located a minimum of five feet from the curb and so positioned as to not obstruct pedestrian passage on any sidewalk. They shall not be positioned within five feet of any crosswalk or fire hydrant or block ingress or egress from any building entrance or emergency exit. They shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any intersection. 
2.  Grant or denial. The city manager or designee shall review the documentation provided by the applicant and shall grant or deny the permit within ten calendar days of receiving a completed application. The permit shall be denied if the location and accessibility to the site pose a public safety concern or if the applicant fails to file a complete application and documentation. 
3.  Revocation. In the event a permit holder has been found to be in violation of any of the regulations of this section, or of any other city, county, state or federal regulations concerning the operation of the farmers market, including state or local health requirements, the city manager or designee may revoke the permit after notice and opportunity for a hearing. No applicant who has had a permit revoked shall be able to get another permit for one year after the revocation date. 
B.  Additional requirements. 
1.  Amplified sound. The farmers market shall comply with the provisions of chapter 15 concerning prohibited noise and procuring special permits for noise. 
2.  Signs. Individual tents may have temporary banners, provided the banners extend no wider than the tent and are high enough to allow adequate clearance for people to pass under. 
3.  Bond. The city manager or designee shall require the operator of the farmers market to provide a bond for cleanup of the sales area for any farmers market located on public property. The amount of the bond will be determined by the square footage of area used by the market.  
Sec. 30-5.12. - Food distribution centers for the needy. 
Except as provided as an accessory use to places of religious assembly, food distribution centers for the needy shall be regulated as follows: 
A.  Meals served. All meals served shall be limited to a consecutive three-hour period within a 24-hour day between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. This limitation does not apply to meals served to the residents and staff of a facility that is jointly licensed and operated as a residence for destitute people and a food distribution center for the needy. 
B.  Prohibited area. Food distribution centers for the needy shall not be located within 2,000 feet from the University of Florida main campus as identified on the University of Florida Campus Master Plan. All distance measurements shall be a straight line from the nearest property line of the facility to the nearest property line of the University of Florida campus. 
C.  Distance requirements. The distance between any food distribution center for the needy and any other food distribution center for the needy or residence for destitute people, or facility combining both uses, shall be at least 2,000 feet. The distance between any food distribution center for the needy and any social service home, halfway house or rehabilitation center shall be at least 1,320 feet. All distance measurements shall be a straight line from the nearest property line of any existing facility to the nearest property line of the proposed facility. 
D.  Saturation. No more than two food distribution centers for the needy or residences for destitute people may be located within a two-mile radius. 
E.  Bufferstrip. A food distribution center for the needy shall provide a buffer equal to that of a commercial use, in accordance with article VIII, when adjacent to any property zoned for residential use. 
F.  Management program. Any applicant for a special use permit shall file with the city manager or designee a management program addressing hours of operation, personnel, client code of conduct, location of on-site waiting areas, management of solid waste and litter, lighting, and identification of a responsible person, as more specifically provided below. The name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the facility shall be kept up to date, and submitted with the management program. 
1.  Hours of operation. The application for a special use permit shall provide the hours of operations clearly indicating the three-hour timeframe for meal service. The hours shall be posted and clearly visible to the public. 
2.  Personnel. The application shall indicate the minimum number of staff persons, including volunteers, which will be supervising the meal service and the clients during the three-hour timeframe. The applicant shall demonstrate to the board that the supervision will be adequate for providing the service and crowd control. 
3.  Client code of conduct. A written client code of conduct shall accompany the application, including the following information at a minimum: The procedure for suspending meal service to persons who violate the code of conduct, including the number of violations, and the requirement for all persons to sign and consent to the code as a condition for receiving service. The enforcement of the code of conduct shall be the sole responsibility of the owner/operator. 
4.  On-site waiting areas. The application for a special use permit shall include a diagram of the facility's onsite waiting area(s). Waiting area(s) shall be on the premise where the meal service is being provided. The owner/operator shall ensure that persons receiving service do not block public access to sidewalks, right-of-way and private property, and that emergency access points are clearly identified and maintained. The applicant shall demonstrate to the board that adequate space is available to accommodate the expected number of persons who will be served meals. 
5.  Management of solid waste and litter. The application shall include a plan for controlling solid waste and litter on-site and off-site in the vicinity of the center. The application shall include information about whether carry-out meals or bag lunches will be provided. When carryout meals or bag lunches are provided, the application shall include a plan of personnel or staff that will provide litter clean-up within a quarter-mile radius of the center on the same day that the meals are served. 
6.  Lighting. Facilities with night hours shall include with the application a plan for security lighting that complies with the lighting standards of the Land Development Code. 
7.  Responsible person. The application shall include the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the center. The contact person shall have the authority to make corrective action when necessary. It shall be the responsibility of the owner/operator to keep the contact person's information up-to-date with the city manager or designee. 
G.  Combined facility. A special use permit may be issued for a facility functioning as both a food distribution center for the needy and a residence for destitute people. All requirements for both facilities shall be met.  
Sec. 30-5.13. - Gasoline and alternative fuel stations. 
Gasoline and alternative fuel stations also include retail petroleum sales at service stations or car washes, either separately or in combination with the sale of food or restaurants, or gas pumps as accessory to a convenience store or restaurant. 
A.  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses to a gasoline or alternative fuel service station are as follows: 
1.  Rental of vehicles, provided they are screened in accordance with section 30-5.39. 
2.  Minor adjustments or repairs to automobiles, trucks, trailers or other vehicles that do not require body work, painting or removal of engines from frames or dismantling of differentials. No lift or repair facilities shall be located outside the principal structure. Additional adjustments or repairs at service stations shall only be permitted within zoning districts where major automotive repairs are a permitted principal use. 
3.  The retail sale of minor automobile parts and accessories, gasoline, diesel fuel, alternative fuels, kerosene, lubricating oils and greases. 
4.  Vending machines, provided such machines are located under the roof of the principal structure. 
B.  Number of fueling positions. 
1.  Within the transect zones, where allowed, up to six fueling positions are permitted by right. 
2.  Within all other zoning districts, where allowed, up to six fueling positions are permitted by right, except for stations located within one-fourth mile from an interchange, where there may be up to 12 fueling positions permitted by right. 
3.  Up to 12 fueling positions may be allowed as part of a planned development rezoning or special use permit process. 
C.  Design requirements. 
1.  All fuel pumps and pump islands shall be set back a minimum distance of at least 15 feet from any right-of-way line or property line. 
2.  All gasoline and alternative fuel pumps and accessory automotive uses shall be located to the rear or side of buildings and at least 50 feet from the property line of any property zoned residential district or planned development district with predominantly residential uses. In the event the physical constraints of the site do not allow such uses to meet these requirements, the uses may be located to the front of the building in order to meet the 50 foot spacing requirement. This design requirement shall not apply in the I-1 or I-2 zoning districts. 
3.  The number and width of driveways shall be minimized. 
4.  Cross-access or joint use driveways shall be provided to adjacent non-residential developments. 
5.  A minimum of 25 percent window area or glazing at pedestrian level (between three and eight feet above grade) on all first-floor building sides with street frontage. Windows or glazing shall be at least 80 percent transparent. 
6.  A public entrance shall be provided that faces the street (a corner entrance may be provided where the building is located at the intersection of streets). 
7.  Pedestrian and bicycle access shall be provided from the public sidewalk to any retail or restaurant facilities on site. 
8.  Off-street parking shall be located to the side or rear of the building. 
9.  Canopy height: The bottom surface of a canopy shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
10.  Perimeter buffers: Sites shall include type B buffers with a minimum four-foot tall opaque masonry wall or privet type hedge along the side and rear property boundaries to minimize the view of fueling pumps. 
11.  Dumpster location: Dumpsters shall be enclosed by a masonry wall and placed as far away from existing, adjacent residential uses as practicable on the site and shall not be less than 50 feet as measured from the residential property line. 
12.  Car wash facilities and associated elements such as vacuums shall be prohibited when adjacent to any property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district with predominately residential uses. 
13.  A convenience store or restaurant or combination thereof shall be present when fueling positions exceed six. 
(Ord. No. 160484 , § 1, 9-7-17)  
Sec. 30-5.14. - Industrial uses. 
A.  Standards for manufacturing uses. All permitted manufacturing uses shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Manufacturing uses shall be limited to the fabrication, manufacture, assembly or processing of materials that are already substantially processed. 
2.  All activity and uses except storage, loading/unloading operations and parking shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
3.  Outside operations between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., including loading/unloading but not including security operations, are prohibited within 100 feet of the property line of any property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district with predominately residential uses, unless conducted within a completely enclosed building that has no openings other than stationary windows or required fire exits. The appropriate reviewing board may grant a waiver to this prohibition if the board finds that the noise attenuation and screening being provided is sufficient to mitigate the adverse impacts of the night operations. 
B.  Hazardous materials. Uses involving class D hazardous materials, as classified by Alachua County, shall be considered specially regulated industries and shall require special use permit approval. The following apply to uses designated as subject to specially regulated industry provisions: 
1.  Reports. The applicant for a special use permit shall submit information specifying expected air emissions, surface and groundwater emissions, noise levels, truck traffic volumes, including time-of-day levels, odor levels, glare impacts, and the compatibility of these emissions and impact levels with other properties, uses and neighborhoods within 2,000 feet. The report shall indicate that these impacts will not violate local, regional, state, or federal limits. The report shall also indicate that "best available technology" is being used to control impacts from the specially regulated industry. 
2.  Exemption. Uses or developments that will result in releases of pollutants to the air and water of no more than one percent of the average release of those pollutants on a list maintained by the city for that industry shall be exempt from the special use permit process, except for the report required in subsection 1. above. The owner requesting this exemption shall provide evidence acceptable to the city manager or designee that the use qualifies. Any use that was permitted under this exemption and is found to be releasing more than one percent of the average release of air or water pollutants reported for that industry shall cease operation until a special use permit is applied for and obtained.  
Sec. 30-5.15. - Junkyards and salvage yards. 
Junkyards and salvage yards shall meet the following standards: 
A.  Dimensional requirements. Minimum lot area is two acres. 
B.  Spacing. Distance from any property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district with predominately residential uses shall be 300 feet. 
C.  Screening. The entire area occupied by a junkyard or salvage yard shall be surrounded by a continuous solid masonry wall eight feet in height without openings, except for entrances and exits, which shall be equipped with solid gates. 
D.  Hazardous materials. Junkyards and salvage yards shall comply with the county hazardous materials code.  
Sec. 30-5.16. - Light assembly, fabrication and processing. 
Light assembly, fabrication and processing uses in zoning districts outside of the BI, W, I-1 and I-2 districts shall meet the following standards: 
A.  The activity shall be conducted entirely within completely enclosed structures. 
B.  Storage of hazardous materials shall be in accordance with the county hazardous materials management code.  
Sec. 30-5.17. - Microbreweries/microwineries/microdistilleries. 
This section applies to operations outside of the BI, W, I-1, and I-2 zoning districts. Microbreweries, microwineries, and microdistilleries are prohibited where the proposed operation would abut single-family zoned property and shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions provided for alcoholic beverage establishments.  
Sec. 30-5.18. - Mini-warehouses/self-storage facilities. 
Within the transect zones, there shall be no access to the individual storage units from the exterior of the building. All units shall be located within a building and accessed from within the building.  
Sec. 30-5.19. - Outdoor storage. 
Where outdoor storage is a permitted principal use (not including accessory, short-term or temporary storage) the following requirements shall apply (see section 30-5.39 for outdoor storage as an accessory use): 
A.  Screening requirements. A landscape buffer strip shall be provided in the same manner as if the property were in an industrial land use designation in accordance with the requirements of article VIII. 
1.  Additional screening may be required to visually shield the use from the public right-of-way. 
2.  No merchandise, equipment, machinery, materials, motor vehicles or other items shall be stored above the height of the landscape buffer strip. 
B.  Hazardous materials. Compliance with the county hazardous materials code is required.  
Sec. 30-5.20. - Parking, surface. 
Surface parking lots as a temporary use are allowed in the U9 and DT districts subject to special use permit approval and the following requirements: 
A.  Surface parking shall be permitted only when the surface parking will be replaced with either a building or structured parking in accordance with an approved master plan. 
B.  Surface parking shall be paved. 
C.  Surface parking shall have either perimeter landscaping or perimeter garden walls in accordance with the landscape regulations as provided in this Land Development Code. 
D.  Surface parking shall be in compliance with all lighting and stormwater regulations in this Land Development Code. 
E.  Any special use permit approved pursuant to this section shall be valid for a period not to exceed five years. The city plan board may extend a special use permit approved under this section for an additional period not to exceed five years if the applicant demonstrates that development in accordance with the approved master plan has commenced.  
Sec. 30-5.21. - Places of religious assembly. 
A.  Within the RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, RSF-4 and U1 districts, places of religious assembly are allowed upon the granting of a special use permit, subject to the following additional dimensional requirements: 
1.  Minimum lot area shall be one acre for each place of religious assembly with a building code capacity of 100 persons or less plus an additional one-half acre for each additional 50 persons of building code capacity. 
2.  Minimum yard setbacks: 
a.  Front: 25 feet. 
b.  Side, interior: 50 feet, unless the proposed use is adjacent to a non-residential district, in which case the district setbacks shall apply. 
c.  Side, street: 25 feet. 
d.  Rear: 50 feet, unless the proposed use is adjacent to a non-residential district, in which case the district setbacks shall apply. 
B.  Day care centers and schools as accessory uses. Within the RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, RSF-4 and U1 districts, day care centers and schools may be allowed as accessory uses to places of religious assembly upon the granting of a special use permit; within all other districts, day care centers and schools are permitted accessory uses to any lawful place of religious assembly provided, in all cases, that the requirements and limitations for day care centers and schools as listed in this article are met. 
C.  Food distribution centers for the needy as accessory uses. The city manager or designee may issue a permit for a food distribution center for the needy in conjunction with a place of religious assembly subject to meeting the standards of section 30-5.12 and the following additional restrictions: 
1.  No more than 20 meals may be served in a 24-hour period. 
2.  The place of religious assembly can physically provide an indoor eating area meeting all state, county and city codes for the proposed use. 
3.  No food distribution center for the needy may be closer than 1,320 feet from any other place of religious assembly having a food distribution center for the needy. 
4.  Each place of religious assembly shall file with the city manager or designee a management program addressing hours of operation, personnel, management of solid waste, litter and lighting. The name, address, and phone number of the person responsible for the facility shall be kept up-to-date. 
5.  Information shall be displayed including the name of the facility, hours of operation and other functional information. 
D.  Residences for destitute people as accessory uses. The city manager or designee may issue a permit for a residence for destitute people in conjunction with a place of religious assembly subject to meeting the standards of section 30-5.22 and the following additional restrictions: 
1.  The total number of beds shall not exceed 20. 
2.  Meals may be provided only to residents. 
3.  No one over the age of 18 may be admitted as a resident without submitting a written report issued by the city police department stating that the person has no outstanding warrants for his or her arrest and is not a "dangerous person", as defined in article II. 
4.  Each place of religious assembly shall file with the city manager or designee a management program addressing hours of operation, personnel, management of solid waste, litter and lighting. The name, address, and phone number of the person responsible for the facility shall be kept up-to-date. 
5.  Each place of religious assembly shall provide an indoor area meeting all state, county and city codes for use as a residence for destitute people. The area shall be inspected and approved by the building official prior to being used as a residence for destitute people, either on a temporary or recurring basis. 
6.  There shall be at least one staff person or volunteer on site, and a director or administrator on-call, when anyone is sheltered overnight in a residence for destitute people.  
Sec. 30-5.22. - Residences for destitute people. 
Except when provided as an accessory use to places of religious assembly, residences for destitute people shall be regulated as follows: 
A.  Spacing and location. Residences for destitute people shall not be located closer than 1,320 feet from any social service home, halfway house or rehabilitation center and shall not be closer than 2,000 feet from any other residence for destitute people, food distribution center for the needy or combination thereof. All measurements shall be measured from the nearest property line of the above-listed facilities to the nearest property line of the proposed facility. 
B.  Saturation. No more than two food distribution centers for the needy or residences for destitute people may be located within a two-mile radius of the proposed facility. 
C.  Renewal of special use permit. The owner of real property holding a special use permit for the operation of a residence for the destitute shall renew such permit in a hearing before the city plan board at a regularly scheduled hearing not more than seven years from the date of issue. The city plan board at such renewal hearing shall ascertain that the facility has been operating in substantial compliance with the above conditions. 
D.  Number of beds. The total number of beds that may be provided in any residence for destitute people in a 24-hour period is 35. 
E.  Police department report. Prior to the admission of any person in a residence for destitute people, such person shall submit a written report issued by the police department stating that such person has no outstanding warrant for his/her arrest. 
F.  Dangerous persons. No person meeting the definition for a dangerous person shall be housed in any residence for destitute people.  
Sec. 30-5.23. - Sexually oriented businesses. 
A.  Intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the purpose nor the effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the purpose nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
B.  Findings. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses set forth in studies and case law considered by the city commission and on evidence and recommendations presented in hearings and in reports to the city commission, the city commission hereby finds as follows: 
1.  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects, including personal and property crimes, public safety risks, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, illicit sexual activity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, undesirable and criminal behavior associated with alcohol consumption, negative impacts on surrounding properties, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. 
2.  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes harm that the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating in the future. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city's rationale for this section, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to future secondary effects that could occur in the city related to current sexually oriented businesses as well as sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the city in the future. The city finds that the cases and secondary effects documentation relied on in this section are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
C.  Spacing. A sexually oriented business may not be established in any permitted district unless all other requirements of the chapter pertaining to such districts and to buildings generally are met and unless the sexually oriented business is at least 1,000 feet from any other sexually oriented business, place of religious assembly, public school, private school, public park, youth association or residential area. 
1.  Measurement. For purposes of the spacing requirements, the measurement shall be made by extending a straight line from the nearest property line of the sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the other sexually oriented business, place of religious assembly, public school, private school, public park, youth association or residential area. If any such use is located in a multi-tenant building, then property line shall mean the nearest line of the leasehold or other space actually controlled or occupied by the sexually oriented business, place of religious assembly, public school, private school or youth association. 
2.  Exemption to spacing requirement. Any sexually oriented business that is established in conformity with this section and other applicable laws and ordinances shall not be made unlawful, if a place of religious assembly, public school, private school, public park or residential area is created or established within the distance limitations subsequent to the filing with the city of the application for the establishment of the sexually oriented business or subsequent to the lawful establishment of the sexually oriented business. 
D.  Obscenity not permitted. Nothing in this section shall be construed as permitted or allowing a violation of any state or federal law, including F.S. Ch. 847, relating to obscenity. 
E.  Existing establishments. Any use herein defined as a sexually oriented motion picture theater, retail store or cabaret that is on April 15, 2010, existing, in actual operation and open to the public, and which in all other respects is in full compliance with applicable laws and ordinances of the city, but which would not otherwise be permitted under the terms of this section, shall then become a permitted nonconforming use. 
F.  Sexually oriented motion picture theaters. Any sexually oriented motion picture theater shall meet the following design standards at all times: 
1.  Presentation area. All screenings and presentations of motion pictures, videos or other visual media shall occur in a room open to all customers of the establishment and containing at least 600 square feet of floor area. No curtains, screens, shades or other devices shall be used to obscure any part of the room. 
2.  Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least two footcandles at floor level. 
3.  Seating. Seating shall consist of individual, theater-style chairs, with solid arms separating the chairs. No couches, benches, individual chairs, beds, loose cushions or mattresses, or other forms of seating may be provided. Separate spaces for wheelchairs shall be provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of the adopted building code in effect and the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
G.  Sexually oriented cabarets. In addition to those standards applicable to adult performance establishments, the following design standards shall apply to any sexually oriented cabaret at all times: 
1.  Presentation area. All performances and all interactions between performers and customers shall occur in a room open to all customers of the establishment and containing at least 600 square feet of floor area. No curtains, screens, shades or other devices shall be used to obscure any part of the room. 
2.  Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least five footcandles at a height of three feet off the floor. 
H.  Retail store with limited quantities of sexually oriented media or devices. A retail trade establishment (SIC Division G) that devotes more than ten percent but less than 30 percent of its floor area, or stocks more than ten percent but less than 30 percenter of the number of items in inventory, to sexually oriented media or sexually oriented devices, shall be treated for zoning purposes as an accessory use to the primary retail trade of the store and not as a sexually oriented retail store, provided that it meets all of the following conditions (however, these conditions shall not apply to a retail trade establishment that allows only persons who are 18 years of age or older to enter the premises): 
1.  All sexually oriented media or devices shall be maintained in a room that is separated from other material by an opaque wall that extends to the ceiling or eight feet above the floor, whichever is less. 
2.  Access to the room containing the sexually oriented media or devices shall be through a door or through a space that can be entered only by passing directly by the manager's or cashier's principal work station. 
3.  The room containing sexually oriented media or devices shall be posted with a notice indicating that only persons 18 years of age or older are allowed in the room. 
4.  Access to the room shall be physically limited to adults through control of access by an employee of the store, through use of an access release located at least 66 inches off the floor, or through constant monitoring of the room by an employee on duty, where such employee has visual control of the separate room through direct visibility, through electronic means or through a window or mirror providing visibility into the room from the manager's or cashier's work station.  
Sec. 30-5.24. - Shooting ranges, outdoor. 
In addition to all other requirements, outdoor shooting ranges, including those within an outdoor gun club, shall comply with the following provisions. Failure to comply with any of these conditions is grounds for revocation of the special use permit. 
A.  Location. Outdoor shooting ranges shall be located a minimum of 2,500 feet from any existing residence and any property zoned for residential use, any school, any hospital, or any public park. 
B.  Storage. No live ammunition and no weapons may be stored on-site. 
C.  Operational plan. The owner of the shooting range shall operate in accordance with national standards as written in the National Rifle Association Range Manual. 
D.  Range master. A range master shall be present in accordance with the national standards as written in the National Rifle Association Range Manual. 
E.  Design. The facility shall be designed by a licensed engineer in accordance with NRA design guidelines as written in the National Rifle Association Range Manual. No berm shall be less than eight feet in height. 
F.  Fencing; signage. The outdoor shooting range shall be fenced with a minimum six-foot high chain link fence with barbed wire, or similar combination. Signs shall be placed around the perimeter of the fencing warning of the facility. The property shall be posted "No trespassing" and the prohibition on trespassing shall be enforced by the owner or operator. 
G.  Hazardous materials. The outdoor shooting range shall comply with the provisions of the Alachua County Hazardous Materials Management Code.  
Sec. 30-5.25. - Social service facilities. 
Individual and family social services are subject to the following standards: 
A.  If located in an industrial district, the fee simple owner(s) of the property shall sign the application and acknowledge that the use is in an industrial district that may be subject to noise, heavy truck traffic, fumes, odors and vibrations that are customary in an industrial district. 
B.  The use shall not co-locate with another industrial use on the same parcel. 
C.  The use shall occupy a building that is currently located on the parcel. 
D.  Residential care is prohibited and no overnight stay or lodging is allowed. 
E.  The special use permit is limited to a maximum of five years, subject to automatic renewal for the same term as the original permit, unless either: 1) the use is discontinued or abandoned for 90 consecutive days; or 2) the city or owner of the property seeks to terminate the use by providing written notice to the city manager or designee at least 90 calendar days prior to the expiration of the special use permit. In the event such notice is given, the special use permit shall expire and terminate unless the owner files a new application within 20 calendar days of receipt of said notice of termination. The application will then be processed and reviewed in the same manner as a new application.  
Sec. 30-5.26. - Social service homes/halfway houses. 
A.  Dimensional requirements. All principal and accessory structures for social service homes/halfway houses shall be located and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width at minimum front yard setback: 100 feet. 
3.  Minimum yard setbacks: 
a.  Front: 25 feet. 
b.  Rear: 20 feet; 35 feet if the rear yard abuts property with residential land use or zoning. 
c.  Side: 
i.  Street: 10 feet. 
ii.  Interior: 20 feet; 35 feet if the side yard abuts property with residential land use or zoning. 
B.  Spacing and location requirements. Social service homes/halfway houses shall not be located closer than 1,320 feet from any other social service home, halfway house, community residential homes for 21 persons or more or rehabilitation center, and shall not be located closer than 2,640 feet from any soup kitchen or residence for destitute people or combination thereof. All measurement shall be from the nearest property line of any of the above-listed facilities to the nearest property line of the proposed facility. 
C.  Buffer requirements. Social service homes/halfway houses shall comply with the requirements of offices, schools and places of religious assembly in accordance with article VIII.  
Sec. 30-5.27. - Solar generation station. 
Solar generation stations shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
A.  Wetlands. The devices that capture solar energy and convert it to electricity shall not be placed in wetlands or surface waters or wetland buffers or surface water buffers. Any impacts to wetlands or surface waters or their buffers from required improvements for a solar generation station, such as impacts from roads or transmission lines, shall be regulated in accordance with article VIII. 
B.  Dimensional requirements. A solar generation station shall not exceed the maximum principal building height of the zoning district in which it is located. 
C.  Setback. Devices that capture solar energy and convert it to electricity shall be located at least 25 feet from any lot line. 
D.  Public safety. The solar generation station shall be designed and operated to protect public safety, including without limitation, preventing the misdirection of concentrated solar radiation onto nearby property, public roads or other areas accessible to the public and implementing site design and operating procedures to prevent public access to hazardous areas. 
E.  Other requirements. A solar generation station shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations governing the operation of a solar generation facility, including without limitation chapter 27 of the Code of Ordinances. 
F.  Removal. The property owner shall remove the solar generation station within one year following a continuous two-year period of non-use.  
Sec. 30-5.28. - Vehicle services or repair. 
Development that provide vehicle services or repair shall meet the following standards. 
A.  Service bays shall be designed and located either: 
1.  With a maximum of three service area entrances at the rear of the building, not exceeding 14 feet in width for each, which provide direct access to an externally-oriented service bay; or 
2.  With a maximum of two service area entrances at the rear or side of the building, not exceeding 26 feet in width for each, which provide indirect access to one or more internally-oriented service bays. 
B.  In addition to the requirements above, service bay doors shall not face abutting property in a residential district or other existing, conforming residential use. 
C.  All installation, sales and services shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
E.  All lifts, tools or repair facilities shall be located in a principal structure. 
F.  Only low impact air guns may be used in an unenclosed work area located within 200 feet of any land zoned for residential use. 
G.  Outdoor accessory display and storage shall be in accordance with section 30-5.39.  
Sec. 30-5.29. - Veterinary services. 
A.  No such facilities shall be permitted to have outside cages or runs except for those that are located in industrial districts and that are at least 500 feet from any property zoned for residential use. 
B.  All such facilities shall have sound attenuation so as to prevent common and ordinary animal noises from being heard outside any building or structure. Outside cages or runs permitted in industrial districts shall not be required to be so designed.  
Sec. 30-5.30. - Wireless communication facilities and antenna regulations. 
A.  Purpose. These regulations were developed to protect the health, safety and welfare of residents of the city, and to protect property values and minimize visual impact while furthering the development of enhanced telecommunications services in the city. These standards are designed to comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the requirements of F.S. Ch. 365. The provisions of this section are not intended to and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services. This section shall not be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent services, consistent with federal regulations. These regulations are intended to: 
1.  Provide uniform standards for the provision of both radio and television broadcast signals and telecommunication services, including two-way radio, paging, personal communication services (PCS), cellular and related wireless services; 
2.  Protect the natural features and aesthetic character of the city by regulating the location, design and operation of wireless communication facilities, with special attention to residential neighborhoods, public parks, transportation view corridors, historic districts, historic landmarks, and environmentally sensitive lands; 
3.  Minimize the adverse visual and aesthetic impacts of wireless communication facilities through innovative design, siting and landscaping standards, including incentives to promote the use of camouflaged towers, collocation of new antennas on existing communication towers and the placement of antennas on roofs, walls, existing towers and other existing structures; 
4.  Accommodate the growing demand for wireless communication services, consistent with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, and ensure an efficient and high-quality wireless communications network; and 
5.  Expedite the review process for those new applicants choosing the least intrusive alternative of deploying wireless telecommunication services. 
B.  Applicability and general requirements. The requirements of this section apply to all wireless communication facilities and broadcast towers. All property within the city limits shall be subject to the requirements of this section. It is the intent of the city to impose all regulations of this section to all land within the city, whether publicly or privately held, except as specifically provided herein. These regulations shall supersede all other code provisions concerning wireless communications facilities for those applications for development review that are filed on or after July 1, 2005, unless otherwise provided in law. Setback and separation distances shall be applied regardless of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries. The design, construction and installation of wireless communications facilities shall comply with all applicable building codes. 
C.  Collocation. Collocation on any existing facility or structure shall be completed in accordance with the standards stated in F.S. § 365.172(11), as applicable. All other collocations shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of subsection H. and, if applicable, subsection J. 
D.  Modification of existing towers. Pursuant to F.S. § 365.172(11), an existing tower, including a nonconforming tower, may be structurally modified in order to permit collocation or may be replaced through no more than administrative review and building permit review and is not subject to public hearing review if the overall height of the tower is not increased and, if a replacement, the replacement tower is a monopole tower or, if the existing tower is a camouflaged tower, the replacement tower is a like-camouflaged tower. 
1.  The replacement tower is located as close as reasonably possible to the existing tower and in no instance greater than 50 feet from the existing tower. 
2.  In all cases the existing tower shall be removed within 30 calendar days of completion of the replacement tower. 
3.  The replacement tower shall comply with the airport hazard zoning regulations of the city. 
4.  Any other existing tower modifications or replacements are considered a new tower and are subject to the provisions of this section. 
E.  Camouflaged towers. New camouflaged towers shall be permitted according to the process identified below in subsection 4. in all zoning districts except for those zones in the single-family and residential-low zoning categories (see Table V-1, below) and U2, where no actual or effective prohibition of the provider's service in that residential area or zoning district results. If a wireless provider demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that the provider cannot reasonably provide its service to the residential area or zone from outside the residential area or zone, the city and provider shall cooperate to determine an appropriate location for a wireless communications facility of an appropriate design within the residential area or zone. In no instance shall the height of a camouflage tower in a single-family or residential-low zoning category exceed 80 feet in height, and shall be subject to a special use permit by the city plan board. The city may require that the wireless provider reimburse the reasonable costs incurred by the city in cooperating in this determination. 
1.  Height. The maximum height of camouflaged towers in multiple-family, office or mixed-use districts, as listed in Table 1, below and in U1 and U6, is 80 feet. The maximum height of camouflaged towers in all other districts is 110 feet, except that in industrial districts a camouflaged tower may be a height of up to 130 feet. Camouflaged towers may be constructed in excess of the maximum heights listed above, provided a special use permit is issued in accordance with article III. 
2.  Setbacks. For purposes of structural safety and aesthetics, regardless of the zoning district in which a camouflaged tower is located, the tower shall be set back a distance of at least the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line. 
3.  Collocation. Any camouflaged tower in excess of 110 feet in height shall be designed to support the facilities of at least three providers, including the facilities of the applicant. Any camouflaged tower in excess of 70 feet in height but less than 110 feet in height shall be designed to support the facilities of at least two providers, including the facilities of the applicant. 
4.  Development plan approval. Development plan approval for new uses shall be done in accordance with: the review procedures stated in article III; the provisions for neighborhood workshops stated in article III; and with the requirements as listed below in subsection L., submittal requirements. The base application fee for review of any development plan application to construct a camouflaged tower shall be the same as the fee for intermediate plan review, plus the fee for a special use permit, if necessary, and the fee for the technical consultant, if deemed necessary by the city. All proposed new camouflaged towers shall be architecturally and/or aesthetically compatible with the surrounding community. To determine architectural and/or aesthetic compatibility with the surrounding community, a public hearing shall be held before the development review board on the development plan application; however, if a special use permit is required for approval of the proposed camouflaged tower, a public hearing shall be held before the city plan board on the development plan application. 
5.  Aircraft hazard. All towers shall comply with the airport hazard zoning regulations. 
6.  Utility building. The equipment used to operate the facility shall be stored in: 
a.  An existing building on the site; 
b.  An equipment cabinet, shelter or an underground vault; or 
c.  A building constructed or installed to accommodate multiple providers and designed to be compatible with the surrounding environment, while meeting the minimum building setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
The equipment cabinet or shelter, if used, shall be screened by a fence or wall of not less than eight feet in height from finished grade, or by landscaping that conceals the cabinet or shelter. 
7.  Equipment storage. No equipment, mobile or immobile, not used in direct support of the transmission or relay facility, shall be stored or parked on the site unless repairs to the facility are currently being made. 
For the purposes of this section, zoning districts shall be classified as follows: 
Table V-1: Zoning districts 
Single-family and residential-low 	RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, RSF-4, RC, MH, RMF-5, U1, U2. 
Multiple-family 	RMF-6, RMF-7, RMF-8, U4, U5. 
Office 	OF, CP, MD. 
Mixed-use 	MU-1, MU-2, U6, U7, U8, U9, DT. 
 
F.  Monopole towers. Except as set forth herein, new monopole towers that are not accessory to communications uses, shall be permitted by right in I-1, I-2, and AGR zones and are subject to review in accordance with the process identified below in subsection 8. 
1.  Height. The maximum height of a monopole wireless tower is 130 feet. Monopole towers may be constructed in excess of the maximum height, up to 200 feet, provided a special use permit is issued in accordance with article III. 
2.  Setbacks. For purposes of structural safety and aesthetics, regardless of the zoning district in which a monopole tower is located, the tower shall be set back a distance of at least 300 feet from the nearest property lines of any single-family, residential-low, multiple-family, office or mixed-use district. The tower shall be set back from any adjoining lot line a distance equal to or greater than the height of the tower. Monopole towers may be constructed within 300 feet of the nearest property lines of any single-family, residential-low, multiple-family, office or mixed-use district, provided a special use permit is issued in accordance with article III. 
3.  Collocation. Collocation is encouraged; therefore, monopole towers shall be designed to accommodate collocation for multiple wireless communication service providers in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 
Monopole Tower Height 	Total Number of Providers 
Less than 110 feet 	3 
111 feet to 130 feet 	4 
131 feet to 170 feet 	5 
171 feet to 200 feet 	6 
 
4.  Fencing and buffering; nonresidential districts. A metal or solid fence or wall of not less than six feet in height from finished grade, with locked gates, shall be provided around the base of each tower or around the yard area where the tower is located. Climb-proof shields can be substituted for a fence or wall around any tower. A monopole tower shall provide a buffer equal to that of commercial use in accordance with article VIII, except that in cases where the adjacent use is also commercial and a buffer is not required, adjacent use buffer C shall be provided (see section 30-8.5, chart A). Exceptions to the buffer strip requirement shall be in accordance with section 30-8.5. 
5.  Utility building. The equipment used to operate the facility shall be stored in: 
a.  An existing building on the site; 
b.  An equipment cabinet, shelter or an underground vault; or 
c.  A building constructed or installed to accommodate multiple providers and designed to be compatible with the surrounding environment, while meeting the minimum building setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
The equipment cabinet or shelter, if used, shall be screened by a fence or wall of not less than eight feet in height from finished grade, or by landscaping that conceals the cabinet or shelter. 
6.  Equipment storage. No equipment, mobile or immobile, not used in direct support of the transmission or relay facility, shall be stored or parked on the site unless repairs to the facility are currently being made. 
7.  Aircraft hazard. All towers shall comply with the airport hazard zoning regulations. 
8.  Development plan approval. A public hearing before the development review board shall be held to consider all new monopole tower development plan applications; however, if a special use permit is required for approval of the proposed monopole tower, a public hearing shall be held before the city plan board on the development plan application. The base application fee for review of any development plan application to construct a monopole tower shall be the same as the fee for intermediate plan review, plus the fee for a special use permit, if necessary, and the fee for the technical consultant, if deemed necessary by the city. 
G.  Personal wireless service (PWS) antennas and wireless communications facilities. 
1.  General. This subsection is relevant to all new PWS antennas and collocated PWS antennas that increase the height of the structure or are not otherwise preempted pursuant to F.S. § 365.172(11). 
a.  PWS antennas attached to existing structures shall be permitted as accessory uses in all zoning districts. 
b.  PWS antennas may be located on existing commercial, industrial, office, institutional or multiple-family structures. PWS antennas shall not be mounted on single-family structures or on two-family structures. 
c.  PWS antennas may extend a maximum of 20 feet above the roofline or the highest point of the existing structure on which they are mounted. 
d.  The height of a rooftop installation shall be measured from the finish level of the portion of the roof on which the antenna is mounted. 
e.  PWS antennas placed on a legally non-conforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the structure. Existing PWS antennas that were legally installed at the time of initial installation may be repaired, replaced and/or relocated at an equal or lower height on the existing structure. 
2.  Visual compatibility for PWS antennas not located on a communication tower. 
a.  All new PWS antennas and collocated PWS antennas that increase the height of the structure or are not otherwise preempted pursuant to F.S. § 365.172(11), shall be placed on the structure out of public view to the greatest extent possible. If this is not practical, screens or enclosures are required to conceal the facility from public view in a manner that is compatible with the scale, color and architectural character of the structure. 
b.  If it is necessary to place the PWS antenna in public view, for aesthetic purposes it shall be integrated into the structure in such a manner that it is compatible with the scale, color and architectural character of the structure to the greatest extent practical. 
c.  Equipment shelters used in conjunction with such PWS antennas shall be located inside the existing structure or hidden from public view, or made compatible with the scale, color and architectural character of the structure. 
d.  A PWS antenna shall comply with the required setbacks for the zoning district in which it is located. 
3.  Development plan approval. Development plan approval in accordance with article III, as applicable, and compliance with the application requirements stated below in subsections L.1., 6., and 11. are required prior to the issuance of a building permit for all new PWS antennas and collocated antennas that are not otherwise preempted pursuant to F.S. § 365.172(11). 
H.  Amateur radio towers. All amateur radio towers in residential zoning districts shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Height. No amateur radio tower shall rise more than 80 feet from the ground level at the exact site on which it is erected except as otherwise provided for in subsection 7. below. 
2.  Location. Amateur radio towers are only allowed in rear yards. Only one tower is allowed per lot. 
3.  Guy anchors. Guy anchors shall meet the setback requirements of the respective district and are allowed in side and rear yards only. 
4.  Construction standards. Amateur radio towers shall meet manufacturer's specifications and an engineer licensed in the State of Florida shall certify plans. Towers shall meet the requirements of the Standard Building Code, relating to wind loads, and shall be engineered or guyed so that in the event a tower falls it will collapse only within the property lines on which it is located. All towers shall meet the standards contained in the most current version of American National Standards Institute "Steel Antenna Towers and Steel Supporting Structures" (ANSI EIA/TIA 222, F-1996 (R 2003)). 
5.  Fencing and buffering. A metal fence or solid wood or masonry wall at least eight feet in height shall be constructed and maintained around the perimeter of the rear yard or the base of the amateur radio tower. Climb-proof shields may be substituted for a fence or wall around the tower. A combination of hedges and/or evergreen trees, at least four feet in height when planted, shall be planted and maintained around the perimeter of the rear yard or in a continuous line around the tower and spaced close together to provide a continuous visual screen. Shrubs shall also be planted and maintained around the guy anchors for visual screening purposes. 
6.  Design/landscape plan. A design/landscape plan shall be submitted for all proposed amateur radio tower sites, showing the proposed location of the tower, guy anchors and any existing or proposed landscaping as required by this section. 
7.  Development plan approval. The level of review for amateur radio towers of up to 80 feet in height shall be rapid review in accordance with article III. 
8.  Special use permits for excess height. Amateur radio towers may be constructed in excess of the 80-foot height limitation provided a special use permit is issued. In addition to the special use permit requirements stated in article III, considerations shall include the following: 
a.  The effects of topography, terrain and height of surrounding tree canopy on broadcasting ability. 
b.  The construction and design of amateur radio towers with regard to safety regulations including a consideration of the distance from the airport and whether the proposed tower would interfere with any flight paths. 
c.  The visual impact on surrounding properties and existing or proposed screening and buffering. 
I.  Historic preservation/conservation districts. A new wireless communications facility shall only be located in a historic preservation/conservation district if it is a camouflaged tower and is 80 feet or less in height. A certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation board shall be required for approval, in addition to the requirements of subsection E. Personal wireless service (PWS) antennas located in a historic preservation/conservation district shall be required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation board for approval, in addition to meeting the requirements stated at subsection G. Any alteration made to a historical structure to accommodate the placement of a PWS antenna shall be designed and constructed so that it is fully reversible without damage to the historical structure. 
J.  Broadcast towers, retransmission and microwave transmission towers. New broadcast towers may be guyed towers, lattice towers or monopole towers. 
1.  Dimensional requirements. 
a.  Tower location. For purposes of structural safety and aesthetics, broadcast towers and retransmission and microwave transmission towers shall be set back at least 300 feet from the nearest property lines of any single-family, residential-low or multiple-family district. The tower shall be set back from any adjoining lot line at a distance equal to or greater than the height of the tower. No broadcast tower shall be located between the street and the front of any principal building. Broadcast towers adjacent to any residential district shall be screened along any common property line by trees and shrubs. A combination of hedges and/or evergreen trees, at least four feet in height when planted, shall be planted and maintained around the perimeter of the rear yard or in a continuous line around the tower and spaced close together to provide a continuous visual screen. Shrubs shall also be planted and maintained around the guy anchors for visual screening purposes. 
b.  Anchor location. All tower supports and peripheral anchors shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the property. 
c.  Height. The height of particular zoning districts shall not apply to broadcast towers. 
2.  Fencing and buffering; nonresidential districts. A metal or solid fence or wall of not less than eight feet in height from finished grade, with locked gates, shall be provided around the base of each tower or around the yard area where the tower is located. Climb-proof shields may be substituted for a fence or wall around any tower. A broadcast tower shall provide a buffer equal to that of an industrial use in accordance with article VIII, except that in cases where the adjacent use is also industrial and a buffer is not required, adjacent use buffer D shall be provided (see section 30-8.5, chart A). 
3.  Equipment storage. No equipment, mobile or immobile, not used in direct support of the transmission or relay facility, shall be stored or parked on the site unless repairs to the facility are being made. 
4.  Aircraft hazard. All towers shall comply with the airport hazard zoning regulations. 
5.  Development plan approval. Development plan approval shall be in accordance with the review procedures in article III, as applicable; the provisions for neighborhood workshops, citizen participation; and the requirements as listed below in subsection L., submittal requirements, as applicable. 
K.  Unused or abandoned towers. A wireless communications tower is considered unused or abandoned when it is not used for transmission or retransmission for nine consecutive months. Upon determination that a tower has been abandoned, the city manager or designee shall provide written notice of the determination, by certified mail, to the owner of the tower. Upon receipt of the written notice of abandonment, the owner shall have 90 calendar days to: 
1.  Reactivate the use of the tower; 
2.  Transfer the tower to another owner who makes actual use of the facility; or 
3.  Remove the tower and all associated equipment. If the tower is not removed within 90 calendar days of the receipt of notice of abandonment, the city may dismantle and remove the tower and recover the costs from the owner or by accessing the bond set forth in submittal requirements. 
L.  Submittal requirements. In addition to the requirements of article III, an application for a new wireless communication facility shall contain the following information: 
1.  The identity of the owner(s) of the proposed facility, as well as the identity of the wireless communication service provider(s) who have committed to locating on the proposed facility. 
2.  The distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residentially zoned lands. 
3.  Details of all proposed antennas and mounting equipment, including the location on the structure, size and color. 
4.  A design drawing including a cross-section and elevation of the proposed tower. 
5.  A description of the capacity of the tower including the number and type of antennas that can be accommodated. 
6.  A certified statement from a licensed professional engineer attesting to the structural integrity of the proposed facility and its ability to accommodate collocation opportunities. 
7.  Color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the tower with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed facility, as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property or properties and adjacent roadways. 
8.  An application for a new wireless communication facility that requires a special use permit shall contain a propagation map depicting both the extent of the communication service provider's existing coverage within the subject area and the service area of the proposed tower. 
9.  A bond or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount determined by the city manager or designee, and subject to the approval of the city attorney as to form and legality, to ensure that if the tower is abandoned pursuant to section 30-5.30, cost to the city for removal of the tower shall be guaranteed to the city. 
10.  FCC license. 
11.  Any additional information that is necessary for the city to complete the review of the application and is consistent with the requirements of Florida Statutes. 
M.  Television antennas. For the purposes of this subsection, television antenna shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for television communications through the reception of electromagnetic waves. The following antennas used to receive video programming signals are allowed in all zoning districts and are exempt from the provisions of this section except as noted herein: 
1.  Residential antenna satellite dishes that are one meter (39 inches) or less in diameter and are designed to receive direct broadcast satellite (DBS) service, including direct-to-home satellite service. 
2.  Antennas that are one meter (39 inches) or less in diameter or diagonal measurement and are designed to receive video programming services via multichannel multipoint distribution service (MMDS or wireless cable). These antennas may be mounted on masts to reach the height needed to establish line-of-sight contact with the transmitter. Antennas mounted on masts higher than 20 feet are considered communication towers and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection G. 
3.  Antennas that are designed to receive over-the-air television broadcast signals and that are mounted on masts higher than 20 feet are considered communication towers and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection G. 
4.  General conditions for television antennas. 
a.  There are no minimum setback requirements for antennas described in subsections M.1. through 3. In order to protect pedestrians and vehicle operators from possible conflict with structures in the right-of-way, no part of an antenna or its support structure shall extend over public sidewalk or right-of-way at a height of less than nine feet. 
b.  Antennas described in subsections M.1. through 3, shall be placed in a location not visible from the street unless an acceptable signal cannot be obtained from any other location. If an antenna must be placed where it is visible from the street, it shall be placed wholly on the subject property and shall comply with the provisions for vision triangles. This is a safety-based restriction necessary to provide unobstructed sight distance in both directions on all approaches to an intersection. 
c.  A certificate of appropriateness shall be required for the placement of antennas described in subsections M.1. through 3., in those districts or on individual properties that are listed on both the local and national register of historic places and for those districts or individual properties listed on the local register of historic places for which the Federal Communications Commission has granted permission for the city to regulate antenna placement. 
N.  Environmental regulations. All wireless communications facilities shall comply with all applicable environmental regulations. 
O.  Signs and illumination. No signage or advertising shall be permitted on any wireless communications facility, except that each tower facility shall have an identification sign of no more than six square feet, identifying the service providers, the dates of permit approval, and the FCC registration and site identification numbers. The maximum height of the sign shall be no more than six feet, as measured from the base of the tower. No signals, lights or illumination shall be permitted on any wireless communication facility unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or as an integral part of the design of a camouflaged facility. 
P.  Technical consultants. The city in its discretion shall have the right to hire independent technical consultants and experts that it deems necessary to properly evaluate individual commercial wireless facility applications for purposes of compliance with land use and zoning regulations. The applicant shall be responsible for paying the costs of such consultation, the costs of which shall be identified reasonable expenses incurred in the review of the application. Payment is due upon receipt of the billing invoice and proof of payment shall be required prior to the consideration of the application by the appropriate reviewing body of the city. The applicant shall also be responsible for paying the costs of such consultation that may occur at the time of consideration of the application by the appropriate reviewing body. No final development order for the project under review shall be issued by the city until payment in full has been received by the city for technical consultation costs incurred during review of the application by the appropriate reviewing body.  
DIVISION 2. - ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 30-5.31. - Generally. 
All accessory structures and uses shall meet the following general requirements and the standards established in this chapter for each specific use or structure: 
A.  No accessory structure may be built unless in conjunction with or after the start of construction of the principal use on the building site. 
B.  No accessory use may be in operation unless the principal use on the site is also active. 
C.  Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this article, accessory uses and structures shall be located on the same building site as the associated principal use. 
D.  Accessory structures shall be no larger than 50 percent of the building square footage of the principal structure. 
E.  Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this article, no accessory use or structure shall be located within the front or street side yard. 
F.  Accessory structures shall conform to the principal building setbacks, unless noted otherwise in this chapter.  
Sec. 30-5.32. - Accessory automotive detailing. 
Accessory automotive detailing (as defined in article II) may be permitted within all structured parking facilities. These accessory uses may be allotted an area equal to no more than three parking spaces within the parking structure.  
Sec. 30-5.33. - Accessory dwellings. 
Accessory dwelling units are allowed in certain districts as specified in article IV and only in conjunction with a primary single-family dwelling unit. Only one accessory dwelling unit may be permitted per lot or parcel. 
A.  Location. An accessory dwelling unit may be attached or detached from the principal building. 
B.  Style. The accessory dwelling unit shall be designed as a subordinate structure to the primary structure on the lot in terms of its mass, size and architectural character. The architectural design, character, style and appearance of the accessory unit shall be consistent and compatible with the primary structure. 
C.  Parking and access. 
1.  Off-street parking for the accessory dwelling, if provided, shall be located on the lot on which the principal building is located. 
2.  An accessory dwelling unit and any off-street parking spaces shall be served by the same driveway as the principal building. 
D.  Standards. Each accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all standards applicable within the zoning district, including required setbacks and building height limits. Accessory dwelling units are exempt from residential density calculations. 
E.  Owner occupancy required. Property owner residency, as shown by an existing homestead exemption, in either the primary or accessory dwelling unit shall be a requirement for permitting of accessory dwelling units. 
F.  Building size. The living area of the unit shall be a maximum of 50 percent of the principal residence or 1,000 square feet, whichever is lesser. 
G.  Subdivision. An accessory unit may not be sold separately unless properly subdivided in accordance with this chapter.  
Sec. 30-5.34. - Consolidated apartment management offices. 
Consolidated apartment management offices (defined in article II) are allowed as an accessory use to multiple-family uses, subject to the following: 
A.  The maximum square footage for a consolidated apartment management office shall be 2,000 square feet. 
B.  Parking. A maximum of three off-street parking spaces is allowed per consolidated apartment management office. 
C.  Location. A consolidated apartment management office shall be located at least 150 feet from property zoned for single-family residential use. 
D.  Number of apartments. Each consolidated apartment management office shall manage at least 50 apartment units. No apartment unit shall be counted towards this number for more than one such office.  
Sec. 30-5.35. - Food trucks. 
A.  The intent of this section is to allow and provide regulations for food trucks as a temporary use on property. 
B.  General regulations. Food trucks may be located on property in: 1) zoning districts that allow food trucks as a use by right and 2) planned development (PD) zoning districts that allow either restaurants or alcoholic beverage establishments, both as defined in article II. The use and operation of food trucks shall be subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Except as provided in subsection C. below, the number of food trucks allowed per lot or combination of contiguous lots under common ownership is limited to one food truck per one-half acre of land area or fraction thereof. For example, a maximum of one food truck is allowed on lots with a land area of one-half acre or less, a maximum of two food trucks are allowed on lots with a land area of one acre or less, and so on. 
2.  Food trucks may operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. the following day, and may be located on the lot of operation no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and shall be removed and returned to the property's original condition no later than 5:00 a.m. the following day. This regulation shall not apply to food trucks that operate as part of and on the location of a restaurant. 
3.  Food trucks shall be located at least 50 linear feet from any restaurant during such restaurant's operating hours. This distance shall be measured by extending a straight line from the food truck to either the main entrance or any outdoor seating area of the restaurant. This regulation shall not apply if the owner(s) or authorized agent(s) of all restaurants within 50 linear feet have provided written consent, and shall not apply to food trucks that operate as part of and on the location of a restaurant. 
4.  Food trucks shall be located in an area that will not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian circulation, bus stops, or any ingress or egress from building entrances or exits, and shall be setback at least 15 feet from fire hydrants. 
5.  Food trucks and any associated seating areas shall not occupy any parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities. In addition, food trucks and any associated seating areas shall not, during the operating hours of any principal use, occupy parking spaces provided to meet the minimum parking requirements of that principal use. 
6.  Appropriate trash containers shall be provided, and all sidewalks, parking areas, and other pedestrian spaces shall be kept clean and free from any refuse or obstruction. 
7.  Each food truck shall be equipped with at least one approved portable fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 8 BC. 
8.  Food trucks shall be licensed to operate by the State of Florida and shall receive any necessary approvals from Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulations and the City of Gainesville. Food trucks shall comply with state/county health department licensing requirements for preparing and selling food items. 
C.  Food truck special events. An owner, or authorized agent, of property located in a zoning district specified in subsection B. above may apply for a food truck special event permit under this section to allow food trucks to operate on the property in a greater number than allowed under subsection B. above. A permit is not required under this section where food trucks will be operating as part of a special event that is permitted under another section of the Code of Ordinances. A property owner or authorized agent shall apply for a permit by paying the fee specified in appendix A and submitting an application to the code enforcement division on a form furnished by the city. The application shall include a site layout plan drawn to scale that includes dimensions and the proposed location of the food truck special event area, all entrances and exits to the property, parking areas, bus stops, loading zones, fire hydrants and any other information reasonably required by the city manager or designee to determine whether the food truck special event is in compliance with all applicable requirements of the Code of Ordinances. Upon determination that the application meets all applicable requirements of this section and the Code of Ordinances, the city manager or designee shall issue a food truck special event permit. A food truck special event permit may be issued no more than once every 30 days per location. 
In addition to the regulations numbered 3. through 8. set forth in subsection B. above, food truck special events shall be subject to the following regulations. In the event of conflict between the regulations in this subsection and subsection B. above, the regulations in this subsection shall prevail. 
1.  Food truck special events may take place only between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. the following day, for no more than two consecutive days. Food truck special events area may be set up no earlier than 3:00 p.m. and shall be returned to the property's original condition no later than four hours after the event. 
2.  Vehicular traffic shall be prohibited within the designated food truck special event area.  
Sec. 30-5.36. - Fowl or livestock, accessory to residential uses. 
The keeping or raising of fowl or livestock is allowed within the RSF-1 through 4, RC, U1, and U2 districts as an accessory use, subject to the following standards: 
A.  Permitted activities. The type and number of fowl or livestock permitted shall not exceed the following: 
Type of fowl or livestock 	Limit per zoning district 
Fowl 	10 hens per single family residence 
Horses and other equine animals 	None 
Cattle 	None 
Goats and Sheep 	None 
Pigs 	None 
Rabbits 	None 
 
B.  Limitations. Fowl or livestock permitted in this section shall be kept or raised for personal use only, except youth projects such as 4-H or FFA activities. 
C.  Prohibited activities. 
1.  On-premise sales of fowl or livestock or fowl or livestock byproducts (e.g. eggs, milk). 
2.  Commercial raising or keeping of fowl or livestock. 
3.  The keeping of roosters (defined as a male chicken of any age and generally characterized by an ability to crow) and any other crowing chickens are prohibited, as well as the slaughtering of hens in the RSF-1 through 4, RC, U1, U2 districts. 
D.  Nuisance prohibited. The raising and keeping of all fowl or livestock shall be done in such a manner so as not to create a public nuisance as set forth in chapter 5 of the Code of Ordinances. 
E.  Chicken coops within the RSF-1 through 4, RC, U1, U2 districts. 
1.  Hens shall be contained within a covered chicken coop or fenced pen area. The coop and fenced pen area shall be located in the rear half of the residential lot behind the principal structure. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow hens to run at large upon the streets, alleys or other public places of the city, or upon the property of any other person. 
2.  The coop and fenced pen area shall meet the setback requirements for an accessory structure in the applicable zoning district. 
3.  The coop and pen area shall be kept in a clean sanitary manner, free of insects and rodents, offensive odors (which shall not be detectable at property boundaries), excessive noise, or any other condition that could potentially cause a nuisance. Stored feed shall be secured in rodent-proof and raccoon-proof enclosed containers. 
4.  A building permit is not required for the coop if it is movable or prefabricated, and 12 square feet or less in size.  
Sec. 30-5.37. - Home occupations. 
A.  The following standards apply to home occupations other than the teaching of fine arts (see subsection B. below), family day care homes and community residential homes, as defined in article II. Standards for family child care homes and community residential homes are found in article V, division 1. 
1.  Permits. 
a.  A person desiring to conduct a home occupation at his or her primary place of residence shall apply to the appropriate department as designated by the city manager. Permit fees must be paid in accordance with Appendix A, except any person exempt from the payment of a license tax under the provisions of section 25-50(a) of the Code of Ordinances is also exempt from this fee. Permit applications must include the following: 
i.  Name of applicant; 
ii.  Location of dwelling unit where the home occupation will be conducted; 
iii.  Total floor area of the dwelling unit; 
iv.  Area of room or rooms to be used in the conduct of the home occupation; 
v.  A sketch with dimensions showing the floor plan and the area to be used for the conduct of the home occupation. This sketch will show the location and nature of all equipment to be used in the conduct of the home occupation, as well as the locations for storage of materials used in the conduct of the home occupation and the identity and nature of these materials; and 
vi.  The exact nature of the home occupation. 
b.  If the proposed home occupation complies with all of the requirements of subsection A.2. of this section, the enforcing officer shall issue the home occupation permit. Once such home occupation permit is issued to an applicant, it may not be transferred to another person through the sale, leasing or rental of the premises on which the home occupation is located or in any other manner; except that, in the case of death, should a surviving spouse or child residing at the same address desire to continue the home occupation, written notice to that effect must be given to the enforcing officer and the permit may be transferred. Such home occupation permit may not be used by the applicant for any premises other than that for which it was granted. 
c.  Home occupation permits are effective for the period of October 1 through September 30. 
2.  Required conditions. All permitted home occupations shall comply with the following criteria: 
a.  The home occupation shall be conducted only within the principal building, except for any related activities conducted off the premises. 
b.  No more than one additional person other than the residents residing on the premises shall be employed or engaged in the home occupation at the premises. 
c.  There shall be no alteration or change to the outside appearance, character or use of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation. There shall be no display of products visible in any manner from the outside of the dwelling. 
d.  No home occupation shall occupy more space than 20 percent of the total floor area of a dwelling unit, exclusive of any open porch, attached garage or similar space not suited for or intended to be occupied as living quarters, provided that in no event shall such home occupation occupy more than 500 square feet. Rooms which have been constructed as additions to the dwelling unit and any attached garage or open porch which has been converted into living quarters shall not be used for such home occupation, nor shall they be considered as floor area, until two years after the date of completion thereof, as shown on the city's records. 
e.  No commodities or goods of any kind shall be sold on the premises, nor displayed on the premises for sale elsewhere, with the following exceptions: 
i.  The sale and display of items produced or fabricated on the premises as part of the home occupation, such as art and handicrafts, is permitted. 
ii.  Orders made by phone, mail or sales party may be filled on the premises. 
iii.  If sales parties for the purpose of selling merchandise or taking orders take place at the location of the home occupation, such parties shall not take place more than four times in any one calendar year, and each party is limited to one 24-hour period. 
f.  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibrations, heat, glare, fumes, dust, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses outside the dwelling, or, in the case of attached dwelling units or multiple-family dwellings, detectable to the normal senses beyond the walls of the dwelling unit; nor shall there be any combustible materials located anywhere on the premises which are in violation of the city's fire code. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment shall be used which creates any visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
g.  No articles or materials used in connection with such home occupation shall be stored on the premises other than in the principal building so used, and any area used for storage shall be counted toward the maximum permissible floor area used for such home occupation. 
h.  No more than one automobile or truck, which shall not be larger than a stock three-quarter-ton panel or pickup truck, used in conjunction with such home occupation shall be permitted to park on the premises in question or off the premises in question and within view from surrounding properties. Such vehicle may only have two signs, not exceeding two square feet in area, each mounted flat against or painted on the sides. 
i.  No home occupation shall be permitted which involves the visitation of clients, customers, salesmen, suppliers or any other persons to the premises which would generate vehicular traffic in excess of two vehicles concurrently or more than ten vehicles per day. 
j.  Deliveries from commercial suppliers shall not be made more than twice a week to the dwelling unit in question, and the deliveries shall not restrict traffic circulation. 
k.  In no case shall a home occupation be open to the public at times earlier than 7:00 a.m. or later than 10:00 p.m. 
l.  The total number of home occupations conducted within a dwelling unit is not limited, except that the cumulative impact of all home occupations conducted within the dwelling shall not exceed the limits of one home occupation as established in this section. 
m.  There shall be no illegal discharge of any materials, fluids or gases into the sewer system or any other manner of discharging such items in violation of any applicable government code. 
n.  Home occupations shall comply with all local, state or federal regulations pertinent to the activity pursued, and shall not be construed as an exemption from such regulations. 
o.  Permit revocation. In the event that an enforcing officer determines that a permit holder is in violation of the provisions of this section, the permit shall be immediately revoked. If an enforcing officer determines that the public safety is at risk, appropriate regulating agencies and authorities shall immediately be notified. 
i.  The following shall be considered as grounds for the revocation of a home occupation permit: 
1)  Any change in use or change in extent or nature of use, or area of the dwelling unit being used, that is different from that specified in the granted home occupation permit. The operator of a home occupation shall apply for a new home occupation permit prior to any such changes. 
2)  Failure to pay the annual permit processing fee or the reinspection fee required every three years shall result in the loss of the home occupation permit. 
ii.  The following conditions shall apply to home occupation permits that have been revoked: 
1)  Initial revocation: Reapplication may only occur when the condition(s) causing the revocation has been abated. 
2)  Second revocation: Reapplication may only occur after one year and when the condition(s) causing the revocation has been abated. 
3)  Third violation: The home occupation permit shall not be reissued. 
B.  Teaching of the fine arts. The teaching of the fine arts, limited to music, sculpture, painting and drawing, may be conducted within a single-family dwelling in any residential district and shall constitute a lawful accessory use of such single-family dwelling. The teaching of the fine arts does not include the sale of any product or item of value which may be produced as a byproduct of such teaching activity. The teaching of the fine arts shall comply with the following standards and criteria: 
1.  Such activity shall be conducted solely within the principal building only by a person or persons who reside therein. 
2.  There shall be no alteration or change to the outside appearance, character or use of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the teaching activity. 
3.  Such activity shall not result in the production of any noise or vibration, light, odor, dust, smoke or other air pollution detectable outside the single-family dwelling by the senses of normal human beings. 
4.  Such activity shall not result in the production of any prolonged sound or noise for a long, continuous period of time so as to disturb the public peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants. 
5.  Such activity shall not involve the storage of goods and materials in excess of 120 cubic feet. 
6.  Such activity shall not generate the concurrent parking of more than 10 motor vehicles in any consecutive two-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 10, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-5.38. - Ice manufacturing/vending machines. 
A.  Permitted zoning districts. Ice manufacturing/vending machines shall be allowed as noted in article IV. Ice manufacturing/vending machines located within the BI, I-1, and I-2 districts shall meet the requirements of subsections B.1., C., E. and F. Within the BUS and BA zoning districts, the use shall require a special use permit and shall meet all the requirements of subsections B. through F. in this section. 
B.  Locational requirements. The placement of ice manufacturing/vending machines shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Shall be co-located with existing commercial, industrial, or retail uses; an ice manufacturing/vending machine is not allowed as a principal use on any lot. 
2.  Shall meet the spacing requirement of one mile from another ice manufacturing/vending machine. 
3.  Shall be located to the side or rear of principal structures at the site. 
4.  Shall allow adequate queuing space for vehicles such that the on-site flow of traffic is not interrupted and there is no backup of traffic onto adjacent roadways. 
5.  Shall be located on the site such that: Pedestrian/bicycle flow and safety is not interrupted or compromised; the architectural layout, landscaping and amenities of the principal use on the site are not visually blocked; and the minimum parking requirements and operations for the principal use are not reduced or interrupted. 
6.  Shall be placed a minimum of 20 feet from any side or rear property line when abutting property is shown on the future land use plan for residential use. 
7.  Shall be placed no further forward on the site than the location of the front facade of the principal building. 
C.  Development plan approval. Ice manufacturing/vending machines shall be required to obtain development plan approval in accordance with the Land Development Code from the appropriate reviewing board. 
D.  Architectural, design, and color standards. The following standards shall apply: 
1.  A roof that screens all mechanical equipment from the view of the public right-of-way and pedestrian walkways is required. 
2.  Building facades shall have the appearance of brick. 
3.  Building and roof colors shall be consistent with the City of Gainesville Advisory Color Guidelines on file with the building inspection department and soft, earth tone colors shall be used for the building facade. 
4.  Skirting is required and shall complement the building facade colors and be consistent with the city's advisory color guidelines. 
5.  Roofs and canopies shall be designed to provide building articulation. 
6.  Utility connections on the ice manufacturing/vending machines shall be screened from the public right-of-way and from pedestrian walkways. 
E.  Landscaping. Ice manufacturing/vending machines shall meet the requirements of article VIII of this Code. In cases of special use permits, additional landscaping may be required for visual shielding and aesthetic purposes. 
F.  Signage. Ice manufacturing/vending machines less than 24 feet long shall have a maximum of two signs with the total square footage of both signs not exceeding 20 square feet. Ice manufacturing/vending machines greater than or equal to 24 feet shall have a maximum of two signs with the total square footage of both signs not exceeding 36 square feet. Sign permits are required.  
Sec. 30-5.39. - Outdoor accessory display and storage. 
The reviewing board or city manager or designee may authorize accessory display and/or storage outside of enclosed buildings subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The outdoor storage/display area shall be designated on an approved development plan. 
B.  The proposal shall be in accordance with the overall design and conditions of the development plan for the principal use. 
C.  If the proposed outdoor display or storage is located within 20 feet of a public right-of-way, it shall be enclosed and screened by a wall, fence or hedge that is not less in height than two-thirds the height of any equipment or fixtures used or any material stored or offered for sale. 
D.  The outdoor storage and/or display shall be clearly incidental or accessory to the principal use of the property and shall be limited to not more than 25 percent of the total building size of the principal use.  
Sec. 30-5.40. - Outdoor cafes. 
A.  Outdoor cafés may not interfere with the circulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on adjoining streets, alleys, or sidewalks. 
B.  Outdoor cafés may not be located in a side or rear yard when abutting any residential property. 
C.  Smoke, odor, or other environmental nuisances must be confined to the lot upon which the outdoor café is located. 
D.  Development plan review is required for new outdoor cafés. The area for the outdoor café must be shown on the development plan. The area must not be in conflict with required landscaped areas and development review may determine appropriate modifications of existing landscaped areas. Stormwater management is required for pervious areas that become impervious for the café use. 
E.  An outdoor café that extends, wholly or in part, onto public right-of-way is subject to the standards of the sidewalk café in this article. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 11, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-5.41. - Patrons' dogs within outdoor portions of restaurants. 
A.  Purpose; intent; preemption. The purpose of this section is to provide a local exemption to certain provisions of the Food and Drug Administration Food Code, as authorized by F.S. § 509.233, in order to allow patrons' dogs within certain designated outdoor portions of restaurants. Nothing in this section is intended to conflict with, be inconsistent with, or preempt state or federal law. To the extent of any such conflict, inconsistency or preemption, the state or federal law shall prevail. 
B.  Permit. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public, each restaurant shall obtain a permit from the city manager or designee prior to allowing patrons' dogs within outdoor portions of the restaurant. Applicants shall submit a completed permit application on the form provided by the city along with the permit fee set forth in appendix A. The application shall be signed by the property owner and by the tenant or operator of the restaurant (if different from the property owner) and shall include such information deemed reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this section, but shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  The name, location and mailing address of the restaurant. 
2.  The name, mailing address, telephone number and email address of the permit applicant. 
3.  A diagram and description of the outdoor area to be designated as available to patrons' dogs, including dimensions of the designated area; a depiction of the number and placement of tables, chairs and restaurant equipment, if any; the entryways and exits to the designated outdoor area; the boundaries of the designated area and of other areas of outdoor dining not available for patrons' dogs; any fences or other barriers; surrounding property lines and public rights-of-way, including sidewalks and common pathways; and such other information reasonably required by the city. The diagram or plan shall be accurate and to scale but need not be prepared by a licensed design professional. 
4.  A description of the days of the week and hours of operation that patrons' dogs will be permitted in the designated outdoor area. 
5.  The license number for the restaurant issued by the Florida Division of Hotels and Restaurants. 
A permit issued pursuant to this section shall not be transferred to a subsequent property owner, tenant or operator upon the sale, lease, or other transfer of the restaurant, but shall expire automatically upon the sale, lease or other transfer of the restaurant. The city shall provide the Florida Division of Hotels and Restaurants with a copy of all approved applications and permits issued. 
C.  Permit conditions. Each restaurant receiving a permit under this section shall be subject to and shall enforce the following requirements: 
1.  Dogs shall not be permitted to travel through indoor or non-designated outdoor portions of the restaurant. Ingress and egress to the designated outdoor portions of the restaurant shall not require entrance into or passage through any indoor area. 
2.  Patrons shall keep their dogs on a leash at all times and under reasonable control. 
3.  Dogs shall not be allowed on chairs, tables or other furnishings. 
4.  The restaurant shall instruct employees and patrons that dogs shall not be allowed to come into contact with serving dishes, utensils, tableware, linens, paper products or any other items involved in food service operations. 
5.  All table and chair surfaces shall be cleaned and sanitized with an approved product between seating of patrons. Spilled food and drink shall be removed from the floor or ground of the designated outdoor area between seating of patrons. 
6.  Accidents involving dog waste shall be cleaned immediately and the area sanitized. A kit with the appropriate materials for this purpose shall be kept near the designated outdoor area. 
7.  Employees shall wash their hands promptly after touching, petting or otherwise handling dogs. Employees shall be prohibited from touching, petting or otherwise handling dogs while serving food or beverages or handling tableware or before entering other parts of the restaurant. 
8.  The restaurant shall advise patrons in the designated outdoor area that they should wash their hands before eating. 
9.  Waterless hand sanitizer shall be provided at all tables in the designated outdoor area. 
10.  A sign or signs shall be posted on the premises notifying the public that the designated outdoor area is available for the use of patrons and patrons' dogs. In addition, a sign or signs shall be posted on the premises informing patrons and employees of the requirements set forth in this section. 
D.  Complaints; enforcement. 
1.  Complaints regarding lack of compliance with this section may be made in writing to the city code enforcement division, which shall accept, document, and respond to all written complaints and shall report to the Florida Division of Hotels and Restaurants all complaints and the response to such complaints. 
2.  The city shall revoke a permit if, after providing notice and a reasonable period of time for correction as specified in the notice, a restaurant is found to be in violation of any provision of this section. The revocation shall be issued in the form of a final administrative order signed by the city manager or designee. 
3.  If a permit is revoked, no new permit may be approved for the restaurant until the expiration of 180 calendar days following the date of revocation.  
Sec. 30-5.42. - Portable storage units and roll-offs. 
Portable storage units and roll-offs, as defined in article II, are allowed by right as a temporary accessory use in the following zoning districts: RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, RSF-4, RC, MH, RMF-5, RMF-6, RMF-7, RMF-8, and OR; subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Placement, dimensions, and use. Portable storage units and roll-offs: 
1.  Shall not be placed within the public right-of-way or within the boundaries of a private street intended to provide access and circulation to more than one property owner. 
2.  Shall be setback at least five feet from all property lines. 
3.  Shall be setback at least five feet from all regulated trees. 
4.  Shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
5.  Shall not be used for the storage or handling of hazardous materials. 
6.  In addition to the above requirements, the following additional requirements shall apply when located on a property with a single-family dwelling: 
a.  Shall be limited to one portable storage unit or roll-off. 
b.  Shall be placed in a front or side yard. The city manager or designee may allow placement in the rear yard when the property owner demonstrates that there are no other locations on the property that meet the requirements of this section. 
B.  Proof of delivery certificate. A "proof of delivery certificate" indicating the date on which the portable storage unit or roll-off was placed on the property shall be displayed in a manner that is visible to a city official from the nearest property line. 
C.  Time limit. Portable storage units and roll-offs shall be located on a property for no more than 30 calendar days, except as follows: 
1.  The city manager or designee may allow one 30-day extension if the property owner demonstrates a continued need for the temporary use of the portable storage unit or roll-off. 
2.  A portable storage unit or roll-off may remain in connection with and throughout the duration of an active building permit for development on the property. 
3.  In the case of emergencies or natural disasters including, but not limited to, hurricanes, windstorms, floods, or other disasters officially declared by the authorized agency, the time limit may be waived by the city manager or designee until the city manager or designee determines that such emergency conditions have ended. 
D.  Seasonal use by commercial parcel delivery services. In accordance with this subsection and F.S. § 316.2126, licensed commercial parcel delivery services may apply to the city for a permit to use a portable storage unit to facilitate seasonal delivery personnel, as defined in Florida Statutes, in making deliveries to residential developments with golf carts or low-speed vehicles and utility vehicles. For each desired portable storage unit location, the applicant shall submit to the city an application on a form provided by the city, together with the fee set forth in appendix A of this Code. Each application shall include a scaled site plan and other documentation demonstrating compliance with this subsection. Any permit issued in accordance with this subsection shall be valid for one season only and shall expire on February 1 of each year. 
The use of a portable storage unit by a licensed commercial parcel delivery service is subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The portable storage unit may be placed in the following areas: 
a.  A common area of a residential development with written permission from the homeowners' association or property management firm, or 
b.  On property of a conforming nonresidential use with written permission from the property owner. Such property shall have a minimum lot size of one acre and shall be contiguous to the area that will receive seasonal parcel deliveries with golf carts or low-speed vehicles and utility vehicles. 
2.  The portable storage unit may be located on the property from October 15 through January 31 and may be accessed only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
3.  Only one portable storage unit per delivery service may be placed on the property. 
4.  The portable storage unit shall be setback at least 50 feet from the property lines and all residential dwellings and setback at least five feet from all regulated trees. 
5.  Outdoor storage of delivery vehicles is prohibited. 
6.  A sign shall be posted on the portable storage unit that indicates the intended use, duration of the use, and the hours of operation. No other signage shall be permitted. 
7.  The portable storage unit shall not exceed ten feet in height.  
Sec. 30-5.43. - Recreational, service and commercial vehicle parking and storage. 
A.  Recreational vehicles. The following regulations apply to the use, parking, storage and keeping of recreational vehicles in all zoning districts: 
1.  Recreational vehicles may be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes only in mobile home parks and those districts permitting camps and recreational vehicle parks, except that recreational vehicles may be used on a lot of record in a residential district in accordance with regulation of temporary mobile homes. Development plan approval is required for any development of a recreational vehicle park. 
2.  Parking of recreational vehicles is permitted only for the purpose of storing the vehicles in all districts, except as provided in subsection 1. of this section. Such vehicle shall not: 
a.  Be used for the storage of goods, materials or equipment other than those items considered to be part of the vehicle essential for its immediate use; 
b.  Discharge or discard any litter, effluent, sewage or other matter into any public right-of-way or upon any private property while parked and provided in this section; 
c.  Be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes; or 
d.  Be stored on any vacant, unoccupied or unimproved lot. 
3.  No owner shall allow any recreational vehicle 18 feet or more in length to be parked on a public street longer than eight hours in any 24-hour period. 
4.  In all residential districts the following additional restrictions shall also apply to the parking, storing or keeping of recreational vehicles: 
a.  Parking is permitted inside any enclosed structure which complies with the dimensional requirements of the particular district. 
b.  Parking is permitted outside any structure in the side or rear yard, provided the vehicle is a minimum of two feet from the lot line. 
c.  Parking is permitted outside any structure in the front yard, provided: 
i.  Space is not available in the rear or side yard and no structure for storage is available or there is no access to either the side or rear yard. 
ii.  The vehicle is parked perpendicular to the front property line. No part of the vehicle may extend over a public sidewalk, bike path or street. 
5.  In all mixed use, business, office and industrial districts storage of such vehicles shall comply with requirements for outdoor storage. 
B.  Public service vehicles. Public service vehicles may be parked in non-residential districts for up to nine hours in any 30-day period. Public service vehicles may be parked in these districts for longer periods only when a permit is obtained. Application for this permit shall be submitted to the city manager or designee, who shall issue such permits upon satisfaction of the following conditions: 
1.  For up to 72 hours in any 30-day period on other than a public right-of-way: With written consent of the owner of the property and acknowledgment that public service vehicle parking shall not occur within the required minimum setbacks for accessory structures in the zoning district. 
2.  For up to 72 hours in any 30-day period in a public right-of-way: 
a.  No adjacent property abutting on the right-of-way may be zoned residential. 
b.  The permit shall be reviewed by the police, public works and planning, each of which shall approve the permit unless the proposed use shall be considered a hazard to the public health, safety or general welfare, taking into account the flow and control of traffic, parking availability, auto and pedestrian safety, and the effect which such use and activity will have on surrounding uses. 
3.  For up to 30 days within any 90-day period on other than a public right-of-way: 
a.  Written consent of the owner of the property. 
b.  Compliance with all setback lines for accessory structures in the zoning district. 
c.  The lot shall be a conforming one for both the zoning district and the existing use, if any. 
d.  The proposed activity may not use or interfere with the use of more than five percent of any parking spaces required as a minimum by any existing use on the property. 
e.  The permit shall be reviewed by the police, public works and planning, each of which shall approve the permit unless the proposed use shall be considered a hazard to the public health, safety or general welfare, taking into account the flow and control of traffic, parking availability, auto and pedestrian safety, and the effect which such use and activity will have on surrounding uses, particularly adjoining residential uses. 
4.  For all permits: No more than one valid permit for one public service vehicle shall be outstanding at any time for any location. 
C.  Other vehicles. The following regulations shall apply to all residential zoning districts: 
1.  Parking for any vehicle is permitted inside any enclosed structure which complies with the dimensional requirements of the particular zoning district. 
2.  Parking shall not be allowed outside of an enclosed structure for any vehicle in excess of 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (manufacturer's capacity rating). 
3.  Any vehicle containing a vehicle sign, as defined in article II, shall be stored in either an enclosed building or a location that would shield view of such advertising from the street.  
Sec. 30-5.44. - Sidewalk cafés. 
Sidewalk cafés are allowed in city right-of-way in all zoning districts, subject to this section. However, sidewalk cafés are allowed in State of Florida right-of-way only in the DT zoning district, subject to this section. Sidewalk cafés must be operated by the business owner of the principal use pursuant to a license agreement entered into with the city on the form provided by the city and approved by the city attorney as to form and legality. The city manager or designee is authorized to enter into such license agreements and to terminate any license agreement if it is determined by the city manager or designee that the licensee has violated the terms of the license agreement or this section or for such other reason as the city manager or designee deems necessary for the public health, safety or welfare. In addition, sidewalk cafés in state right-of-way are subject to approval by the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT), all terms and conditions imposed by FDOT, and are subject to termination by FDOT. All license agreements are subject to the following minimum terms and conditions: 
A.  The principal use and sidewalk café must remain in compliance with the requirements of this Code. 
B.  The licensee shall maintain the portion of the right-of-way where the sidewalk café is located in a clean and safe condition and shall promptly repair any damage caused by the licensee, its invitees, employees and others using the sidewalk café. 
C.  The licensee shall release, indemnify and hold harmless the city, and the State of Florida if the sidewalk café is located in a state right-of-way, for any personal injury or property damage resulting from the existence or operation of the sidewalk café and the condition and maintenance of the right-of-way upon which it is located, including utilities located within the right-of-way. 
D.  For a sidewalk café located in a city right-of-way, the licensee shall maintain general liability insurance in an amount not less than $500,000.00 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. The city shall be named as an additional insured, as evidenced by a policy endorsement. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business in the State of Florida and shall be rated at least A- and have a size category rating of VI or higher as per Best's Key Rating Guide, latest edition. The licensee shall give the city no less than 30 calendar days' written notice prior to any cancellation, nonrenewal, or any material change in a continuing policy. The city's risk management director is authorized to lower the amount of general liability insurance required, if the licensee can show that the above amount is excessive for the particular activity. The licensee shall furnish evidence of such insurance to the city annually. 
E.  For a sidewalk café located in a state right-of-way, the licensee shall maintain general liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death to any one person or any number of persons in any one occurrence and not less than $1,000,000.00 for property damage, or a combined coverage of not less than $2,000,000.00. The State of Florida and the city shall be named as additional insured, as evidenced by a policy endorsement. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business in the State of Florida and shall be rated at least A- and have a size category rating of VI or higher as per Best's Key Rating Guide, latest edition. The licensee shall give the city no less than 75 calendar days' written notice prior to any cancellation, nonrenewal, or any material change in a continuing policy. The licensee shall furnish evidence of such insurance to the city annually. 
F.  Sidewalk cafés may not interfere with any utilities or other facilities such as street lights, fire hydrants, signs, parking meters, mailboxes, or benches located on the sidewalk or in the public right-of-way. 
G.  A minimum five-foot wide clear, straight, and visually unobstructed pedestrian path must be maintained on the sidewalk at all times. However, where a sidewalk café is adjacent to a lane of traffic with no on-street parking and located on an arterial street, a minimum six-foot wide clear, straight, and visually unobstructed pedestrian path must be maintained on the sidewalk at all times. The width of a required clear pedestrian path may be increased during the day or decreased at night by the city manager or designee if deemed advisable for the public health, safety and welfare. However, in no event shall the clear pedestrian path be less than three feet in width. 
H.  When adjacent to on-street parking, sidewalk cafés may include the area adjacent to the curbline, provided there is sufficient sidewalk width to maintain a five-foot wide clear pedestrian path. Curbside seating must allow enough space for on-street parked cars to safely open vehicle doors and enter or exit vehicles. With written authorization from the city manager or designee, sidewalk cafés may at certain designated times extend to on-street parking areas directly in front of the principal use. 
I.  Sidewalk cafés may use the sidewalk in front of the abutting property in the same building or within the same block provided written permission is obtained from the property owner. 
J.  All tables, chairs, and fixtures must be arranged so as to avoid any possible intrusion into the clear pedestrian path. Umbrellas and awnings may not intrude into the clear pedestrian path, unless they have a vertical height clearance of at least seven feet. All tables, chairs, and fixtures must be removed immediately after the daily close of business, and must be stored inside the building or securely adjacent to the building. Sidewalk cafés on streets where the clear pedestrian zone exceeds six feet may leave furniture in place after business hours. 
K.  Barriers or enclosures are not required for sidewalk cafés. If enclosures or barriers are provided, they must be moveable and designed to provide ADA-compliant access to the public right-of-way. Enclosures or barriers may consist of screens, planters, fencing or other material that surrounds the area in which the sidewalk café is operated. 
L.  No heating or cooking of food or open flames is allowed in the sidewalk café, except as may be allowed by the chief fire official. 
M.  Sidewalk cafés may not use or obstruct a sidewalk located within the vision triangle. 
N.  Each license agreement for a sidewalk café must be for a one-year term and must be renewed annually and upon any change of business ownership of the principal use. License agreements must include a diagram showing the largest sidewalk area that the sidewalk café will potentially be occupying in compliance with this section, and the license agreement and diagram must be kept at the principal use and be available for inspection during all hours of operation. 
O.  Sidewalk cafés that serve alcohol must have the largest sidewalk area that the sidewalk café will potentially be occupying included within the requisite alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 12, 2-21-19)  
DIVISION 3. - TEMPORARY USES 
 
Sec. 30-5.45. - Mobile home dwellings, temporary. 
A.  Within the AGR zoning district, the development review board may authorize a special use permit for one mobile home as a principal structure to be used as a temporary dwelling on a conforming lot of record, provided that the following conditions and requirements are met: 
1.  The lot and the mobile home are used exclusively by the lot owner as a dwelling unit, subject to all the principal building dimensional requirements and the restrictions in the district in which it is located, except minimum yard setbacks upon a showing of necessity. 
2.  In reaching its decision, the development review board shall consider the following factors and standards: 
a.  Location of the mobile home on the parcel; 
b.  Location of existing utility hookups; 
c.  Impact on surrounding properties; 
d.  Ingress and egress to the site; 
e.  Provision for the removal of the mobile home; and 
f.  Land assembly. 
B.  Such special use permit shall be valid only during the active construction of a permanent, conforming dwelling upon the same lot, and shall expire upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent dwelling. Such special use permit shall in no instance be valid for more than one year from the date of issuance.  
Sec. 30-5.46. - Model homes. 
The appropriate reviewing authority may, after design plat review, authorize a temporary permit for model home units in subdivisions, residential portions of planned developments, or mixed-use developments, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Duration. Such temporary permits shall not exceed one year in duration, but shall be renewable annually for a total of four consecutive years. In considering renewal of a temporary permit, the appropriate reviewing board, upon investigation by the city manager, or designee, shall determine that the permit holder is operating in compliance with the provisions of this section and with any special conditions set by the appropriate reviewing board, and evaluate the impact of the model home units on the surrounding developing neighborhood. If the appropriate reviewing board determines that, due to increased noise, light, glare, activity or for a violation of any special condition placed upon the operation of model home units by the appropriate reviewing board, the model home units are having an undesirable impact on the neighborhood, the temporary permit shall not be renewed. 
B.  Location. Any model home unit site issued a temporary permit shall be immediately identified by a sign affixed to the property prior to the sale of any abutting lot or dwelling unit to a person other than the operator of the model home unit. Such graphics shall clearly identify the site as a model home unit. 
C.  Number. The maximum number of model home units allowed in any one residential development, planned development and mixed-use development is limited as follows: 
Number of
Approved Dwellings 	Number of Model Home Units 
1 to 50 	3 units 
51 or more 	5% of approved dwelling units (rounded to the nearest whole number) 
 
For purposes of this section, the number of approved dwelling units means the cumulative number of dwelling units approved at final development plan, subdivision or planned development review(s) for any one residential development or residential planned development. However, in detached single-family dwellings the number of allowable model home units shall not exceed the number necessary to provide one example of each dwelling unit type offered in the residential development or residential planned development. Reversed floor plans and exterior facade variations will not be considered a separate dwelling unit type. 
D.  Use as office. Although residential sales and presentations may be undertaken at a model home unit, the operator of the model home unit shall have a primary office in a properly zoned area and not in a residential development or the residential section of a planned development. A primary office is defined as a relatively fixed place of business where the activities of the operator of the model home unit are administered, including sales, or managed and informational data on employees, payroll, receipts and other establishment-type records are maintained. A model home unit shall not operate or function as a construction office. The model home shall be used primarily for demonstrating the type of units offered in the subdivision. 
E.  Parking. Permanent, hard-surface parking shall not exceed that normally provided for other residential structures of the same type in the same residential development or residential planned development. The location and use of any temporary parking shall comply with all requirements of the approved development plan for the residential development or residential planned development. The development plan shall clearly indicate the type of allowable pervious material which shall be capable of supporting parking activities. 
F.  Amendments. If a model home unit is included in the development plan of an approved residential development, planned development or mixed-use development, any amendments or modifications to the model home unit shall be processed in the same manner as an amendment to an approved final development plan.  
Sec. 30-5.47. - Promotional/temporary sales. 
The city manager or designee may issue a permit for the sale of certain goods and commodities that are strictly of a temporary nature, not including farmers markets, provided the following conditions and requirements are met: 
A.  Such sales shall not be permitted on public rights-of-way; provided, however, that in areas zoned CCD such sales and displays may be permitted on sidewalks only; and provided, further, that parades and art shows may be permitted on public rights-of-way under such conditions as are otherwise provided by ordinances and policies of the city commission. 
B.  The sales period for seasonal or temporary goods, such as Christmas trees, shall not exceed 30 calendar days; promotional sales such as characterized by the so-called "midnight madness," "truck sale," "tent sale" or "sidewalk sale" shall not exceed 72 hours; and special event sales such as may be permitted in conjunction with a parade, festival, or other such event shall not exceed the specified period approved for such event. No more than one permit per applicant per location shall be issued in any given six-month period for seasonal type sales, and no more than one special event permit per applicant per location shall be issued in any given 60-day period of time for promotional type sales. 
C.  Application for a permit under the provisions herein shall be examined and approved by the appropriate departments of the city to ensure protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. In addition to normal concerns of each such department, particular attention shall be given to traffic flow and control, auto and pedestrian safety, and the effect which such use and activity will have on surrounding uses, particularly where the adjoining use is residential. 
D.  When the city manager or designee deems it necessary, the applicant may be required to post a bond or otherwise provide adequate assurance that the site of the selling activity will be returned to its original or an improved state when the selling activity has ceased.  
Sec. 30-5.48. - Sales and leasing offices, temporary. 
Temporary sales and leasing offices for residential developments are allowed with a permit in any zoning district. A permit shall be issued by the appropriate reviewing authority in conjunction with development plan approval if the development plan meets the following conditions in addition to the other requirements for development plan approval and applicable zoning district and use regulations: 
A.  The development plan shall indicate the location of the temporary sales and leasing office. 
B.  The temporary sales and leasing office shall be located in an area approved for impervious area by the development plan for the project. 
C.  The temporary sales and leasing office shall be fenced off from the remainder of the site where general construction is in progress. The petitioner may propose other design measures to prevent customers from moving into the construction area. 
D.  The number and location of parking spaces proposed for the temporary use shall be designed so as to avoid backing or stacking of vehicles into the right-of-way. 
E.  No ground-mounted sign other than the allowable temporary development sign for the main project shall be allowed. However, the temporary use may have one sign not to exceed six square feet directing customers to the sales and leasing office. 
F.  The temporary sales and leasing office shall meet all state requirements and be approved by the building division. 
G.  Construction offices may only remain as long as an active site or building permit on the property. 
H.  General conditions. 
1.  A building permit for the temporary sales and leasing office shall be obtained from the building division prior to the office being erected. The following conditions shall be met prior to obtaining the building permit for the temporary sales and leasing office: 
a.  The temporary sales and leasing office shall obtain development approval in accordance with article III. 
b.  A valid building permit shall be issued for the main project. 
2.  The temporary sales and leasing office use may only be conducted on a site that has an approved development plan with an active building permit for construction of the main project being marketed under the temporary sales and leasing permit. 
3.  The office may not be used to lease or sell off-site properties. 
4.  The office may be used for a period of 12 months or until a certificate of occupancy is issued for 25 percent or more of the approved units or until a certificate of occupancy is issued for a permanent on-site management office, whichever occurs first. 
5.  Once any of the provisions in subsection 4. have been met, no additional permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until the temporary leasing and sales office is removed from the site. 
6.  Neither the sales and leasing office nor the surrounding area where customers are permitted may be used for storage of building materials or building supplies.  
Sec. 30-5.49. - Sales for fundraising by nonprofit agencies. 
A.  The intent of this section is to permit the sale of goods, which may include the use of a building or parcel of land for such sales, by nonprofit institutions such as places of religious assembly, schools and fraternal societies, where such sales are clearly incidental to the primary function of such institution and where such a sale is conducted with or as a special event and for a specified time period. 
B.  To qualify for permission to conduct such sales, an applicant shall secure a permit from the city manager or designee. Approval of such a permit shall be based upon a consideration of the location, which may be in any zoning district, the type of goods to be sold, and the manner of sale, which shall have been examined and approved by the various departments of the city, particularly police, fire and traffic engineering, to ensure protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. In granting their approval, such departments may suggest such conditions of approval as would be in keeping with their individual responsibilities and the general spirit and purpose of this section and may recommend that approval of such permit be denied where conditions warrant. 
C.  A permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be effective for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days.  
ARTICLE VI. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - CONCURRENCY AND TRANSPORTATION MOBILITY 
 
Sec. 30-6.1. - Purpose. 
This division is intended to implement the Comprehensive Plan, as required by F.S. § 163.3202, by ensuring that development approved by the city shall not result in a reduction of service below the level of service (LOS) standards adopted in the Comprehensive Plan.  
Sec. 30-6.2. - Implementation of Comprehensive Plan. 
A.  To implement the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the city establishes: 
1.  A concurrency management system that enables the city to determine whether it is adhering to the adopted LOS standards and its five-year schedule of capital improvements; 
2.  A regulatory program that ensures each public facility is available to serve development concurrent with the impacts of development; and 
3.  A transportation mobility program (TMP) as an alternative to transportation concurrency. The TMP is an alternative mobility funding system that is not mobility fee-based. 
B.  Annual report on facility capacity. On an annual basis, the city shall issue a facility capacity report indicating the facility capacity status for each public facility having an adopted LOS standard. The extent of the remaining capacity available for each fiscal year shall be made available to the general public within 30 calendar days of the start of each fiscal year. Gainesville Regional Utilities shall be responsible for determining the water supply and water and wastewater facility capacity status to be included in the facility capacity report, as determined in accordance with Gainesville Regional Utilities' water/wastewater capacity policy. 
1.  Nothing herein shall preclude amendments to the annual report if deemed necessary to update or correct: Errors in preparation; the impact of issued development orders or permits, monitoring by the city indicates an unacceptable degradation to an adopted LOS standard; or changes in the status of capital improvement projects of the state or any local government that changes the underlying assumption of the annual report. 
2.  An amended annual report shall not divest rights acquired prior to the amended report, except where a divestiture of such rights is determined by the city commission to be essential to the health, safety or welfare of the general public and otherwise in accordance with law. 
C.  Annual capital improvements element update. As provided in the Comprehensive Plan, the capital improvements element shall be updated annually during the budget review process. The annual report on facility capacity, prepared in conjunction with the budget review process, shall include a forecast of the capacity of existing and planned capital improvements identified in the five-year schedule of capital improvements. The forecast shall be based on the most recently updated schedule of capital improvements for each public facility. The city shall also annually revise relevant population projections, update public facility inventories, update unit costs, and update revenue forecasts in cooperation with the office of management and budget, the finance department and Gainesville Regional Utilities (GRU). The findings of the city shall be fully considered in preparing any proposed amendments to the Capital Improvements Element, any proposed amendments to the city annual budget for public facilities, any proposed amendments to GRU's annual budget for public facilities, and the review of and issuance of development orders during the next year. 
D.  Recommendations on amendments to the capital improvements element, city annual budget and GRU annual budget. Based upon the city report described above, the city manager and general manager of utilities shall annually propose to the city commission any amendments to the capital improvements element, the city's annual budget and the GRU annual budget for capital improvements made necessary by circumstances described in the report.  
Sec. 30-6.3. - Level of service standards. 
The following level of service (LOS) standards shall be used to implement the concurrency management system and the transportation mobility program: 
A.  Transportation mobility. 
1.  Roadway LOS: 
a.  The LOS for all roadways in city limits shall be LOS E, except for I-75 and roadways operating as backlogged or constrained. 
b.  The LOS for I-75 segments that fall within city limits shall be maintained at LOS D to the extent feasible, recognizing that I-75 serves land areas and traffic outside city limits. 
c.  The city shall attempt to maintain the 2012 operating LOS on all backlogged and constrained roadways in city limits. 
2.  Transit LOS: 
a.  The city shall strive to provide fixed-route transit service within one-fourth mile of 80 percent of all medium and high density residential areas identified on the future land use map, and within the RTS service area. 
b.  The city shall strive to provide peak hour frequencies of 20 minutes or less within one-fourth mile of all high density residential and UMU-1 and UMU-2 land use areas in city limits. 
c.  The city shall strive to provide and maintain fixed-route transit service to all existing transit hubs and transit-supportive areas (as mapped in the Transportation Mobility Element Map Series) with peak hour frequencies of 30 minutes or less. 
d.  The city shall strive to operate 80 percent of fixed-route transit routes for at least 14 hours per day. 
3.  Pedestrian LOS: 
a.  The city shall install at least one linear mile of sidewalk annually to retrofit existing areas without sidewalks. 
b.  Sidewalk construction shall be required for all new development. 
c.  New streets shall be designed and constructed to include sidewalks. 
4.  Bicycle and trail LOS: 
a.  The city shall add an average of at least one mile of bicycle facilities annually, including multi-modal trails. 
b.  New streets shall be designed and constructed to include bicycle facilities. 
B.  Stormwater management. 
1.  The LOS standard for all stormwater management facilities shall be the 100-year critical duration storm. The LOS standard for water quality treatment shall be treatment of first one inch of runoff; and compliance with the stormwater management facility design and performance standards established by the applicable water management district to ensure that the receiving water quality standards of Chapter 62-302, Florida Administrative Code are met and to ensure that receiving surface waters maintain their classifications as established in Chapter 62-302 Florida Administrative Code. 
2.  These standards shall apply to all new development and redevelopment. Any exemptions, exceptions or thresholds in the Florida Administrative Code citations are not applicable. 
C.  Potable water/wastewater and water supply. 
1.  Potable water. 
a.  Maximum day (peak) design flow: Two hundred gallons per capita per day. 
b.  Storage capacity: One-half of peak day volume in gallons. 
c.  Pressure: The system shall be designed for a minimum pressure of 40 psig under forecasted peak hourly demands to assure 20 psig under extreme and unforeseen conditions. 
2.  Wastewater. 
a.  Average day standard: One hundred six gallons daily flow per capita. 
3.  Water supply. Average daily flow of 147 gallons per capita per day. 
D.  Recreation. 
1.  Level of service standards for parks. 
Park 	Adopted LOS Standard 1 	Existing LOS 2 
Neighborhood park 	0.80 acres 	1.33 acres 
Community park 	2.00 acres 	2.13 acres 
Local nature/conservation 	6.00 acres 	15.71 acres 
Total acres per 1,000 people 	8.80 acres 	19.73 acres 
 
1 Park standards are in acres per 1,000 people. 
2 Existing LOS is based on 2011 city population estimate and available facilities. 
E.  Public schools facilities. The uniform, district-wide LOS standards for elementary, middle and high schools shall be 100 percent of program capacity as annually adjusted by the school board. This LOS standard shall apply to all school concurrency services areas (SCSAs) (within Gainesville's city limits) as adopted in the interlocal agreement. For combination schools, the school board shall separately determine the capacity of each school to accommodate elementary, middle and high school students, and shall apply the LOS standard prescribed above for elementary, middle and high school levels respectively. 
F.  Solid waste. The following LOS standard for disposal and collection capacity shall be established: 0.655 tons of solid waste per capita per year disposed (3.6 pounds of solid waste per capita per day disposed). 
(Ord. No. 170831 , § 6, 4-5-18)  
Sec. 30-6.4. - Level of service review. 
A.  Generally. It is the policy of the city that no development order shall be issued unless adequate public facilities are available to serve the project, at adopted LOS standards. The responsibility for providing information to show compliance with the adopted LOS standards and meeting concurrency requirements shall be upon the applicant. In order to ensure that adequate public facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of development on each public facility, the following procedures shall govern the issuance of development orders. 
B.  Exemptions. Developments that are issued a certificate of concurrency exemption as further provided in this chapter are exempt from the concurrency requirements of this chapter. In addition, the following types of development fall below the threshold for any concurrency review and are deemed automatically exempt: 
1.  Single-family dwellings (including expansions and remodeling) on lots of record that existed on or before June 10, 1992. 
2.  Building permits for two-family dwellings (including expansions and remodeling) that: 1) are on lots of record that existed on or before June 10, 1992; or 2) previously have met the concurrency requirements of this chapter. 
3.  Developments that meet the criteria for rapid review as provided in article III of this chapter. 
4.  Concept review of a development as specified in article III of this chapter. 
5.  Zoning verification letters with no associated change of use as specified in article III of this chapter. 
6.  Lot splits. 
7.  Changes to a new use allowed under the applicable zoning district that do not involve adding any new square footage or impervious surface. 
C.  Mandatory certification of preliminary development orders. Prior to the final approval of a preliminary development order, as defined in this chapter, the owner/developer of a project shall obtain either a certificate of concurrency exemption, a certificate of preliminary concurrency or a certificate of conditional concurrency reservation. Renewals of approvals for preliminary development orders shall consider the implications for concurrency management. 
D.  Mandatory certification of final development orders. Prior to the approval of a final development order, as defined in this chapter, the owner/developer of a project shall demonstrate that a valid and unexpired certificate of concurrency exemption, certificate of final concurrency or certificate of conditional concurrency reservation exists for the project. A project under consideration for a final development order that has a valid and unexpired certificate of preliminary concurrency and that has not been amended in a fashion to change densities or intensities of use shall be automatically granted a certificate of final concurrency. Renewals of approvals for final development orders shall consider the implications for concurrency management. 
E.  Succession. As long as the original certificate of concurrency exemption, certificate of preliminary concurrency, certificate of final concurrency or certificate of conditional concurrency reservation remains valid and unexpired, it shall serve all subsequent development permits for that specific project. 
F.  Optional review of projects. Any person may submit an application for a concurrency determination at any time. A concurrency determination reserves no capacity and is in no way binding on the city. Applications for a concurrency determination shall contain sufficient data on the project to prepare a concurrency determination. 
G.  Credit for redevelopment, reuse or demolition of existing structure. If an applicant proposes to redevelop, reuse or demolish a building or part of a building as part of the redevelopment of a property and desires to receive public facility impact credits for that portion of the property being redeveloped, reused or demolished in accordance with this section, application shall be made and approved prior to such action. Construction shall commence within the timeframe established in the final development order to obtain the benefits of the credit. The applicant shall provide sufficient information about the previous use of the structure(s) so that credits can be calculated. Credits are not transferable to any other site. In the case of reuse or redevelopment of a building, full credit shall be provided for the existing square footage of the building even if a change of use occurs. However, any additional square footage added to the building or development shall be subject to concurrency and TMP review. 
H.  Applications. 
1.  Submission of application. Applications for a concurrency determination, certificate of concurrency exemption, certificate of preliminary concurrency, certificate of final concurrency and certificate of conditional concurrency reservation shall be on file in the city. Fees for each type of application are set forth in appendix A (schedule of fees, rates and charges). The application shall consist of such information as needed by the city to determine concurrency status. 
2.  Limitation of approval. A concurrency determination, certificate of concurrency exemption, certificate of preliminary concurrency, certificate of final concurrency and a certificate of conditional concurrency reservation shall apply only to the specific land uses, densities and intensities based on information provided in the application, and, where applicable, the preliminary and final development orders. All applicants, to the extent required by the city, shall submit such applications for entire projects, rather than portions of projects, except in cases of phased developments. 
3.  Issuance of certification. After concurrency review has been completed, the city manager or designee shall either approve or deny the application. If denied, the denial shall be in writing and shall include the reasons for denial. If a certificate of conditional concurrency reservation is approved, the approval shall require the payment of the relevant reservation fee or a bond equal to the amount of the reservation fee for reserving capacity, as specified in the executed development agreement. This fee shall be paid within ten working days of the issuance of the certificate of concurrency reservation or the certificate shall be cancelled. In either case, the final development order shall not be issued until the capacity reservation fee is paid. Public facility capacity shall be granted on a first-come, first-served basis, determined as of the date and time a certificate of preliminary concurrency, certificate of final concurrency or certificate of conditional concurrency reservation is issued. 
4.  Expiration and effect. A certificate of concurrency exemption shall be valid for one year. A certificate of preliminary concurrency and certificate of final concurrency shall be valid for the time period that the appropriate development order is valid and unexpired. If either a preliminary or final development order does not have an expiration date, the certificate of preliminary concurrency or certificate of final concurrency shall expire in one year. A certificate of conditional concurrency reservation shall be valid for the time period reserved in the certificate. A new application for a certificate of preliminary or final concurrency shall be submitted if the project does not continue in good faith. A new fee will be assessed for the resubmittal of an application for a certificate of preliminary or final concurrency.  
Sec. 30-6.5. - Standards of review. 
The following standards shall be used in review: 
A.  Potable water, solid waste, stormwater management, water supply, wastewater and recreation. Prior to approval of a building permit or its functional equivalent, the city shall consult with Gainesville Regional Utilities to determine whether adequate water supplies to serve the new development will be available no later than the anticipated date of issuance by the city of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent. Concurrency requirements for potable water, solid waste, stormwater management, water supply, wastewater and recreation shall be met by one of the following standards: 
1.  A final development order is issued subject to the condition that the necessary facilities and services will be in place and available to serve the development no later than the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent; or 
2.  The necessary facilities and services are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement that is secured by a completion bond or other acceptable form of security subject to review and approval as to form and legality by the city attorney. The agreement shall guarantee that the necessary facilities and services will be in place and available to serve the development no later than the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent. 
B.  Public schools facilities. The concurrency requirements for public school facilities shall be met if: 
1.  Adequate school facilities (elementary, middle, and high school) are in place or will be under actual construction within three years after the issuance of a final development order or its functional equivalent; 
2.  Adequate school facilities are available in an adjacent school concurrency service area (SCSA) or will be in place or under actual construction in an adjacent SCSA within three years after the issuance of a final development order or its functional equivalent; or 
3.  The developer executes a legally binding commitment to provide mitigation proportionate to the demand for public school facilities to be created by actual development of the property, including, but not limited to, the options described in F.S. § 163.3180(6)(h)2.a. 
C.  Project phasing. In determining the availability of public facilities, an applicant may propose and the city may approve proposed projects in stages or phases so that public facilities needed for each phase shall be available in accordance with the standards set forth in this section.  
DIVISION 2. - SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 30-6.6. - Design standards. 
A.  Lots and blocks. 
1.  Generally. Lots and blocks shall be designed according to acceptable practice for the type of development and use contemplated so as to: be in keeping with the topography and other site conditions; provide adequate traffic and utility access and circulation; provide acceptable use of space; and provide privacy, adequate drainage, and protection of property. 
2.  Lot frontage. Each lot in a subdivision shall front for the entire required minimum lot width on a public street or an approved private street. Where there is no minimum lot width requirement, each lot shall abut a public street or approved private street for a width equivalent to the maximum driveway width required in the Design Manual, plus any required turning radii area. Notwithstanding the above, the length of street frontage may be modified during subdivision review by the public works and planning departments, based on the need to achieve the most efficient lot layout, access to and from the subdivision, operational needs of service vehicles, vehicular circulation and the health, welfare and safety of the public. 
3.  Connectivity. The subdivision shall create vehicular and pedestrian access to serve the subdivision and improve gridded connectivity by connecting to surrounding existing streets and by including new streets within the subdivision. Street intersections shall occur at least every 1,000 feet. Additionally, subdivisions containing 20 lots or more shall provide a minimum of two access points to the extent feasible. Modifications to this requirement may be granted by the technical review committee where the construction of a street is limited by existing conditions, including: 
a.  Access management standards; 
b.  Regulated environmental features; or 
c.  Public facilities, including stormwater facilities, parks, or schools. 
Alternatively, where the technical review committee determines that it is not possible to construct the streets that would be required to meet the block perimeter standard, the block perimeter shall be completed with the provision of pedestrian and bicycle paths or multi-use paths. The required streets or paths shall be constructed at the expense of the owner/subdivider according to the appropriate city standards as determined through the subdivision review process, but may be sited and configured in a manner so that the streets provide the most appropriate access to the subdivision and connectivity to the surrounding street network. Where a street or path is planned to provide a future connection to a street or path beyond the extent of the subdivision, the owner/subdivider shall provide for the connection of the street by stubbing out the road improvements as close as practicable to the boundary of the subdivision. 
4.  Dimensions. The size, width, depth, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. Lot dimensions and street abutment requirements shall not be less than the minimum standards established in article IV. Lots in areas shown on the future land use map as single-family or residential planned use district for single-family detached units shall front on a local street, whenever the lots abut a local street. 
a.  For development sites of five acres or less, located in an area shown on the future land use map as single-family or residential planned use district, the following standards shall apply: 
i.  The lot size and dimensions shall be generally consistent with abutting/adjacent lots. 
ii.  The minimum lot width of new parcels shall be no less than 75 percent of the average width of adjacent lots, but shall not be required to be greater than 150 feet and may not be less than the minimum required in article IV. Each lot shall meet this minimum requirement at the front setback line (as opposed to the minimum front yard setback) and the rear property line. 
iii.  The minimum lot width requirement shall not apply if a 35-foot natural or planted buffer is created as a perimeter buffer around the new development. The perimeter buffer may include stormwater facilities and shall be approved by the city commission during design plat review. 
b.  The city commission may waive any of the standards listed in subsection a. above for any single lot that is greater than or equal to 1.5 times the required lot size of the zoning district in which the property is located. 
5.  Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be, as nearly as practical, at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines. No lot shall be divided by a municipal boundary. 
6.  Double-frontage lots. Double-frontage and reverse-frontage lots shall be discouraged except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials and collectors or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A landscape buffer screen in accordance with the requirements of article III, division 7, across which there shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be provided on lots abutting the traffic arterial. 
B.  Streets layout and type. 
1.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan, particularly any neighborhood elements, now in existence or as may hereafter be adopted, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to the provision of wide tree lawns and tree planting to yield shaded streets, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
2.  When an appropriate street network is not shown in the Comprehensive Plan now in existence or as may be hereafter adopted, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing collector or arterial streets in surrounding areas unless topographic, traffic volume or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical or undesirable. 
3.  Each street on the plat shall be designated as one of the following types, based upon the projected traffic count for the street: 
Street Type 	Description of Intended Use 	Range of Average Daily Trips at Full Development 
Minor local street 	Local streets are designed to serve the local community. 	Less than 800 
	Residences should be designed to front local streets. Local streets should be designed to encourage slow speeds and discourage non-local traffic. 	
Major local street 	See above. 	801 to 1,200 
Minor local collector 	Collector streets are designed to carry and distribute traffic between local streets and arterial roadways (see Design Manual). 	1,201 to 3,200 
Major local collector 	See above. 	3,201 to 7,000 
Minor arterial 	Arterial streets are routes that generally serve and interconnect major activity centers in the urban area and/or provide connections between cities. 	7,001 to 12,000 
Principal arterial 	See above. 	Over 12,000 
 
D.  Traffic count data. 
1.  The number of annual average trips per day may be obtained from the city traffic engineer. 
2.  Trip generation rates shall be calculated by a professional engineer using trip generation rates established by the Institute of Transportation Engineers according to accepted engineering practices approved by the city traffic engineer. 
E.  Subdivisions on arterial streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the provision by the subdivider of marginal access streets, reverse-frontage lots with planting screen contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property lines, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through traffic from local traffic may be required. No lot in any area shown on the land use plan for single-family use or single-family residential PUD at less than eight units per acre shall front on an arterial street. 
F.  Design specifications. Intersection design, intersection sight distance, minimum street design, and cul-de-sac minimum lengths and turnaround diameters shall be designed in accordance with this article and the Design Manual. 
G.  Street access to abutting property. When designated on the official roadway map or determined by the city commission to be needed for proper traffic circulation, access to abutting property shall be provided through the use of a street stub. If such a street stub terminates more than 100 feet from an intersection, it shall be provided with a temporary turnaround that would allow vehicular traffic to turn around safely without having to leave the pavement. Specifications for optional temporary turnarounds are contained in the Design Manual. The developer of the abutting area shall pay the cost of restoring the street to its permanent cross section and extending the street at such time as the abutting area is developed. 
H.  Dedication of right-of-way. 
1.  Where a proposed subdivision abuts or includes a future transportation corridor alignment or existing transportation corridor that is scheduled for construction shown in the City of Gainesville Comprehensive Plan or the Florida Department of Transportation 5-Year Transportation Plan or the Alachua County 5-Year Work Program, rights-of-way as needed according to the proposed road type shall be dedicated on each side of the proposed alignment for use as a transportation and utility corridor. 
2.  Where a proposed subdivision or lot split abuts a public right-of-way that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, as further specified in the Design Manual, the owner(s) may be required to dedicate to the city, at no cost to the city, one-half of the right-of-way width necessary to meet minimum design requirements for street rights-of-way, as specified in this article. If the proposed subdivision abuts both sides of a substandard street, one-half of the right-of-way width necessary to meet those minimum design requirements may be required from each side. The dedication of this right-of-way or any easements necessary shall be accomplished by a separate document. The subdivider shall provide the city with legal descriptions of all easements or rights-of-way to be dedicated, and the city shall prepare and record the necessary documents as part of the approval process. 
I.  Alleys. When provided in any district, alleys shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 20 feet. 
J.  Bridges. Bridges shall be constructed in accordance with the Design Manual. 
K.  Sidewalks and bikeways. 
1.  Where provided, sidewalks and bikeways shall be designed as an integral part of the total on-site and off-site circulation system, including integration or linkage with designated greenways, and shall be located within the street right-of-way or within rear lot easements or common open areas. 
2.  The installation of sidewalks shall be the responsibility of the subdivider and the sidewalks shall be installed prior to the acceptance of the improvements by the city. The subdivider may elect to postpone installation of sidewalks until such time as building permits are issued for 60% of the subdivision lots, up to a maximum of five years. However, security for the construction of such sidewalks, in the amount of 150 percent of the estimated costs of construction, shall be provided by one of the methods described in article III, division 7. In subdivisions, sidewalks along streets fronting common areas such as stormwater basins, entrance streets, or open space shall be installed within 12 months of final plat approval (acceptance of improvements by the city), and are not eligible for the above-described postponement provisions. 
3.  The city manager or designee may waive the requirement of installing a streetside sidewalk or modify the sidewalk width requirement to save a heritage tree or a regulated tree deemed by the city manager or designee to have special value to the urban forest. Instead, the sidewalk right-of-way is allowed to be re-aligned or a short narrowing of the sidewalk width is allowed. The city manager or designee can approve either a sidewalk less than five feet wide for a distance less than 15 feet, or may require the dedication of additional right-of-way or easement so that the sidewalk can avoid the tree. 
4.  Where a previously dedicated street forms a boundary of a subdivision, and where adequate right-of-way for the installation of a required sidewalk does not exist, the subdivider shall dedicate proper sidewalk areas upon the side of the street abutting the lands subdivided and construct the required facilities. 
5.  Sidewalk construction in accordance with this chapter shall be required for each individual lot in a subdivision created after September 11, 2000, prior to being issued a certificate of occupancy. 
L.  Costs of street improvements. 
1.  It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to install all local and minor collector streets located within a subdivision. When a major collector or a major or minor arterial street is located within a subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to construct the street, but shall only be required to pay a portion of the construction cost, which portion shall be determined by the ratio that the estimated average daily traffic on the street generated by the subdivision lands at full development bears to the total estimated average daily traffic for the street based on full development of its entire service area. The city shall pay the remaining portion of the street construction costs, but the total dollar liability of the city shall be limited to its proportion of the estimated construction costs prepared by the subdivider and approved by the city commission prior to construction. At its option, the city commission may waive the requirement for construction of the major local collector or major or minor arterial and any associated bikeways or sidewalks, in which case the subdivider's only obligation shall be the dedication of the required right-of-way. Also at its option, when the subdivider's portion of the cost of the major local collector or major or minor arterial exceeds 50 percent, the city commission may permit the construction of a half street by the subdivider. 
2.  When the average daily trips of a subdivision impact an existing minor or major arterial or major local collector street, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to make improvements as necessary to serve the proposed development while maintaining the operating conditions of the affected roadway. These improvements can include, but are not limited to, installation of additional lanes, signalization, associated stormwater management improvements, and the installation of associated bikeway, sidewalk and transit improvements. The city commission may determine the proportional cost of programmed improvements to be allocated to the subdivider. 
M.  Flood hazards. A subdivision plat shall not be approved unless all land intended for use as building sites can be used safely for building purposes, without danger from flood or other inundation. All subdivisions, or portions thereof, located within a flood channel or floodplain shall meet the requirements of article VIII. 
N.  Erosion and sediment control measures. The city may require the subdivider to use grading techniques, subdivision design, landscaping, sedimentation basins, special vegetation cover and other measures to reduce erosion and sediment. The subdivider shall comply with the requirements of the Design Manual concerning erosion and sediment control measures. 
O.  Stormwater management required. A complete stormwater management system, in conformance with this chapter and the Design Manual, shall be provided in all areas of the subdivision for handling stormwater runoff within or across the subdivision lands. 
P.  Stormwater management facilities. 
1.  Easements for maintenance access shall be granted to the city along drainage basins and along all storm sewers. In some circumstances, additional easements may be required by the city manager or designee for maintenance access only. 
2.  The design of stormwater facilities shall consider the ease of maintenance over the life of the facility. 
3.  Any appurtenances placed in the right-of-way or within any publicly dedicated drainage basin, such as fountains, landscaping, lighting features, and signs, shall be the sole responsibility of the homeowners association and shall only be installed with express written approval of the city manager or designee. A maintenance agreement shall be required prior to acceptance of the facility by the city. 
4.  Trees selected from the Gainesville tree list that are identified as appropriate for stormwater basins shall be planted to meet the requirements identified in section 30-8.6. 
Q.  Stormwater management easements. Easements, rights-of-way, and stormwater management facilities meeting all requirements of article III, division 7, shall be required upon recommendation of the director of public works. 
R.  Utilities required. 
1.  Sanitary sewer. The subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer services to each lot within the subdivision. All sewer lines serving lots within the subdivision shall be installed by the subdivider prior to the paving of the street and should be designed to operate on a gravity flow basis unless otherwise approved by the utility department. 
2.  Water supply. The subdivider shall install a system of water mains as approved by the utility department and connect the system to the public water supply. The installation of the mains and connection to each lot shall occur prior to paving of the street. 
3.  Water and sewer systems. 
a.  New central water and sewer systems where required shall be designed by an engineer in accordance with the regulations of the utilities department, the state department of environmental protection and the county health department, and with standards established in this chapter. Central water and sewer systems shall be designed and constructed for an economic life of not less than 20 years, and the water system shall be designed in accordance with the fire protection requirements provided in chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances. 
b.  Fire hydrants shall be connected to mains no less than six inches in diameter; however, the utilities department may require larger diameter mains for long lines that are not connected to other mains at intervals close enough for proper mutual support. 
c.  Sufficient storage or emergency plumbing facilities shall be provided to such an extent that the minimum fire flows will be maintained. 
S.  Underground utilities. Provisions shall be made for utility lines of all kinds, including but not limited to those of franchised utilities, electric power and light, telephone, cable services, water, sewer and gas, to be constructed and installed beneath the surface of the ground within residential and non-residential subdivisions, unless the city commission determines that soil, topographical or other compelling conditions make such construction unreasonable or impractical. The subsurface mounting of incidental appurtenances, including but not limited to transformer boxes or pedestal-mounted boxes for the provision of utilities, electric meters, back flow preventers and fire hydrants shall not be required. 
T.  Utilities easements. When they are necessary to serve the subdivision, utilities easements shall be provided, with a minimum width of 20 feet, located along lot lines. The location of the utility easements shall not interfere with the required space devoted to street trees and tree lawns. Additional width may be required for sewer or stormwater management easements. Side lot line easements may be decreased to ten feet in width when serving a single electric, cable TV, gas or telephone utility. Rear lot line easements shall be discouraged, unless they are provided along an alley. 
U.  Greenway dedication. Where a proposed subdivision contains a designated greenway, the appropriate review board shall determine if there is a rough proportionality between the projected impact of the development on traffic and recreational needs and the nature and amount of property in the development encompassing the greenway. If the board finds the necessary proportionality, a right-of-way or public trail easement shall be dedicated to the city for use as a greenway corridor. The dedication shall correspond with the entire length of the designated greenway corridor as it passes through the subject property, and be of sufficient width to comply with design standards as specified in section 30-8.42, pertaining to greenway districts. Such a dedicated corridor may be established for joint use as both a greenway and for required utility or stormwater management facility dedications when such dedications are compatible with the greenway use. In making its determination, the board shall consider the following: 
1.  Assessed value of the property to be dedicated and proportion to value of entire property; 
2.  Square footage of property to be dedicated and proportion to area of entire property; 
3.  Other legal and reasonable uses of property to be dedicated; 
4.  Impact to otherwise legal and reasonable plans being considered for development of entire property that would be caused by dedication of the property; 
5.  Estimated increase in transportation demand caused by the development, and estimated amount of automobile trips that would be avoided by having dedication in place; and 
6.  Estimated increase in recreation demands caused by the development. 
V.  Screening walls and landscaping. Screening separating residential lots from abutting FDOT functionally classified arterial streets and from streets designated by the city commission as arterial streets based on their physical design, moderately long trip length, and existing or anticipated traffic characteristics shall be required in the form of low-maintenance walls, dense plant material or planted earth mounds. Such a screen shall be at least six feet in height and shall be completely in place before required improvements for the subdivision are accepted for maintenance. The responsibility for maintenance of the wall, plant material and earthen mounds shall be conveyed to the neighborhood association established for the maintenance of common property within the subdivision or the subdivider may provide a financial mechanism for such purpose, subject to the approval of the city attorney. 
W.  Subdivision entrance islands or medians. Landscaped islands or medians may be permitted within the right-of-way at all subdivision entrances. These areas shall be landscaped with materials from the Gainesville Tree List. In addition, the landscaped area shall be provided with an irrigation system or a readily available water supply within 100 feet. Maintenance of subdivision entrance identification and landscaping shall be in accordance with article III, division 7. 
X.  Permanent development identification signs and structures. Permanent development identification signs and structures for subdivisions may be located in the public right-of-way provided there is compliance with article IX and with the following restrictions: 
1.  Maintenance agreement. A maintenance agreement between the city and the subdivision or neighborhood organization or the developer placing the sign in the public right-of-way is required. The agreement shall provide that the subdivision or neighborhood organization or developer, including its successor or assign, is responsible for maintaining the sign and the public right-of-way where the sign is located. 
2.  Permitted signs and structures with indemnification agreement. If the subdivision or neighborhood organization or the developer enters into an agreement that is acceptable to the city attorney indemnifying the city from any liability, the city may permit structures such as walls, permanent planters, or one single- or double-sided street graphic containing a maximum of 32 square feet of sign area per side, to be placed at the entrance(s) and located in the city's right-of-way. 
3.  Permitted signs with no indemnification agreement. If the subdivision or neighborhood organization or the developer does not or is unable or unwilling to enter into an indemnification agreement with the city that is acceptable to the city attorney, the city will permit an identification sign on the right-of-way at the entrance(s) to the subdivision pursuant to the conditions in article IX and the following additional conditions: 
a.  One double-sided sign no taller than four feet in height from the ground may be placed in an entrance median. If made of wood, the sign may be no wider than six inches in width, and, if made of masonry, may be one course thick (unreinforced) and no wider than 12 inches, including letters. 
b.  Alternatively, two single-faced signs equal in size may be placed within the right-of-way on each side of an entranceway. Unless mounted on a wall, each face of the subdivision sign shall be no taller than four feet from the ground. 
c.  The sign(s), whether located in a median strip or along the side of the entrance street, shall be located at least four feet behind the face of the median curb. 
d.  Location and materials of the signs shall meet the requirements of article IX. 
Y.  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required in all subdivisions as per plans approved and accepted by Gainesville Regional Utilities and the city fire department.  
Sec. 30-6.7. - Cluster subdivisions. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to establish a process by which environmentally sensitive land and infill sites may be developed for residential purposes without strict adherence to the dimensional requirements of the zoning code of the city. The intent is to encourage better site planning than would normally occur by conventional subdivision procedures. Specifically, the objectives are to better preserve valuable open spaces, environmentally sensitive areas, existing tree cover; to provide for infill development where appropriate; to provide for better utilization of land; to provide for zero lot line development; to promote efficiency through design; and to provide for design flexibility to meet changing market conditions. Such development will be accomplished without an overall increase in density otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the development is located as determined by the minimum lot size. 
B.  Permitted districts; minimum size. A cluster subdivision may be permitted in any zoning district in which single-family dwellings are allowed as a permitted use and where the parcel to be subdivided has an area of five acres or more. 
C.  Approval procedure; design standards; name. 
1.  Cluster developments shall be approved in accordance with the procedures established for plats. Further, cluster subdivisions involving attached housing in zoning districts that allow such housing types shall also secure development plan approval in accordance with article III. 
2.  Design standards for improvements shall be in accordance with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
3.  The name of a subdivision approved pursuant to this article shall be followed by the words "cluster subdivision," which shall become and be made a part of its official name. 
4.  Application for cluster subdivision will be classified as either environmental or infill based on the following criteria: 
a.  Environmental. Development site contains regulated surface waters and wetlands or regulated natural and archaeological resources, or it is within a planning parcel that includes regulated natural and archaeological resources. 
b.  Infill. Cluster subdivision provides for infill development where appropriate, better use of land, zero lot line development, and/or promotes efficiency through design. 
D.  Dwelling types permitted. Except in the RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3 and RSF-4 zoning districts, all types of attached and detached single-family residential dwellings may be permitted in a cluster subdivision. In the RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3 and RSF-4 districts only single-family detached dwellings will be permitted in a cluster subdivision. Within cluster subdivisions, a variety of lot sizes and architectural typologies shall be encouraged. 
E.  Modification of street, yard, and lot requirements. Modifications to the lot area, lot width and depth, minimum yard setback, street width and layout requirements of the applicable zone may be permitted if shown on the design plat and such plat is approved by the city commission. No cluster subdivision of 50 acres or less in an RSF district shall have lot sizes reduced by more than 25 percent of that required by the district regulations. Each cluster subdivision may use zero lot line, regular lots or a combination of the two. However, each lot in a cluster subdivision that directly abuts developed property not in a cluster subdivision shall not have the following, unless the subdivision provides a 35-foot buffer around the entire subdivision: 
1.  An abutting side or rear yard that is less than that required for the abutting property; or 
2.  A lot width that is less than 75 percent of the minimum lot width required in the zoning district for the abutting property. 
F.  Number of dwelling units permitted. The total number of dwellings permitted in a cluster subdivision shall not exceed the number of dwelling units that would have been otherwise permitted by the density standards in the zoning district in which it is located. In the RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, RSF-4, RMF-5 and RC districts, the permitted number of dwelling units may be calculated by dividing the total land area of the cluster subdivision by the minimum lot size required for the applicable zoning district. The number of dwelling units shall not exceed the density allowed by the zoning district. 
G.  Cluster open space requirement. 
1.  Each cluster subdivision that reduces lot sizes below the minimum area required by the zoning district in which it is located shall provide cluster open space to be preserved and maintained for its scenic value, for recreational or conservation purposes and other related uses. This space shall be clearly indicated on the plat by the use of the words "cluster open space." The minimum amount of land to be designated as cluster open space shall be equivalent to 75 percent of the total amount of area by which each lot was reduced below the minimum lot size required in the zoning district plus any required wetland, creeks and associated buffer acreage in which the subdivision is located. Cluster open space is not required unless lot sizes are reduced below the minimum area required in a zoning district. 
2.  Land area devoted to public or private vehicular streets and sidewalks, rights-of-way, and drainage structures shall not be included towards meeting cluster open space requirements, except when such land is being jointly used for a greenway corridor as specified by section 30-6.6. For the purposes of this section "drainage structures" shall be defined as culverts, storm drains and stormwater retention or detention ponds. Fifty (50) percent of drainage facilities (unfenced) that use existing topography, have side slopes that are stabilized by plantings, provide a recreational or aesthetic amenity, provide environmental quality and ecological value, and use native plants to create an aquatic or a temporary aquatic type of ecosystem to the development, may be included towards meeting cluster open space requirements. Unless otherwise restricted, cluster open space may contain accessory structures and improvements necessary for the educational, cultural, recreational or social enjoyment of the residents or citizens plus any necessary utility services. The appropriateness of accessory structures will be reviewed and considered in terms of their enhancement of the cluster open space, the purposes as provided in subsection A. of this section, and the criteria as provided in subsection I. below. Accessory structures may be approved during the design plat review process, or during the development plan review process subject to the provisions of this section and the provisions of article III. Accessory structures are prohibited within wetlands, creeks, lakes and associated buffers. 
3.  Environmentally significant features such as but not limited to, creeks, creek setback buffers, wetland, wetland setback buffers, flood channels, floodplain areas, major tree groupings and individual trees of significant size shall be designated as cluster open space. Notwithstanding any contrary language contained in section 30-8.19 or other city regulations, all wetlands mitigation for a cluster subdivision shall be done on site. 
4.  The cluster subdivision shall strive to protect healthy heritage trees. The restrictive covenants for the cluster subdivision shall require that homes and other improvements are designed to protect the trees. 
H.  Ownership of cluster open space. 
1.  Public ownership. Cluster open space may be conveyed to the city unless the city commission finds that the size, location, nature and type of development, or fiscal impact (i.e., the cost and maintenance of development or open space) would make public use undesirable or unnecessary. Such conveyance shall be by statutory warranty deed free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, and shall take place on or before the recordation of the subdivision plat. In some instances, the city commission may authorize the conveyance of the cluster open space by a conservation easement as provided in F.S. § 704.06, when the nature and character of the cluster open space are suitable for such easement. Where the cluster subdivision encompasses lands designated for greenways or other forms of public ownership or access under the recreation; conservation, open space and groundwater recharge; and stormwater management elements of the Comprehensive Plan, the city may require dedication of such areas to the city as specified by section 30-6.6. 
2.  Private ownership. Where open space is not dedicated to the city or public use, it shall be protected by legal arrangements satisfactory to the city attorney sufficient to assure its maintenance and preservation for the purpose(s) intended. Covenants or other legal agreements shall specify, at a minimum, the ownership of the cluster open space, method of maintenance, maintenance of taxes and insurance, compulsory membership and assessment provisions; guarantees that any homeowners' association formed to own and maintain cluster open space will not be dissolved without the consent of the city; and any other provisions deemed necessary by the city attorney to meet the requirements of this section. 
I.  Criteria for review of cluster subdivisions. A cluster subdivision shall provide for better use of land and for a total environment, which is improved over that which could be achieved under standard regulations. The applicant shall present evidence that the proposed cluster subdivision uses the land better than a standard subdivision. If the city commission finds that a subdivision will be improved by the reasonable modification of the location, design or configuration of open space, building lots, streets and parking areas, the subdivision will be modified or denied. The following criteria shall guide the city in review of the proposed subdivision and in making any modifications thereof: 
1.  Individual lots, buildings, streets and parking areas shall be designed and situated to minimize alteration of the natural site features and topography. A minimum of 50 percent of all heritage trees shall be protected. 
2.  Individual lots, buildings and other structures shall be arranged and situated to relate to surrounding properties and to improve the view from, and the view of, buildings, lots and structures. 
3.  Individual lots, buildings, streets and parking areas, and any accessory structures and improvements located in the cluster open space, shall be situated to avoid the adverse effects of shadows, noise and traffic on the residents of the site and to minimize the area devoted to motor vehicles. 
4.  Cluster open space shall include any irreplaceable natural features located on the tract such as, but not limited to, stream beds and adjacent banks, wetlands, flood channels, floodplain areas, major tree groupings and individual trees of significant size. 
5.  The usability of cluster open space intended for recreation or public use shall be determined by the size, shape, topographic and location requirements of the particular purpose proposed for the open space. Further, such space intended for recreation or public use shall be easily accessible to trail users including the elderly and handicapped, be integrated to form unbroken trail linkages between uses within the subdivision, and take advantage of opportunities to establish off-site linkages to nearby land uses, bikeways, sidewalks and greenways. 
6.  To the extent practical, lands designated for greenways or other forms of public ownership or access in the conservation, open space or recreation element shall be included as cluster open space and dedicated as specified by section 30-6.6. 
7.  Diversity and originality in lot layout and individual building design shall be encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship between the development and the land. Garage doors if forward facing shall be set back at least 20 feet from the back of sidewalk and shall not be forward of the front facade of the building. Sidewalks shall be included on both sides of the street internal to the cluster subdivision. 
8.  To the extent practical, cluster open space shall contain regulated surface waters and wetlands, and set-asides of regulated natural and archaeological resources. 
9.  When lots abut wetlands or buffer areas, the property owner shall provide a ten-foot building construction setback from those areas for a construction work area, so that wetlands and buffer areas are not disturbed during any construction process.  
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 30-6.8. - General lot and building requirements. 
The following lot and building requirements shall apply in all zoning districts: 
A.  Frontage on right-of-way. 
1.  Minimum property frontage. No building or structure, except as hereinafter provided, shall be erected on a lot or parcel of land which does not physically abut a public street, private street, or approved private street for the required minimum lot width of the district where the same is located. The city manager or designee may designate a private street as an "approved private street" provided it meets one of the following standards: 
a.  A perpetual ingress/egress easement recorded in the public records of Alachua County that provides legal access to the lot or parcel of land from a dedicated road or right-of-way and which is deemed capable of carrying public safety vehicles; or 
b.  Property owned jointly or in common by all property owners fronting the private street as shown in the public records of Alachua County that connects to a dedicated road or right-of-way and which is deemed capable of carrying public safety vehicles. 
For the purposes of this section, two classes of approved private streets shall be designated by the city manager or designee: 
a.  Existing private streets that were constructed prior to September 26, 1994; and 
b.  New private streets that are approved for construction after September 26, 1994. 
The city manager or designee shall have the authority to approve or disapprove, for the purposes of erection of buildings or structures, private streets that existed prior to September 26, 1994. All private streets approved for construction after September 26, 1994 shall meet the construction standards for public streets as shown in the Engineering Design and Construction Manual, except in the PD district. In PD districts, the geometric construction standards may be varied as set forth in the planned development ordinance. For the purposes of minor subdivision and lot splits, the approved private street shall also meet the requirements in article III, division 7. 
In zoning districts with no minimum lot width requirement, the lot or parcel of land shall abut a public or approved private street for the maximum driveway width dimension requirement provided in the Design Manual plus any required turning radii area. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, a single-family dwelling, if it is an allowable use in the district, may be erected on a lot or parcel of land that abuts at least one public or approved private street for at least 25 feet, provided that the minimum lot width for the district in which it is located is met at the required front yard setback line. Provided, further, that any single-family dwelling existing on a lot that does not conform to the provisions of this subsection may be modified, enlarged or extended, and/or an accessory building or structure may be added to a single-family dwelling, provided that such modification, enlargement, extension or addition complies with all the other requirements of the district in which the lot is located. 
B.  Minimum setbacks from centerlines of all streets. 
1.  Every required minimum front yard setback line shall be established by a line parallel to the centerline of the street right-of-way at the distance listed in this subsection, measured from the street right-of-way line or the distance from the street centerline listed in subsection B.2. of this section. For the purpose of determining street classifications, the official roadway map shall be used. 
2.  If the actual street right-of-way line is closer to the street centerline than the following distances, the setback shall be measured from a line parallel to the street centerline located the following distances from the centerline: 
a.  Highways and arterials: 50 feet. 
b.  Thoroughfares and collectors: 40 feet. 
c.  Minor collectors: 35 feet. 
d.  All other streets: 25 feet. 
C.  Overhanging and protruding projections. 
1.  Within the DT district, porches or balconies (the "projection") that are supported by columns or posts may project over the public right-of-way line provided all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The projection is not enclosed with any walls or screens and is not heated or cooled. 
b.  There shall be a curbed sidewalk that is at least ten feet wide in front of the portion of the building where the porch or balcony is to be placed. 
c.  The projection (except for the supporting pole or column) maintains a clear height above the sidewalk of at least nine feet. 
d.  The projection does not encroach upon the vision triangle as provided in the Design Manual. 
e.  No portion of the projection or the supporting column or post may be located within four feet, measured horizontally, of the curb. 
f.  The horizontal distance between the building façade and the supporting column or post must be at least four feet. 
g.  An unobstructed pedestrian path that is at least five feet wide and meets all Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements shall be maintained along the length of the sidewalk in front of the subject property. 
h.  The projection has received the written approval of the city. At a minimum, this includes review by planning, public works, fire rescue, building inspections, and Gainesville Regional Utilities (GRU). The city may impose additional setbacks, conditions, or restrictions as are deemed necessary by the city. 
i.  If the governmental entity that owns the public right-of-way is not the city, then the written permission of the governmental entity that owns the public right-of-way is required. 
j.  If the public right-of-way belongs to the city, the property owner shall enter into a license agreement with the city indemnifying and holding harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees, from any property damage, including loss, and any personal injury, including death, caused in any way by the projection of the porch or balcony over the right-of-way, and containing such other provisions as deemed necessary by the city to protect the interests of the city. 
2.  Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed from its lowest point to the sky, except for the customary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, open exit stairs, ornamental features and eaves; provided, however, that none of the above projections shall extend into a required yard more than 36 inches; and further provided that none of the above projections shall extend over any public right-of-way, except in the MU-1, MU-2, BUS, and transect zoning districts. Enclosed exit stairs, outside stairways, balconies, chimneys, flues or other projections shall not extend into any required yard. 
3.  Within the MU-1, MU-2, BUS, and transect zoning districts, structural or ornamental features may project up to six inches over the public right-of-way line. Additionally, bay windows, cantilevered porches, balconies or exit stairs (the "projection") may project up to three feet over the public right-of-way line, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The projection maintains a clear height of nine feet above the sidewalk or ground level of the right-of-way. No component of the projection, including the support, may extend below this clear height. 
b.  The projection does not encroach upon the vision triangle as provided in the Design Manual. 
c.  The projection is at least four feet from an imaginary line drawn perpendicular to the face of the nearest curb. 
d.  The projection has received the written approval of the city. 
e.  If the governmental entity that owns the public right-of-way is not the city, the projection has received the written approval of the governmental entity that owns the public right-of-way. 
4.  In any nonresidential zoning district, marquees, canopies, or awnings may extend out ? of the way between the face of a building and the curb, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  There shall be a sidewalk in front of a portion of the building where the marquee, canopy or awning is to be placed. 
b.  The outside edge of the marquee, canopy or awning shall be at least two feet from an imaginary line drawn perpendicular to the curb. 
c.  The marquee, canopy or awning shall maintain a clear height above the sidewalk of at least nine feet. No support for the marquee, canopy or awning may extend below this clear height. 
d.  The person requesting the marquee, canopy or awning shall receive written approval from both the city as regards and Gainesville Regional Utilities as regards the site plan. 
e.  The person requesting the marquee, canopy or awning shall receive written approval from the city traffic engineer and public works department, or, if the right-of-way is not city-owned from the government entity with jurisdiction over the right-of-way. 
f.  The marquee, canopy or awning shall not encroach into the vision triangle as provided by the Engineering Design and Construction Manual. 
g.  The property owner shall be responsible for removing the marquee, canopy or awning at the property owner's expense upon notice that a road or right-of-way project requires it to be removed. If the property owner does not remove it, the governmental agency with jurisdiction over the right-of-way shall remove it and bill the property owner for the cost of removal. 
h.  If the right-of-way belongs to the city, the property owner shall enter into a license agreement with the city indemnifying and holding harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees, from any property damage, including loss, and any personal injury, including death, caused in any way by the projection of the marquee, canopy or awning over the right-of-way, and containing such other provisions as deemed necessary by the city attorney to protect the interests of the city. The license agreement shall be for a period of one year, and shall be renewable from year-to-year provided the marquee, canopy or awning is maintained in good condition and meets the standards set forth in this section. 
D.  Exceptions to height limits. Place of religious assembly spires, chimneys, water towers, transmitter towers, smoke stacks, flagpoles, monuments, television antennas and similar structures and their necessary mechanical appurtenances may, where permitted, be erected above the height limits established in this chapter; however, the heights of these structures or appurtenances thereto shall not exceed the height limitations prescribed by the airport zoning ordinance in article IV, division 5.  
Sec. 30-6.9. - Fences and walls. 
A.  Generally. 
1.  The requirements of this section are minimum requirements and shall not be construed to supersede any fence or wall requirements in the Code of Ordinances or in state law, such as specific requirements for fencing around swimming pools. 
2.  All fences and walls shall be constructed of uniform, durable, weather resistant materials of professional grade. Fences constructed of wood shall be treated to resist wood-destroying organisms. Fences constructed of metal, except galvanized metal, shall have a colored finish coat and be treated to resist rust and corrosion. 
3.  Fences and wall shall be constructed in a safe, sturdy, workmanship-like manner. 
B.  Fences. 
1.  Fences located within a required yard setback, or within five feet of the front property line in districts requiring no minimum front yard, shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
2.  Fences located outside the required setback may be constructed to the actual height of the principal building on the lot or to the maximum permitted height for accessory structures for the zoning district in which the lot is located, whichever is lesser. 
3.  Horizontal and vertical support posts shall be placed facing the inside of the fenced area, except where the fence is designed such that both sides are finished with alternating vertical fence supports. 
4.  Fences that are constructed, in whole or in part, of razor wire or barbed wire or similar materials are prohibited in all residential zoning districts. 
5.  Chain link, razor wire, barbed wire and wire mesh fences are not allowed within any of the transect zones, except within side or rear yards within U1. 
C.  Walls. 
1.  The construction of a wall requires a building permit and is subject to the applicable codes and review procedures of the building department. 
2.  Garden walls that are built along street frontages shall be limited to three feet in height for purposes of security and visibility. Fences and decorative pillars may extend up to five additional feet above the wall, provided that at least 50 percent of the area above three feet is open. 
3.  Retaining walls. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or prevent the construction of a retaining wall on any property, provided that such retaining wall does not adversely affect the natural flow of surface water or create any other adverse effect upon adjacent or adjoining properties. However, any application for a retaining wall shall be subject to the approval of the building official before the issuance of a building permit. The building official shall approve applications for retaining walls which are in conformance with this section.  
Sec. 30-6.10. - Mechanical equipment. 
For purposes of this section, mechanical equipment is defined as a heating, ventilation, or air conditioning unit placed outside of a building in addition to any utility-related equipment such as backflow preventers, pumps, transformers and similar equipment required to be installed on a development site. Mechanical equipment shall be located to minimize noise and visual impacts to adjacent property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district with predominately residential uses. 
A.  Mechanical equipment shall be screened and sound attenuation shall be provided when adjacent to any property in a residential zoning district or a planned development district with predominately residential uses. 
B.  Mechanical equipment shall not be located between the building and the street unless the utility company determines this to be the only feasible location. 
C.  Screening, by wall, fence or vegetative matter, shall exceed the height of the equipment if the equipment is visible from the street or adjacent properties. Certain equipment, including rain barrels or cisterns, shall not require screening provided they are designed to blend with the building and are constructed with the same materials and colors. 
D.  Roof-top mechanical equipment shall be enclosed by parapets or screen walls of the minimum height necessary to conceal it from the street and adjacent properties. 
E.  Chiller plants and similar large-scale utility structures shall provide a six-foot high wall to hide the structure from the public street and adjacent properties. A six-foot wide landscaping strip planted with shrubs and trees shall be provided along the wall.  
Sec. 30-6.11. - Solid waste disposal facilities. 
A.  Solid waste disposal facilities, including solid waste, recycling, and yard trash containers, shall be located to the side or rear of the building and shall be concealed from view from the public street by a masonry wall or opaque fence with a minimum height of six feet. The enclosing wall or fence shall be finished or painted with the same material as is used on the building and shall be fitted with an opaque sliding or hinged door and working latch. 
B.  On corner or double-frontage lots, disposal facilities shall be accessed from the secondary frontage.  
Sec. 30-6.12. - Outdoor lighting. 
A.  Purpose. To provide regulations for outdoor lighting that will: 
1.  Protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare; 
2.  Promote safety and security in vehicular use areas; 
3.  Protect adjacent properties, the environment, and the night sky from adverse lighting impacts such as light pollution, light trespass, glare, excessive lighting, and offensive light sources; 
4.  Promote energy and resource efficient lighting; and 
5.  Encourage the use of crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) fundamentals in the design of lighting installations. 
B.  Applicability. All outdoor lighting uses within the city, including but not limited to multi-family residential, nonresidential, public and private recreational and institutional uses, architectural, and landscape lighting. 
C.  Exemptions. 
1.  Properties with a single-family or two-family dwelling. 
2.  Lighting for public rights-of-way, public streets, and approved private streets. 
3.  Lighting necessary for emergency equipment and work conducted in the interests of law enforcement, fire rescue, storm debris clean-up or other similar public safety efforts. 
4.  Lighting for construction, renovation, or repair of roads and utilities. 
5.  Temporary general construction lighting, which shall be regulated in accordance with building construction standards and shall be valid during the active period of a building permit. 
6.  Sign lighting, which is regulated elsewhere in this Land Development Code. 
7.  Lighting required by federal or state laws or regulations. 
8.  Luminaires with fully shielded light sources, provided the total output of the fixture does not exceed 1800 lumens. 
9.  Luminaires with diffuse lensing, provided the total output of the fixture does not exceed 900 lumens. 
10.  Point source, or other types of unshielded fixtures, provided the total output of the fixture does not exceed 600 lumens. 
11.  Low-voltage landscape lighting, provided the lighting is shielded in such a way as to eliminate glare and light trespass. 
D.  General requirements. 
1.  Luminaire design and operation. 
a.  Fixture placement, distribution, wattage, orientation, and mounting height shall maximize the efficient and effective use of light output, and minimize light trespass, light pollution and glare, including the projection of light skyward or beyond the primary object being illuminated. Fixtures using directional optics and located adjacent to property boundaries shall be oriented in such a way as to minimize glare onto adjacent properties. 
b.  Lighting of horizontal surfaces shall be fully shielded full-cutoff fixtures and shall be aimed downwards. 
c.  Lighting of non-horizontal surfaces shall be designed, installed and aimed so as not to project light output beyond the object being illuminated, skyward, onto a public roadway, or onto adjacent uses. 
d.  Luminaires shall consist of the most energy efficient light sources. 
e.  The maximum mounting height of area lighting shall not exceed 30 feet when located within 75 feet of a single-family use or single-family zoning district. 
f.  Sites shall not exceed an average vertical illuminance of 0.5 footcandles at a height of five feet above the mounting height of the highest luminaire. This requirement shall be provided at a parallel horizontal over the area where surface level data are provided. 
g.  Controls shall be provided that automatically extinguish all outdoor lighting when sufficient daylight is available. Automatic lighting controls are not required for the interior of parking structures. 
h.  A property owner/representative may and is encouraged to reduce any required level of lighting output by up to 50 percent of the otherwise required value after the site closes or is no longer in use for the night. Uniformity ratios shall meet the otherwise required values. 
i.  The placement of light poles in landscape islands is discouraged. Separate islands should be created for the placement of light poles. Poles may be placed within the perimeter and interior landscape strips in locations that avoid conflicts with existing and required trees. Notwithstanding the above, where special designs, tree separation, pole arm extensions and reduced pole heights are feasible, a pole may be placed within a landscape island after review and approval by the appropriate reviewing body. 
j.  Except in emergencies by police, fire, utilities, medical personnel, aircraft warning lights or for meteorological data gathering purposes, the use of exposed light sources, search lights, flood lights, lasers, lighting or lights that pulse, flash, rotate or simulate motion is prohibited. No exceptions or variances shall be permitted. 
2.  Light trespass standards. 
a.  Unless otherwise provided in this section, lighting shall have illuminances, uniformities and glare control in accordance with the published standards of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA). 
b.  Light trespass measured line-of-site at the property line of the receiving property shall not exceed the following levels: 
i.  1.0 footcandles for non-residential and multi-family sites. 
ii.  0.5 footcandles for residential sites. 
iii.  0.4 footcandles for nature parks. 
iv.  5.0 footcandles for public and private streets. 
1)  Alleys. This standard shall be decreased to 2.0 footcandles where an alley of 20 feet or less separates a receiving property that has a single-family use or zoning. 
2)  Automobile dealers. This standard shall be increased to 10 footcandles for public streets abutting automobile dealers along Main Street north of NW 16 th Avenue and along NW 39 th Avenue between NE 2 nd Street and NE 10 th Street, provided that portion of the receiving public street is at least 500 feet from any property with single-family use or zoning. Light trespass at private streets shall meet the above requirements. 
E.  Specific illumination requirements. In addition to the general requirements applicable to all outdoor lighting uses, the following requirements for specific outdoor lighting uses or areas shall apply. If provisions in this subsection conflict with any of the general requirements, the provisions in this subsection shall prevail. 
1.  Recreational lighting. Lighting for outdoor recreational uses (including mounting heights above 30 feet, where appropriate) may be designed in accordance with the published standards of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA). 
2.  Nature parks. Buildings shall not be externally illuminated on any vertical faces fronting a nature park. 
3.  Building entrances, exteriors and site security. Lighting shall be provided for the general security of areas, including building entrances, stairways, ramps, main walkways, dumpsters, other site accessory structures, pedestrian entrance/exit points, and vehicular use areas. 
a.  Lighting levels at building entrances/exits and around buildings shall not exceed an average horizontal illuminance of 5.0 footcandles at ground level, a uniformity ratio of 6:1 and a maximum uniformity ratio of 10:1. 
b.  Lighting levels on pedestrian walkways and at pedestrian entrances/exits of vehicular use areas of multi-family developments shall maintain a minimum horizontal illuminance of 1.0 footcandles at ground level. 
c.  Pedestrian walkways greater than 30 feet from the edge of a building or vehicular use area shall maintain a minimum horizontal illuminance of 0.2 footcandles at ground level. 
d.  There shall be a minimum horizontal illuminance of 1.0 footcandles at ground level within five feet of dumpsters, site accessory structures and areas that are of the type known to be prone to illicit behavior or victimization. 
e.  Unimproved areas of a site may be so defined and excluded from the lighting plan. 
4.  Vehicular use areas. 
a.  Lighting shall be uniform throughout the parking lot, with no dark patches or pockets, for safety and identification of features. 
b.  Lighting shall maintain a minimum horizontal illuminance of 0.5 footcandles at ground level and shall not exceed an average horizontal illuminance of 2.5 footcandles, a uniformity ratio of 5:1, and a maximum uniformity ratio of 15:1. An applicant may elect to use the building entrance and outdoor lighting standards on portions of vehicular use areas within 30 feet of a building. 
5.  Parking structures. 
a.  Applicability. These standards for parking structures shall apply to any multilevel parking structure and any floor of a building, including but not limited to the first floor and/or basement level, used for parking or storage of vehicles. However, when either the top floor of a building used for parking or storage of vehicles or the top floor of a multilevel parking structure is uncovered and open to the sky, said floor shall be regulated in accordance with the standards for parking lots but shall have luminaires that do not exceed a height of 15 feet. Where covered parking areas are restricted in depth to one vehicle length, lighting shall be provided in accordance with the building entrances, exteriors and site security provisions above. 
b.  Luminaires shall be full-cutoff, semi-cutoff and/or refractor high intensity discharge (HID) or LED fixtures. The exact type, configuration and placement of luminaires shall be designed to prevent glare, cavern effect and to facilitate vertical illumination of the floor so that drivers are able to discern objects within the facility. Luminaires used in driving lanes shall not emit greater than 50 percent of the light output above an angle of 38 degrees on driver approach and 75 degrees on driver retreat. 
c.  Lighting intensities for all floors, ramps, entrance/exit areas, and stairways shall be as listed in Table 1. 
Figure 1—Transverse Lighting Coverage.
Transverse Coverage and Cutoff based on 8-foot Mounting Height
 
Table 1: 
	Min. Horizontal Illuminance
(footcandles) 	Max. Uniformity Ratio 	Min. Vertical Illuminance * 
(footcandles) 
Basic per floor 	1 	10:1 	0.5 
Ramps Day 	2 	10:1 	1 
Ramps Night 	1 	10:1 	0.5 
Entrance Areas Day 	50 	- 	25 
Entrance Areas Night 	1 	10:1 	0.5 
Stairways 	10 	- 	1 
* Measured facing the drive aisle at five feet above the parking surface at the point of the lowest horizontal illuminance. 
 
6.  Vehicular use areas canopy lighting. 
a.  Luminaires mounted on or under canopies shall be full-cutoff fixtures or recessed so that the lens cover is flush with the bottom surface (ceiling) of the canopy, as demonstrated in Figure 2. Lighting may also be shielded by fixtures or the edge of the canopy so that light is restrained to 85° or less from vertical as shown in Figure 2. Luminaires shall not result in glare and shall meet light trespass standards applicable to adjacent properties. 
b.  Lighting within six feet of the canopy shall maintain a minimum horizontal illuminance of 2.0 footcandles at ground level and shall not exceed an average horizontal illuminance of 10 footcandles, a uniformity ratio of 5:1, and a maximum uniformity ratio of 10:1. 
c.  Indirect lighting where light is aimed upward at the underside of the canopy and reflected back down from the underside of the canopy may be used when luminaires are shielded so that all direct illumination is focused exclusively on the underside of the canopy and when the average vertical illuminance does not exceed 0.5 footcandles at five feet above the canopy level. 
d.  Luminaires shall not be mounted on the top or sides (fascias) of the canopy when not part of a permitted sign. The sides (fascias) of the canopy shall not be illuminated in a manner other than that prescribed under the sign code. 
Figure 2—Canopy Lighting
 
7.  Gasoline and other fuel dispensing uses. 
a.  In addition to the requirements listed above for vehicular use area canopy lighting, lighting shall not exceed an average horizontal illuminance of 20 footcandles at ground level under the canopy and within an area of six feet from the edge of the canopy. Lighting shall not exceed a uniformity ratio of 5:1 and a maximum uniformity ratio of 10:1. 
8.  Vehicle and automobile dealerships along Main Street north of NW 16 th Avenue and along NW 39 th Avenue between NE 2 nd Street and NE 10 th Street; when more than 500 feet from residential. 
a.  Lighting shall not exceed an average horizontal illuminance of 50 footcandles at ground level. 
F.  Lighting plan submission and review. Lighting plans demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this section shall be submitted to the technical review committee for review and approval for development plan review, a building permit, or special use permit applications. Lighting plans shall be certified by signature and seal of a registered architect, engineer, or lighting professional holding a current lighting certification (LC) from the National Council on Qualifications for the Lighting Profession (NCQLP) as providing illumination in accordance with the applicable standards of this section and shall include the following information: 
1.  A layout of all existing and proposed luminaires with location, designation, mounting height and orientation. 
2.  A schedule of all fixtures that includes the following information: 
a.  Fixture designation. 
b.  Fixture distribution information for area lighting fixtures, such as IESNA Type III, Type IV, or Type V. 
c.  Mounting height. 
d.  Light source type and wattage. 
3.  An illustration showing lighting levels (illuminance in footcandles) for each source of light. Separate calculations shall be performed for each area of the site, such as parking lots, building entry areas, and light trespass on receiving property boundaries. The boundary of each area shall be clearly indicated and the area shall be labeled. The calculations shall be performed on a grid at a maximum of every ten feet. 
4.  A table of photometric calculations indicating, at a minimum, the following values for each area: 
a.  Average, maximum and minimum illuminance. 
b.  Average and maximum uniformity ratios. 
c.  The ordinance section applicable to the area. 
5.  Landscaping information demonstrating that the site lighting and existing and proposed landscaping have been coordinated to minimize conflict between vegetation and intended light distribution, both initially and at vegetation maturity. 
6.  Topographic variations on site and any significant change in grade or elevation of the surrounding sites. 
7.  A brief written narrative describing the proposed luminaires, mounting heights, control devices and schemes, applicable calculation zones, and a summary of the adjacent properties. This may be provided as notations on the lighting plan or in a separate attachment on the preparer's letterhead. 
8.  Manufacturer specification sheets, cut-sheets or other manufacturer-provided information for all existing and proposed luminaires. Photometric reports generated from manufacturer-provided IES data, where available. 
9.  For parking structures, the lighting plan shall include the following additional information: 
a.  Minimum horizontal and vertical lighting intensities for each floor, floor ramps, entrance areas and stairways. Data may be requested for certain daylight periods. 
b.  Uniformity ratios and maximum uniformity ratios for each floor, floor ramps, entrance areas and stairways. Data may be requested for certain daylight periods. 
c.  The cutoff angles on driver approach and retreat. 
G.  Variances. During approval of a development plan or building permit, the appropriate reviewing authority may approve a variance for one or more of the requirements of this section. The appropriate reviewing authority may approve a variance only when the applicant demonstrates, in addition to meeting all of the review criteria for a variance in article III, that the applicant is using an alternate methodology, technique, or approach that is consistent with IESNA standards and that meets the intent and purpose of the lighting ordinance. At the expense of the applicant, the appropriate reviewing authority may request an independent review by a registered architect, engineer, or lighting professional holding a current lighting certification (LC) from the National Council on Qualifications for the Lighting Profession (NCQLP). 
H.  Nonconforming luminaires and lighting. 
1.  A legally nonconforming luminaire or lighting installation shall be made to conform with the requirements of this section when any of the following situations applies: 
a.  Minor corrective action, such as re-aiming or shielding, can achieve conformity with the applicable requirements of this section; 
b.  Fifty percent or more of the existing luminaires on a property are replaced; 
c.  The number of existing luminaires on a property is increased by 50 percent or more; 
d.  The city manager or designee deems the nonconforming luminaire or lighting installation a safety hazard; or 
e.  A development is expanded or remodeled at a cost that exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of the site or structures as determined by the Alachua County Property Appraiser. Assessed valuation shall be determined by reference to the official property tax assessment rolls of the year of the expansion and/or remodel. 
2.  A development that becomes nonconforming with this section due to a change in operational hours from daytime only to include nighttime operation shall be required to comply with these regulations within 90 calendar days of the effective date of the change. 
3.  To prevent safety hazards, nonconforming luminaires and temporary luminaires that direct light towards streets or parking lots and that cause disability glare shall be either shielded or re-directed within 90 calendar days of notification by the city.  
DIVISION 4. - STORMWATER 
 
Sec. 30-6.13. - Design and maintenance. 
A.  Prohibitions. 
1.  No person shall change, or allow to be changed, the contour, topography, use or vegetation cover of land unless the stormwater runoff and sedimentation generated thereby are controlled in accordance with this article, except as follows: 
a.  Property in actual agricultural use, excluding silviculture. 
b.  Accessory home gardening and customary routine landscape maintenance. 
c.  Removal of individual trees in accordance with the landscape and tree management sections of this article. 
2.  No person shall discharge or alter the discharge of stormwater runoff or sedimentation from development activity into creeks, watercourses or water bodies without the consent of the applicable governmental authority. 
B.  Design and maintenance standards for stormwater facilities. 
1.  Design standards. Stormwater management facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this article and the Design Manual. 
a.  General standards. 
i.  All drainage facilities shall provide a positive outfall to existing watercourses, water bodies, wetlands or storm sewer systems unless it can be proven that it is a closed system. 
ii.  The property owner is fully responsible for compliance with all rules, regulations and requirements of the county, the applicable water management district, the state department of environmental protection, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
iii.  All basins designed to be dry shall drain completely within 72 hours of the storm event. Designs providing for longer drainage periods require approval by the city manager or designee. 
iv.  All development shall provide on-site stormwater quality treatment for the first one inch of stormwater runoff, except as provided in subsection e. of this section. Infill residential development within improved residential areas or subdivisions existing prior to November 18, 1991, shall ensure that its post-development runoff will not contribute pollutants that will cause the runoff from the entire improved area or subdivision to degrade receiving water bodies and their water quality. 
v.  All development shall have on-site stormwater quantity control designed for the 100-year critical duration storm, except as provided otherwise in this section. A detention system shall be provided that will permit a controlled outlet to receiving watercourses. The system shall be designed so that the peak flow of stormwater off of the site, assuming full development, shall not exceed the natural flow from the lands prior to the subdivision or any development, based on the 100-year critical duration storm. 
vi.  The type, intensity and structural design of any development proposed for a site shall be appropriate to the existing natural topographic characteristics of the site, while recognizing that minimal grade changes are essential to site development. Avoid disturbing steep slopes. Use terracing and diversions when disturbance of slopes is unavoidable. Slopes created by fill for other than landscape or buffering purposes shall be not steeper than three to one and shall be stabilized by vegetation or other approved methods. Excessive erosion of any cut or fill slope shall require remediation by the property owner. 
vii.  Drainage facilities designed within a closed system shall be evaluated on a site-specific basis with the minimum design criteria being the 100-year critical duration storm event. 
viii.  All stormwater basins shall be landscaped in such a manner as to promote safety and to integrate the basin with the overall design of the site. 
ix.  The contour of retention and detention basins should promote aesthetically pleasing site design and increased wildlife habitat. 
x.  The Design Manual shall include guidelines for the design and operation of facilities that discourage the breeding of mosquitoes. 
xi.  The design of retention and detention basins shall promote joint uses for habitat, open space, passive recreation, and the establishment and integration of trails. 
xii.  Stormwater management facilities shall be designed to minimize the need for maintenance in accordance with the Design Manual. 
b.  Erosion and sedimentation control. The city may require the developer to limit clearing and grubbing outside the proposed developed area to the site, control erosion and sedimentation during and after construction, stabilize cleared areas, limit stockpiles, protect stormwater inlets during construction, control construction access routes, remove temporary control systems after construction, and limit the placement of gutters and drains. Wherever construction vehicle access routes intersect paved public roads, provisions shall be made to minimize the transport of sediment (mud), concrete and other construction materials onto the paved surface (through runoff or vehicle tracking). Materials reaching the paved surface shall be removed from the paved surface at the end of each day. Removal shall be by shoveling or sweeping, and the materials shall be transported to a sediment-controlled disposal area. 
c.  Hogtown Creek Basin. 
i.  Within the Hogtown Creek Basin, systems shall be designed to retain any increase in volume of runoff over the predevelopment volume for a 72-hour period. 
ii.  The state Department of Transportation, Standards for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition, and the state Department of Transportation, Roadway and Traffic Design Standards for Design, Construction, Maintenance and Utility Operations for Streets and Highways on State Maintained Systems, latest edition, shall be applied where standards are not specifically addressed in this chapter or in the Design Manual. 
d.  Master stormwater basins. The requirements for stormwater quantity and quality as listed above may be satisfied by a master stormwater plan serving several properties. An easement shall be provided between participating landowners. The easement shall be recorded in the public records of the county and submitted to the city prior to the issuance of any development permit. Any development proposed for consideration using an existing or planned master stormwater basin shall provide the calculations and documentation necessary to establish the right to use the facility and that the contribution of stormwater runoff of the proposed development will be within the design parameters of the master basin. A maintenance agreement among all the property owners that conforms to the provisions of this section shall be executed subject to the approval of the city attorney as to form and legality and recorded in the public records of the county. 
e.  Off-site stormwater management facilities. A development may use an off-site stormwater management facility to meet the applicable stormwater quality or quantity standards required by the Design Manual. 
f.  Redevelopment of vehicular use area or building. For the purposes of this section, redevelopment is any demolition or reconstruction of the vehicular use area (excluding resurfacing and restriping) or building. Any proposal for a site on which the proposed redevelopment of building(s) or vehicular use area involves the demolition and reconstruction of more than 80 percent of the area devoted to existing building and vehicular use area shall be considered new development, and shall be required to meet the standards for new development. This determination shall be made by the city manager or designee. All redevelopment of a particular lot or site governed by a final development order shall be cumulative from June 10, 1992. Redevelopment shall conform to the following standards with regard to required facilities: 
i.  Less than 4,000 square feet. Any redevelopment of existing impervious surfaces of a site of less than 4,000 square feet shall only require the continued maintenance of existing facilities, including natural areas that provide storage. No additional stormwater management shall be required, except that all development shall be in compliance with all state and water management district requirements. 
ii.  4,000 square feet or more. Any redevelopment of existing impervious surface of 4,000 square feet or more shall be designed to accommodate stormwater quality treatment for the first one-half inch of runoff from the proposed improvements in the disturbed area. The city manager or designee may allow the design engineer to retain the first one-half inch of runoff from an area of equal size as the disturbed area provided that it can be proven that there would be greater water quality benefits to the receiving surface water of equal size. Stormwater management facilities, including natural areas that provide storage, shall continue to be provided. All development shall be in compliance with all state and water management district requirements. 
g.  Subdivision of property. A complete stormwater system in conformance with the flood control provisions of this article shall be provided for all areas of the subdivision for managing stormwater runoff and providing water quality treatment within or across subdivision lands. Soil borings shall be taken to establish soil type and percolation rate. The Design Manual shall provide guidelines for determining the appropriate number and location of soil borings. Full development shall be assumed for selection of proper runoff coefficients. The system shall be designed, in accordance with the Design Manual, to accomplish the following results: 
i.  Closed conduits. A system of closed conduits (except where open ditches are specifically permitted by the city commission) shall be provided to collect and channel stormwater in such a fashion as to permit the unimpeded use of public roads during a rainstorm of the maximum intensity predicted for the city area at ten-year intervals. 
ii.  Flood routing. A route for stormwater runoff shall also be provided that will function, when the system designed to handle the ten-year, 24-hour storm has reached its capacity, so as to prevent flooding (water over the curb level) and ensure access for emergency vehicles during a ten-year, 24-hour storm event. 
iii.  Detention/retention system. A detention/retention system shall be provided that will permit a controlled outlet to receiving watercourses. The system shall be designed so that the peak flow of stormwater from the subdivided lands, assuming full development, shall not exceed the natural flow from the lands prior to the subdivision and any associated development based on the 100-year critical duration storm. 
iv.  Roadside swales. Roadside swales may be provided in lieu of curb and gutter as long as all the specific requirements of this article and the Design Manual can be met. 
v.  Open drainageways. Open drainageways (ditches) shall not be permitted in or within 100 feet of any residential district or any land in actual use or zoned for use as a school, unless it can be established to the satisfaction of the city commission that the open drainageway will appear and function as a natural watercourse and will not require significant maintenance. Any permitted open drainageway shall be designed so as to present no unreasonable hazard to life, the health of the public and nearby property residents and so as to be protected against scour and erosion. 
C.  Acceptance of facilities. Acceptance of facilities for dedication to the public shall be in accordance with the conditions and procedures pertaining to subdivision review. 
D.  Intergovernmental coordination. Copies of all water management district, state department of transportation, state department of environmental protection, and county permits and permits of any other applicable agency with jurisdiction shall be required prior to commencement of any development. 
E.  Inspections. 
1.  The engineer of record shall file as-built plans with the public works department upon completion of any improvements for which changes have been approved during the construction process. 
2.  The city shall periodically inspect stormwater control facilities and shall inspect upon complaint to determine that such facilities are operating and being maintained as designed.  
DIVISION 5. - WATER/WASTEWATER 
 
Sec. 30-6.14. - Centralized water and wastewater facilities. 
All property within the city shall be subject to the following requirements. These requirements do not lessen or exempt compliance with any other section of the Code of Ordinances where the regulations may be more stringent. 
A.  Exemptions. The following exemptions to the requirements for mandatory hookup to the centralized water and wastewater systems shall apply, unless more stringent code requirements apply: 
1.  Development on lots in platted subdivisions and other legal lots of record that existed as of June 10, 1992, shall be exempt, unless there are existing distribution or collection facilities in the right-of-way or easements abutting the property. 
2.  Developments that provide temporary package wastewater plants shall be exempt, but only to the extent provided for in section 30-6.15. 
B.  Centralized water systems. Developments that require potable water shall connect to the city's centralized potable water system when equivalent residential densities are greater than two units per acre. Equivalent residential density shall be calculated using peak daily demand as estimated for level of service purposes as indicated in article VI, division 1. 
C.  Centralized wastewater systems. Developments that require wastewater treatment shall connect to the city's centralized wastewater treatment system when equivalent residential densities are greater than two units per acre. Equivalent residential density shall be calculated using peak daily demand as estimated for level of service purposes as indicated in article VI, division 1. 
D.  Septic tanks or on-site disposal systems for nonresidential development. Any nonresidential development proposing the use of a septic tank or on-site disposal system shall demonstrate that toxic, hazardous or industrial waste will not be disposed of in the septic tank or on-site disposal system.  
Sec. 30-6.15. - Package wastewater plants. 
If there are no existing wastewater collection facilities, a development may install a new, temporary package wastewater plant for the treatment of wastewater, provided the plant meets all of the following criteria: 
A.  All relevant state and federal standards for package wastewater plants shall be met. 
B.  The development shall connect to the central wastewater treatment facilities within five years after central wastewater facilities become available to the development. 
C.  The developer of such temporary package treatment plant shall enter into a legally binding agreement that dedicates and assigns responsibility for the proper maintenance and operation of the plant to an appropriate agency of local government, and which provides adequate compensation by the developer to the local government for the proper operation and maintenance of the plant. 
D.  The package plant shall be approved by the appropriate government agency assigned plant operation and maintenance as meeting standards for design, operation and maintenance.  
Sec. 30-6.16. - Industrial pretreatment plants. 
The city shall allow industrial pretreatment plants for the processing of industrial wastewater. Such industrial pretreatment plants shall be in conformance with the requirements of section 27-182.  
DIVISION 6. - TRANSPORTATION 
 
Sec. 30-6.17. - Streets. 
A.  Public and private streets. The design standards for streets are contained in the Design Manual or standards from other agencies as referenced in the manual. 
B.  Private approved streets. Each private approved street in a minor subdivision shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  An approved private street shall be paved to a minimum width of 12 feet wide for one-directional traffic flow and 18 feet wide for two-directional traffic flow. Alternatively, a determination shall be made by the city public works department, the city fire rescue department, and city solid waste department that the approved private street is adequate to support service vehicles as necessary to provide municipal services. 
2.  The structure and sub-base of the approved private street shall meet the standards set forth in the Design Manual. 
3.  Each approved private street shall be connected directly to a public street or to another approved private street that connects directly to the major public road network. The method and type of connection shall be subject to approval by the public works department in accordance with the standards set forth in the Design Manual. The private street serving the subdivision shall have a maximum length of 1,000 feet (measured by traversing the length of the approved private street from its farthest extent to the nearest public street). When the private street reaches 1,000 feet in length, the subdivision shall include one of the following, as determined by the city fire rescue department: 1) appropriate emergency connection to the nearest public road, if such a connection can be made on property within the minor subdivision, or 2) a turnaround sized to accommodate fire and rescue vehicles. 
4.  The owners of each approved private street shall provide necessary easements to the city for the purpose of providing municipal services. Alternatively, if the city finds the street serves a valid public purpose, the owners may gratuitously dedicate an approved private street for purposes of public right-of-way. 
5.  Lots created on an approved private street shall be designed to minimize the number of curb cuts onto the street. Shared driveway access shall be required of adjoining lots, except where an odd number of lots are created, in which case, one lot, as determined by the public works department, may be allowed to have a separate driveway. 
6.  Approved private streets shall provide a sidewalk having a minimum width of five feet. The sidewalk shall be provided on one side of the street in accordance with standards of the Design Manual. Where five feet of pavement is not possible due to a natural or permanent man-made obstruction, the pavement width may be decreased to a minimum of three feet as necessary to avoid the obstruction. If paving is not possible due to natural conditions, a minimum three-foot wide stabilized pedestrian trail shall be constructed. 
7.  All proposed minor subdivisions shall meet the level of service standards in the Comprehensive Plan. Proof of meeting these standards shall exist in the form of a certificate of concurrency exemption, certificate of preliminary concurrency or certificate of conditional concurrency reservation. The approval of a nonresidential minor subdivision in no way reserves capacity for the purposes of concurrency. 
C.  Culs-de-sac or dead-end streets. Culs-de-sac shall not exceed 250 feet, except where alternative emergency service access is available. Where emergency service access is available, dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs shall not extend beyond 1,000 feet. Pedestrian connections shall be provided to these streets in order to shorten walking distances.  
Sec. 30-6.18. - Sidewalks and shared-use bicycle paths. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this section is to enable pedestrian activity throughout the city, especially as a means to promote pedestrian and transit trips, pedestrian safety and accessibility. Sidewalks are required in conjunction with development orders in every zoning district. This shall apply on any parcel or lot where a roadway is existing adjacent to the proposed development or where there is a reasonable likelihood of mass transit service or a pedestrian need for sidewalks. Sidewalk(s) are required on both sides of all public and private streets. 
B.  Schools. Public and private schools shall meet the design guidelines of Safe Routes to School. Sidewalks and bikeways adjacent to the site shall be extended to appropriate walkways around buildings and bicycle storage areas. 
C.  Sidewalks are required on both sides of all streets at least five feet in width. Whenever a sidewalk intersects with a curbed street, ramps shall be installed to facilitate access to the sidewalks by wheelchairs. 
1.  A shared-use bicycle path shall be provided in a subdivision wherever designated on the officially adopted trail network plan for the city. Also, subdivisions containing a proposed trail network corridor shall provide a shared-use bicycle path and sidewalk system that integrates or links the subdivision with the trail network. 
D.  Responsibility for construction. The installation of sidewalks is the responsibility of the developer/owner and the sidewalks shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city. For a phased development, sidewalk(s) shall be completed to serve any area for which a certificate of occupancy or any temporary occupancy is required. The developer/owner shall only be responsible for the sidewalk on the same side of the street(s) on which the approved plan is adjacent, except as specifically modified in this section. 
E.  Design standard. Sidewalk(s) and ramp(s) shall be constructed in accordance with the Design Manual. 
F.  Dedication. In conjunction with the owner/developer's installation of any required sidewalk(s) along a street, the sidewalk shall be constructed within existing right-of-way or, if insufficient space exists within the right-of-way, the sidewalk area shall be dedicated to public use in a form acceptable to the city attorney. 
G.  Modifications. The appropriate reviewing authority may approve modifications from the terms of this section as follows: 
1.  The appropriate reviewing authority shall require the petitioner to provide information in the form of reports, maps, diagrams, and similar material to support their request for modification. 
2.  The appropriate reviewing authority may determine the appropriate location or termination of sidewalks, or determine that a portion of a sidewalk may be narrowed to the minimum extent necessary to meet the requirements of this section. 
3.  The applicant shall demonstrate that conditions and circumstances, which do not result from the actions of the developer, warrant modification of the sidewalk requirements. In reaching its decision, the appropriate reviewing authority shall consider the following: 
a.  Protection of heritage trees; and 
b.  Excessive slope or other topographic or geological features. 
(Ord. No. 170831 , § 7, 4-5-18)  
Sec. 30-6.19. - Access management. 
A.  Access to residentially zoned properties. 
1.  No residentially zoned land shall be used for driveway, walkway or access purposes to any land that is non-residentially zoned or that is used for any purpose not permitted in a residential district or that is shown on the future land use map of the Comprehensive Plan for solely non-residential use, except for ingress and egress to a use that was existing on October 26, 1981, on land that does not abut a public street. 
2.  Entrances to dwelling units in the RMF-5, RMF-6, RMF-7, RMF-8 districts shall be 15 feet or greater from any access road or driveway. 
3.  Minor improvements, such as ramps and landings, that are intended to provide access for a handicapped resident shall be permitted by right within the required yard of any existing single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling and three-family dwelling. 
B.  Access to non-residential uses. 
1.  Where a parcel of property used for nonresidential use in any business, office, industrial or mixed-use district abuts more than one street, access from either street to such property shall be permitted only if no property in any RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, RSF-4 or RC residential district or shown for single-family residential use on the future land use map of the Comprehensive Plan lies immediately across such street from such office-zoned property; provided, however, access may be permitted from any major collector or arterial as shown on the official roadway map; and provided, further, that one point of access shall be permitted in any case, notwithstanding other provisions of this subsection. 
2.  Access to shopping centers shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article, chapter 23 of the Code of Ordinances, and the Design Manual. Areas used by motor vehicles shall be physically separated from public streets by landscaped buffer areas. 
C.  Bicycle, greenway and pedestrian access. Provisions shall be made to safely incorporate travel ways for bicycle and pedestrian usage into development and redevelopment projects extending to adjacent properties. Where bikeways, greenways or sidewalks are presently adjoining the property, provisions shall be made to safely link the internal bicycle and pedestrian system with adjoining facilities. During development plan review, the appropriate reviewing authority shall also review the relationship of the mixed-use development to adjoining properties and may require appropriate access for bicycles or pedestrians at locations where vehicular access is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 170831 , § 8, 4-5-18)  
Sec. 30-6.20. - Driveways. 
All driveways constructed or removed within the city limits shall be constructed or removed as provided for in this section and chapter 23 of the Code of Ordinances. 
A.  Unauthorized construction, curb-cutting declared unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, cut, break-out or remove any curb along a street or alley except as authorized by the provisions of this article. 
B.  Permit. 
1.  Required. No person shall remove, alter or construct any curb, driveway, gutter or pavement or perform any other improvement on any public street or designated street right-of-way without obtaining a permit authorizing the activity from the appropriate governmental entity (the state department of transportation for roads on the state highway system, the county for roads under county maintenance, or the city for all other roads). 
2.  Fees. Fees for city permits shall be according to the schedule set out in appendix A and shall be paid to the city by the person to whom the permit is issued at the time it is issued. 
3.  Posting at site. The driveway permit shall be posted at the construction site. 
C.  Submission of plans; information required. 
1.  No driveway permit shall be issued except in compliance with this chapter. In the event that the proposed construction does not require development review under this chapter, then a copy of the plans showing the location and dimensions of all proposed improvements shall be filed with the public works department and the traffic engineering department. Plans are not required for single-family zoned property or single-family uses. All applications for driveway permits shall include information as to whether the driveway will connect to a road on the state highway system or is on a county-maintained street. 
2.  Additional plans shall be submitted to the state department of transportation or the county for driveways connecting on the state highway system or county-maintained streets. All plans submitted for driveways on the state highway system shall meet state department of transportation submittal requirements including those in Chapters 14-96 and 14-97, Florida Administrative Code as amended from time to time. All plans submitted for driveways connecting on county-maintained streets shall meet the county's submittal requirements. 
3.  Information required on plans submitted shall include: 
a.  A complete plot plan showing all proposed buildings and parking layouts, including north arrow and date. 
b.  Existing and proposed driveway locations and widths. 
c.  Street pavement types and widths and right-of-way widths. 
d.  Proposed location of off-street loading and unloading facilities, interior parking arrangements, and traffic circulating patterns. 
e.  Retaining walls, drainage, utility poles, trees and other physical features that affect the driveway location. 
f.  Driveways on adjacent properties and/or on opposite side of the street. 
g.  The state road number, county road number or local road name, the existence and location of any existing and/or proposed public or private roads (proposed public roads as shown in the state department of transportation five-year transportation improvement plan or the city or the county five-year capital improvement plans) abutting or entering the property, and the horizontal and vertical curvature of the roads. 
h.  Any additional information required by the state department of transportation or the county for roads under their permitting authority. 
D.  Design considerations. 
1.  State department of transportation design and construction standards shall be met for driveways on the state highway system. 
2.  County design and construction standards shall be met for driveways under county road maintenance. 
3.  In addition to state department of transportation or state county design standards, all city requirements shall be met unless they are superseded by state department of transportation or county standards. The city design standards and all other city requirements shall be met for all city-maintained streets or alleys. 
4.  The choice of the proper location for access facilities (driveways) shall involve consideration of the amount of conflict that can be expected both within the parking area and on the abutting streets. One primary concept that shall be followed is to reduce the number of connections to a practical minimum, thus providing fewer locations where conflicts may occur. The city manager or designee may require stub outs to adjacent properties for future cross-access. 
5.  The area to which the driveway provides access shall be of sufficient size to allow all necessary functions for loading, unloading and parking maneuvers to be carried out on private property and completely off the street right-of-way. 
6.  Driveways shall be constructed to conform to the existing paved street grade or grade approved by city engineer for nonpaved streets. 
7.  Parking areas shall be so designed and marked as to provide for orderly and safe movement and storage of vehicles: 
a.  Back-out parking onto a public street and/or highway shall not be permitted unless in the opinion of the city manager or designee the parking does not present any unexpected hazard to roadway users with respect to roadway design considerations (e.g. visibility, road width, maintenance of utilities, traffic control devices). 
b.  The minimum distance from the street right-of-way line at any ingress or egress driveway to any interior service drive or parking space with direct access to the driveway shall be 20 feet. 
c.  The minimum distance from the street right-of-way line on any major ingress or egress driveway to any interior service drive or parking space having direct access to such driveway shall be 100 feet. A major driveway is defined as the main ingress or egress point to a public street or highway from a site of a major development such as a shopping center, multiple-family development, industrial park, etc. 
d.  Six-inch standard curb or similar barrier shall be installed along the driveway from the street right-of-way line to the first interior service drive or to and including the first interior parking space described in subsections b. and c. above. Material other than concrete or asphalt curb may be used if approved by the city engineer and chief code enforcement officer or building official. 
8.  Driveways shall be laid out to intersect the street as nearly as possible at right angles (ninety (90) degrees) and no driveway shall intersect any street at less than seventy-five (75) degrees, unless no other access is possible and the alternate access design is approved by the city traffic engineer. Driveways at or near street intersections or driveways from other sites that cannot be aligned shall be offset no less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from each other. In order for a driveway to be offset less than one hundred fifty (150) feet the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city traffic engineer that extraordinary need and/or circumstances exist such as insufficient frontage width or existing natural features which preclude driveway installation. 
9.  Driveways serving major developments, as defined in this chapter, shall not be located closer than 300 feet from the intersection of arterial and/or collector streets. The petitioner shall demonstrate hardship to the city traffic engineer or the city traffic engineer shall determine that special engineering design considerations exist for driveways serving major developments to be located closer than 300 feet to the intersection of arterial and/or collector streets. 
E.  Specifications generally; costs for city-maintained roadways. 
1.  The public works department shall prepare, maintain and update a Design Manual that provides design and construction specifications for driveways, curb cuts, curbs and other pavement on city-maintained roadways and rights-of-way. 
2.  All driveways shall be hard-surfaced in conformance with the applicable standards and specifications. 
3.  Driveways shall cross the sidewalk area at the sidewalk grade established by the city engineer. 
4.  Driveways shall be constructed as nearly to a right angle to the street or roadway as possible. 
5.  Where special pedestrian and vehicular hazards may be encountered, driveways may be restricted to a one-way operation. Proper signs giving notice to the restricted use of driveways shall be erected and maintained by the person having control over the driveways. Failure to erect such signs and failure to use such driveways in accordance with the proper signs shall be a violation of this article. 
6.  All costs of any change proposed in any physical improvements originally installed by the city and all costs of the installation of any driveway or necessary signing shall be borne by the property owner. 
7.  All costs and responsibilities for maintenance and/or repair of any driveway or related signing shall be borne by the property owner. 
F.  Number and location of driveways. In order to maximize traffic safety and highway capacity, provide reasonable ingress and egress to property, and adhere to the concepts of access management as stated in Florida Statutes and regulated by the state department of transportation, the number and location of driveways shall be regulated as follows: 
1.  One driveway shall be permitted for ingress and egress to a lot, except: 
a.  Where joint-use driveways, shared-access or cross-access drives are approved by the development review board or city plan board under development plan review in accordance with this chapter; or 
b.  Where property zoned and in use for a detached single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling abuts a local street. 
2.  Two driveways shall be permitted for ingress to and egress from a lot provided: 
a.  All other requirements of this article are met; 
b.  The minimum distance between the two driveways equals or exceeds 20 feet as measured from inside edge to inside edge of the driveways at the property line; and 
c.  The applicant demonstrates to the city traffic engineer sufficient need, such as delivery of emergency services, one-way driveway, physical features unique to the site, and/or loading/unloading requirements, to justify two driveways. 
3.  More than two driveways shall be permitted for ingress and egress to a lot provided: 
a.  All other requirements of this article are met and exceptional circumstances exist that cannot be mitigated, in the judgment of the city traffic engineer, unless more than two driveways are provided; or 
b.  Where the lot meets the following three thresholds: 
i.  The lot exceeds ten acres in total land area; 
ii.  The lot has more than 1,000 automobile parking spaces; and 
iii.  Whenever more than two driveways are permitted, the minimum distance between driveways meets or exceeds 300 feet as measured from centerline to centerline of the driveways at the property line. 
4.  The number and location of driveways on the state highway system are regulated by the state under Chapters 14-96 and 14-97, Florida Administrative Code, as amended from time to time. 
5.  If development on any city street impacts the operation of any road on the state highway system, the regulations set forth in Chapters 14-96 and 14-97, Florida Administrative Code, as amended from time to time shall apply. 
G.  Driveway types. 
1.  All driveways on the state highway system or on county-maintained streets shall meet the relevant requirements of the appropriate governmental entity. 
2.  All driveways on city-maintained roadways shall be the standard ramp-type driveway construction except that street-type entrances may be permitted from major thoroughfares into the major entrances of planned shopping centers, large industrial developments, apartment complexes and drive-in theaters that have parking areas for 300 or more vehicles. 
H.  Width of driveways having access to city-maintained roadways. 
1.  Ramp-type driveways. 
a.  The width of a ramp-type driveway shall be within the minimum and maximum limits as specified below: 
Location 	Minimum (feet) 	Maximum (feet) 
Single-family residential 	10 	24 
Residential 	12 	30 
All other uses: 		
One-way 	15 	24 
Two-way 	24 	40 
 
b.  All driveway widths shall be measured at the street right-of-way line. 
c.  For single-family residential driveways, the width of the curb opening shall not be less than 16 feet measured from the outside edge to outside edge of the curb transition (T). 
d.  For all other ramp-type driveways the width of curb opening shall not exceed the driveway width by more than three feet on each side. 
2.  Street-type driveways. The width of street type driveways shall be within the minimum and maximum limits as specified below: 
Location 	Minimum (feet) 	Maximum (feet) 
Planned shopping centers, industrial developments, apartment complexes (with parking for 300 or more vehicles). 	24 	60 
 
I.  Prohibited locations; installation of curb stops. 
1.  No driveway shall be constructed in the radius return of an intersection. 
2.  No driveway shall be constructed nearer than 25 feet from the intersection of street right-of-way lines. 
3.  All driveways shall be constructed with a minimum setback distance of five feet from any interior property line, and with a two-foot minimum offset from the property line at the roadway connection. These offsets may be reduced for single-family residences at the recommendation of the city traffic engineer. 
4.  To prevent vehicle overhang on private property in the vicinity of the driveway, parking areas and loading areas, a six-inch raised curb and/or parking stops shall be constructed a minimum distance of three feet inside the street right-of-way line or property line. 
5.  No driveway shall be permitted to include any municipal facility such as traffic signal standards, catchbasins, fire hydrants, utility poles, fire alarm supports or other similar type structures. 
6.  To prevent parked vehicles from intruding or overhanging landscaped areas, sidewalks or critical drainage retention areas, the city engineer or city traffic engineer may require the construction of a six-inch raised curb and/or similar barrier to protect such areas. 
J.  Work to be performed by bonded contractors; requirements of bond. All work of removing any curb and building of any driveway shall be done by a licensed contractor having in force a current contractor's bond in an amount equal to or greater than three times the estimated cost of the proposed work. This bond shall be for a period of three years and shall be renewed each year at the time the contractor obtains his/her business tax receipt. 
K.  Type of construction for driveways on city-maintained roadways. 
1.  All nonresidential driveways shall be constructed of six-inch thick concrete with steel reinforced matting from the edge of the curb or pavement to at least the property line. The driveway shall extend a sufficient distance from the pavement so that the rise of the drive will be at least six inches above the level of the gutter or pavement with the minimum distance being the property line. 
2.  Residential driveways shall be concrete as specified above or may be of type III asphalt, one and one-half inches thick, depending on the existing stormwater facilities, subject to review by the public works department. 
3.  Exceptions to the concrete requirement for nonresidential driveways may be made at the discretion of the public works department. 
L.  Minimum thickness of concrete; specifications for concrete. All driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the Design Manual. 
M.  Alteration of existing driveways; unnecessary driveways. 
1.  Existing driveways shall not be relocated, altered or reconstructed without a permit approving the relocation, alteration or reconstruction, and the driveways shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
2.  When the use of any driveway is changed, making any portion or all of a driveway unnecessary, the owner of the abutting property shall, at his/her expense, replace all necessary curbs, gutters, sidewalks and grass areas in accordance with the Design Manual. 
N.  Review and approval. All driveways hereafter constructed in the city on street rights-of-way shall be reviewed and approved by the appropriate city department prior to the issuance of any building permit for the erection, construction, reconstruction or change in the use of the building, structure or land. This provision shall not apply to single-family residential zoned property or for single-family uses.  
ARTICLE VII. - PARKING AND LOADING 
 
Sec. 30-7.1. - Generally. 
A.  Applicability. Off-street parking facilities, including those provided for any new building constructed, any new use established, any addition or enlargement of an existing building, and any change in the occupancy of any building or the manner in which any use is conducted that would result in additional required parking spaces, shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
B.  Requirements for uses not mentioned. In the case of a use not mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking shall be the same as for the most similar use specifically mentioned. 
C.  Optional parking study. Applicants may submit a parking study as part of the development plan that illustrates the actual demand for the proposed use. 
D.  Shared parking (two or more uses on same site). Shared parking shall be based on the type of uses and the hours of operations. The total number of required parking spaces may be reduced up to 25 percent if each of the following criteria are met: 
1.  The property owner(s) provide the city with a shared parking agreement signed by each property owner or authorized agent. 
2.  Shared parking matrix. City standards shall be used to calculate the shared parking usage percentages for multiple uses according to the shared parking matrix below: 
	WEEKDAY 	WEEKEND 
USE 	1:00 a.m.—7:00 a.m. 	7:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. 	6:00 p.m.—1:00 a.m. 	1:00 a.m.—7:00 a.m. 	7:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. 	6:00 p.m.—1:00 a.m. 
Multi-family residential/attached dwelling 	100% 	60% 	100% 	100% 	75% 	95% 
24-7 Reserved parking 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 
Civic facility 	0% 	100% 	10% 	0% 	100% 	30% 
Public administration 	0% 	100% 	10% 	0% 	10% 	0% 
Day care center 	0% 	100% 	0% 	0% 	0% 	0% 
Entertainment establishment 	0% 	40% 	100% 	0% 	80% 	100% 
Office 	5% 	100% 	5% 	0% 	15% 	0% 
Hotel/motel 	100% 	55% 	90% 	100% 	55% 	90% 
Food service establishment * 	20% 	70% 	100% 	30% 	75% 	100% 
Retail/General commercial 	0% 	100% 	80% 	0% 	100% 	60% 
 
* Not 24-hour. 
E.  Location of parking area. 
1.  Required off-street vehicle parking areas shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal structure to be served, or on any lot or parcel of land within 300 feet of the principal structure to be served, or within 600 feet if the structure is located within a transect zone, as measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the off-street parking facility, provided that this provision shall not be interpreted to permit the location of off-street parking spaces within a zoning district where parking facilities are not otherwise permitted. 
2.  All bicycle parking facilities required by this chapter shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the use for which such facilities are required and as close to the building entrance as possible without interfering with the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
3.  Within the transect zones, a minimum of ten percent of the provided bicycle parking shall be located between the street curb and the front of the building. The remainder shall be located a maximum distance of 600 feet from a building entrance. Within the U9 and DT zones, bicycle parking that is not located along the street shall be covered from inclement weather or located within a parking structure. 
F.  Joint use of parking area. The joint use of vehicle parking facilities of more than five spaces by two or more uses is permitted whenever such joint use is practicable and satisfactory to each of the uses intended to be served and when all requirements for location, design and construction can be satisfied. In computing capacities of any joint use, the off-street vehicle parking requirement is the sum of the individual requirements that will occur at the same time, provided that the total of such off-street vehicle parking facilities required for joint or collective use may be reduced during site plan approval in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  That the uses which the joint off-street parking facilities serve do not normally or regularly operate during the same hours of the day or night may be considered; and 
2.  Not more than 60 percent of off-street vehicle parking facilities required for a use may be supplied by off-street vehicle parking facilities which are provided for other buildings or uses. 
G.  Joint use agreement. A copy of an agreement between joint uses shall be filed with the application for a building permit. The agreement shall include a guarantee for continued use and maintenance of the parking facility by each party to the joint use. 
H.  Leased parking facilities. Required off-street vehicle parking areas may be leased (the "leased area") with boundaries clearly delineated in the lease by the owner or operator of the principal structure to be served, provided the owner or operator enters into a written lease agreement, which shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney, under the following terms and conditions: 
1.  The leased area is within 300 feet, or within 600 feet if the structure is located within a transect zone, of the main entrance of the principal structure measured to the nearest point of the leased area; 
2.  The leased area shall be clearly marked with appropriate signage indicating that the area is for the exclusive use of the principal structure, except in a transect zone, wherein the leased area may be jointly used with another principal structure provided the uses in such principal structures do not normally or regularly operate during the same hours of the day or night and otherwise comply with the provisions of subsection F. of this section; 
3.  The leased area shall comply with, the landscaping section and the design requirements of this chapter; 
4.  The term of the lease for the leased area shall be a minimum of three years with a minimum one-year cancellation clause; and 
5.  The lease shall expressly provide that the use of the principal structure is expressly contingent upon the parking facilities of the leased area, and if the lease is terminated for any reason the owner or operator of the principal structure shall immediately cease operations and terminate the use of the principal structure unless and until additional required off-street parking facilities are provided in accordance with provisions of this article. 
I.  Assessed parking. The required off-street vehicle parking for a particular use shall be reduced by its proportionate share of publicly owned public parking for which it has been specifically assessed. The applicant shall acknowledge through an agreement or a statement in the development plan that the city retains the right to remove the on-street parking. 
J.  Enforcement. Off-street parking facilities shall be maintained and continued as an accessory use as long as the principal use is continued. It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of any building, structure or use controlled by this article to discontinue, change, dispense with, sell or transfer any required parking facilities, including those leased or jointly used, without establishing alternative vehicle parking facilities which meet the requirements of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to utilize a building, structure or use without providing the off-street parking facilities to meet the requirements of this article.  
Sec. 30-7.2. - Off-street vehicle parking. 
Off-street vehicle parking, including public parking facilities, shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
A.  Access. Vehicular ingress and egress to off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the driveway ordinance, chapter 23, article V. 
B.  General requirements. Parking areas shall be so designed and marked as to provide for orderly and safe movement and storage of vehicles. 
1.  All parking spaces shall contain some type of vehicle wheel stop or other approved barrier that prevents any part of a vehicle from overhanging onto the right-of-way of any public road, alley, walkway, utility or landscaped area. 
2.  All parking lots with two or more rows of interior parking shall contain grassed and/or landscaped medians at least eight feet in width unless an alternative landscape plan is approved pursuant to section 30-8.4. Where it is determined by public works that the landscaped median(s) would obstruct the storm drainage, the city manager or designee may approve an alternative. 
3.  Off-street parking on any property with RC, RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, or RSF-4 zoning, or planned development (PD) zoning with single-family or two-family dwellings, and that is located within either the University of Florida context area or a residential parking overlay district area shall be regulated in accordance with section 30-7.7. 
4.  Maneuvering and access driveways for off-street parking areas, except those provided for single-family dwellings, shall be provided within the lot on which the parking is located so that any vehicle shall not be required to back into or maneuver within the public street right-of-way on entering or leaving any off-street parking space. 
5.  The minimum distance from the street right-of-way line at any major ingress or egress driveway to any interior service drive or parking space having direct access to such driveway shall be 100 feet. A major driveway is defined as the main ingress or egress point as approved by the city plan board, development review board or technical review committee. 
6.  The minimum distance from the street right-of-way line at any other ingress or egress driveway to any interior service drive or parking space with direct access from such driveway shall be 20 feet. However, the city manager or designee may allow a reduction of the 20-foot requirement, provided generally accepted traffic principles are maintained, under the following conditions: 
a.  Where an existing vehicular use area would be impractical to meet the 20-foot requirement; or 
b.  Where an existing vehicular use area proposed for improvement exists with less than the required 20 feet; or 
c.  For any new development or redevelopment of a vehicular use area, except a vehicular use area with direct access to any roadway classified on the official roadway map, the minimum distance from the right-of-way line at any other ingress or egress driveway to any interior service drive or parking space with direct access from such driveway may be nine feet (which distance also meets landscape requirements) provided all of the following conditions are met for each type of use: 
i.  Residential off-street parking: 
1)  Vehicular use area access: from alleys or local streets (streets designed for or carrying traffic volumes of under 1,200 vehicles per day); 
2)  Available right-of-way from edge of pavement to the private property line: Ten feet minimum (not required for alleys); 
3)  Speed limit: The posted speed limit is 30 mph or less; and 
4)  Use: Generates less than 300 trips per day. 
ii.  Nonresidential off-street parking: 
1)  Vehicular use area access: From alleys or local streets designed for traffic volumes under 1,200 vehicles per day; 
2)  Available right-of-way from edge of pavement to the private property line: Ten feet minimum (not required for alleys); 
3)  Speed limit: The posted speed limit is 35 mph or less; 
4)  Size of parking lot: 25 or fewer nonresidential parking spaces; and 
5)  Use: Generates less than 100 trips per day. 
C.  Construction specifications. 
1.  Paved parking facilities. Except as provided in subsection 2. below, all off-street parking areas shall be paved using asphaltic concrete, concrete, paving block or brick, and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by resolution of the city commission and on file in the public works department. 
2.  Unpaved parking facilities. Unpaved spaces shall be located on the periphery of any paved parking areas in locations that will receive less use than those paved and more remotely located to the use served. All gravel areas shall be self-contained with curbing that is acceptable to the public works department. The following parking facilities may be unpaved, provided such facilities are approved by the city plan board, development review board, or the city manager or designee to be in compliance with this section and other applicable requirements of the Land Development Code: 
a.  Up to 70 percent of the required vehicle parking spaces for places of religious assembly provided that such unpaved parking spaces shall not be used as joint parking with any uses other than places of religious assembly. 
b.  Up to 20 percent of the total required spaces for multi-family dwellings, in accordance with section 30-7.2 C.3. 
c.  Parking spaces provided in excess of the minimum number required by this article, or for uses not required to provide parking spaces. 
d.  Parking lots located in the residential districts, as identified in section 30-4.1, when said lots contain ten or fewer parking spaces and parking lots in the office districts when such lots contain less than seven parking spaces. 
e.  College Park/University Heights areas in accordance with section 30-7.7 B. 
3.  Multiple-family dwellings with more than six parking spaces. 
a.  If approved in site plan review, up to 20 percent of the total required vehicle parking spaces for multi-family dwellings may be provided by stabilized unpaved parking. 
b.  Six months after a final certificate of occupancy is issued or, if phased, upon installation of all parking facilities required, an inspection will be made by the city manager or designee. If findings indicate that the unpaved spaces are in good condition or infrequently used, such unpaved spaces may remain unpaved. If findings show that the spaces receive as much use as the paved spaces, or have deteriorated, such unpaved spaces shall be paved within 90 calendar days of written notice to the owner of the property. 
c.  Stormwater management facilities shall be provided for all vehicle use areas, whether paved or unpaved, at the time of construction unless the owner demonstrates that stormwater management facilities can be expanded to accommodate future required paving and upon recommendation of the Public Works Department. 
d.  A violation of the Code of Ordinances occurs if the unpaved parking area deteriorates so that nearby properties, rights-of-way or easements are adversely impacted or if the unpaved parking area has deteriorated so that it may no longer be used for parking. Evidence of deterioration includes but is not limited to: 
i.  The settlement of the unpaved parking area(s) such that drainage patterns are redirected onto off-site properties rather than the intended stormwater management facilities. 
ii.  Absence or failed condition of the approved unpaved parking surface. 
iii.  Introduction of sediment and debris from the unpaved parking area onto city rights-of-way and easements. 
e.  To remedy this violation, the city may require the property owner to pave the area or to stabilize the area in another manner. If paving is deemed necessary by the city, the property owner may be required to expand the stormwater management facilities as provided in subsection C.3.c. of this section. 
4.  Vehicles and equipment display and storage areas. 
a.  When allowed as a permitted use, parking, storage or display of automobiles for sale or lease shall be conducted on a paved hard surface. 
b.  All mechanical equipment and merchandise shall be installed or displayed on a paved hard surface. 
c.  Temporary parking and storage may be allowed by the city manager or designee for up to 60 calendar days in areas outside of the wellfield protection zones. The city shall make a determination that: 
i.  The location of the facility will not be harmful to, nor impact surface waters, wetlands or other environmentally sensitive areas; 
ii.  The nature, extent and duration of the proposed storage area will not create a nuisance or safety hazard; 
iii.  That the storage use will be of an intensity that will maintain sod or some other vegetative cover; and 
iv.  That the applicant has a plan to return the site to an original or improved condition. 
D.  Dimensional requirements. Vehicular parking widths and depths shall meet the specifications in the Design Manual. 
E.  Handicapped parking. Accessible handicapped parking spaces shall comply with the state accessibility requirements manual on file at the building inspection department. 
F.  Tandem parking. When administered as a valet parking service, required off-street parking may be placed in a tandem configuration upon approval by the development review board, the city plan board, or the city manager or designee where development plan review before the city plan board or development review board is not required. The area used for tandem parking shall be clearly designated on a development plan and shall meet all landscaping requirements, except that the location of required interior landscaping shall be determined at the time of development review. Approval of tandem parking configuration shall be based on continued maintenance of the administered parking service. If and when the service is discontinued, the regular off-street parking configuration of aisle and spaces shall be reinstituted and the minimum parking spaces required shall be provided in accordance with this article. When using this option the property owner shall demonstrate that private streets, vehicular maneuvering areas, service areas, loading and unloading area, queuing areas and any regular parking space can function efficiently and will not obstruct the efficient flow of traffic, service, utility and vehicles on the site.  
Sec. 30-7.3. - Structured parking. 
A.  Development plans for new parking garages as a principal or accessory use shall: 
1.  Minimize conflict with pedestrian and bicycle travel routes; 
2.  Provide parking for residents, employees, and/or customers in order to reduce the need for on-site surface parking; 
3.  Be located and designed to discourage vehicle access through residential streets; and 
4.  Design facilities for compatibility with neighborhoods by including ground floor retail, office, or residential use/development (as appropriate for the zoning district) when located on a public street. The facility shall also have window and facade design that is scaled to relate to the surrounding area. 
B.  Structured parking shall not be located within 100 feet of property zoned for single-family use. 
C.  Accessory automotive detailing may be allowed within structured parking facilities. These accessory uses may be allotted an area equal to no more than five parking spaces within the parking structure. One exterior sign of no more than six square feet at an entrance to the garage is allowed in association with accessory automotive detailing.  
Sec. 30-7.4. - Bicycle and motorcycle parking. 
A.  Required bicycle parking facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Bicycle parking facilities shall include provision for the secure storage and locking of bicycles on a hard surface at least seven feet in length. All required bicycle parking facilities shall be from an approved list of bicycle parking devices that is adopted by the city commission and maintained by the city. Other bicycle parking devices may be used if it can be established to the satisfaction of the building official that they are equivalent to any devices on the approved list in function, quality and construction. 
2.  Fixed objects that are intended to serve as bicycle parking facilities shall be clearly labelled as available for bicycle parking. 
3.  If a room or common locker not divided into individual lockers or rack spaces is used, one bicycle space shall consist of an area that is at least 12 square feet with locking devices. Adequate aisle widths shall be provided in rooms or common lockers. Bike racks should be spaced at least two and one-half feet on center. 
4.  Individual locker spaces or racks shall be designed to provide convenient ramped access to users. 
B.  Motorcycle spaces or stalls shall be a minimum of three feet in width. The locations and design of motorcycle stalls shall be in accordance with current engineering practices and motorcycle parking design and construction specifications on file in the public works department. Motorcycle parking stalls shall be constructed of concrete, suitable asphaltic, approved pervious surface or other material as approved by the city manager or designee that is not subject to motorcycle kickstand damage. Motorcycle parking shall be clearly labeled as such.  
Sec. 30-7.5. - Required number of parking spaces. 
A.  Generally. The number of parking spaces required for each use shall be as provided in this section. In computing the number of parking spaces required, a fractional space of one-half space or more shall be counted as one space. The number of parking spaces listed in the tables in this section shall be the specific number of spaces required, unless the provision specifically identifies the number as a minimum or maximum. 
1.  Vehicular parking. 
a.  At development plan review, the approving authority may allow bicycle parking facilities that are in addition to the minimum number of required bicycle parking facilities to substitute for up to 85 percent of vehicle parking spaces on a four-for-one basis. Such substitution shall be made upon presentation of evidence by the owner of the property that the proposed use will be better served through the provision of additional bicycle facilities. 
b.  At development plan review, the approving authority may allow ten additional spaces or up to ten percent greater than the maximum allowed, whichever number is greater, upon presentation of evidence by the owner of the property that the proposed use has a justifiable need for the additional parking spaces. 
2.  Bicycle parking. Unless otherwise specified, the required number of bicycle parking spaces is stated as a percentage of the required vehicular spaces. 
3.  Motorcycle and scooter parking. 
a.  For developments that are in the University of Florida Context Area, but that are outside of the transect zones, the minimum requirement shall be one space per ten bedrooms. 
b.  Scooter and motorcycle parking maybe substituted for required vehicle parking space on a one-to-one basis for development requiring less than 40 spaces. 
c.  Proposed developments requiring 40 vehicular parking spaces or more shall provide off-street motorcycle and scooter parking spaces at a ratio of one space per 40 vehicle spaces required by this section. At development plan review, the approving authority may allow motorcycle and scooter parking spaces that are in addition to the minimum number of required parking spaces to substitute for up to 15 percent of required vehicle parking spaces on a one-to-one basis. 
4.  Relocatable structures. Any development within an ED district shall comply with the parking requirements as set forth in this article, except that off-street parking facilities for relocatable structures are not required to be constructed for three years from the date of placement of the relocatable structure on a lot. However, the construction of off-street parking facilities in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be commenced within 90 calendar days whenever any relocatable structure has been on a lot for a period of more than three years. The movement of a relocatable structure from one portion of a school lot to another location, or the replacement of one relocatable structure with another relocatable structure, shall not extend the aforesaid time limits prescribed herein. 
Transect 	Min. Vehicle Spaces 	Min. Bicycle Spaces 	Min. Scooter Spaces 
	Nonresidential Use 	Residential Use 	Nonresidential Use 	Residential Use 	
DT 	- 	- 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 6 bedrooms 
U9 	- 	- 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 6 bedrooms 
U8 	- 	- 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 6 bedrooms 
U7 	- 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 6 bedrooms 
U6 	- 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 6 bedrooms 
U5 	- 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	1 per 3 bedrooms 	- 
U4 	Per requirements of this article. 	
U3 		
U2 		
U1 		
 
Use 	Required Vehicle Spaces 	Required Bicycle Spaces 
Auditoriums and sports arenas or stadia, based on fixed seating capacity 	1 for each 4 seats. 	10% 
Automotive service, limited 	1 for each 200 square feet of floor area. 	2 spaces 
Auto wrecking, junkyards and salvage yards 	5, plus 1 for each acre in excess of 5 acres. 	None 
Baseball fields 	10 per baseball diamond plus 1 space for each 4 seats designated for spectators. Where benches are used, 2.5 feet of bench shall be equivalent to 1 seat. 	
Basketball courts 	5 per court. 	
Beauty and barber schools 	3, plus 1 for each operator station. 	20% 
Beauty salons/barbershops 	2 per beauty or barber chair. 	10% 
Bowling alleys 	2 for each alley. 	15% 
Car wash facilities 	With employees, 3 spaces minimum. Queuing spaces shall be provided to accommodate a minimum of 3 vehicles. Addition or reduction in the number of queuing spaces may be determined by the city manager or designee. Queuing spaces shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the right-of-way. 	2 spaces if there are employees. 
Civic, social and fraternal organizations 	1 for each 40 square feet of floor area in principal area(s) of assembly. 	10% 
Community residential homes: 		
 1 to 6 residents 	1 per home. 	0 
 7 to 14 residents: 		
  (1) Where residents are allowed to keep motorized vehicles on premises. 	1 per bedroom. 	As required for multiple-family dwellings in the district located. 
  (2) Where residents are not allowed to keep motorized vehicles on premises. 	1 per each employee in the largest work shift, plus 1 per each 5 residents, or fraction thereof. 	
 More than 14 residents: 		
  (1) Where residents are allowed to keep motorized vehicles on premises. 	1 per bedroom. 	As required for multiple-family dwellings in the district located. 
  (2) Where residents are not allowed to keep motorized vehicles on premises. 	1 per each employee in the largest work shift, plus 1 per each 5 residents, or fraction thereof. 	
Dancehalls and exhibition halls, without fixed seats, based on floor area devoted to public assembly 	1 for each 100 square feet of floor area devoted to the principal activity. 	5% 
Dance schools other than ballrooms 	5, plus 1 for each 150 square feet of dance floor area in excess of 500 square feet. 	10% 
Day care centers 	1 designed for the safe and convenient loading and unloading of persons for every 10 persons based upon the center's regulated capacity, with a minimum of 4 spaces, plus 1 parking space per every employee at maximum staff level. Adequate space for queuing, loading and unloading shall be provided. 	10% 
Group housing, large except sorority and fraternity houses 	1 per every 400 square feet of floor area. 	50% 
Drive-through food service establishments with seating 	3, plus 1 for each 3 seats of seating capacity where service is provided. 	10% 
Drive-through food service establishments with no seating 	1 for each employee plus 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 	10% 
Dry cleaning, pickup 	3, plus 1 for each 500 square feet floor area in excess of 1,000 square feet. 	3 spaces 
Funeral homes and crematories 	1 for each 5 seats in the chapel(s). 	4 spaces 
Golf courses 	6 per hole, plus required spaces for restaurants and cocktail lounges. 	4 spaces 
Grocery stores 	1 for each 200 square feet of floor area. 	10% up to a maximum of 15 spaces 
Gymnasia and fitness facilities 	10, plus 1 per 150 square feet of floor area in excess of 1,000 square feet or 1 space for each 4 seats, whichever is greater. 	25% 
Hospitals 	1.5 spaces per bed. 	5% 
Hotels and motels 	5, plus 1 for each guestroom, plus 75% of required spaces for restaurants, retail outlets and other accessory uses. 	4 spaces 
Housing for the elderly 	1 for every 3 living units. 	50% 
Laboratories medical and dental, when a primary use 	4, plus 1 for each 300 square feet of floor area in excess of 1,000 square feet. 	10% 
Laundromat 	1 for each 3 washing or drying machine. 	2 spaces 
Libraries 	1 for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 	20% 
Manufacturing and industrial uses with no retail trade 	1 per 500 square feet of floor area. 	5% 
Mini-warehousing, self-storage 	5, or 1 for manager's area(s), plus 1 per 200 bays, whichever is greater. 	5% 
Movie theaters 	1 for each 3 seats. 	10% 
Multiple-family dwellings 	1 parking space per bedroom, excluding transect zones; see section 30-4.15 for transect zone parking requirements. 	1 per 3 bedrooms in all transect zones; 10% all other districts. 
Museums 	1 parking space per 500 square feet of exhibit display. 	25% 
Nursery and garden store 	10, plus 1 for each 150 square feet inside sales area over 1,000 square feet, and 1 per 2,000 square feet outside sales area open to the public. 	2 spaces 
Nursing homes 	1 per 2 beds. 	5% 
Offices and business and professional services 	1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space per employee, whichever is greater. 	10% 
Offices, medical and dental 	1 for each 150 square feet of floor area. 	5% 
Park facilities not listed 	Parking study required. 	4 spaces for the first 10 acres plus 1 for every 5 acres or part thereof over 10 acres up to a maximum of 20 spaces. 
Picnic tables 	1 for every 3 picnic tables over 5 tables. 	
Places of religious assembly 	1 for each 4 seats, or 1 for each 40 square feet of floor area in principal area(s) of assembly. 	10% 
Pool halls 	2 for each table. 	20% 
Public swimming pools and private swim clubs 	1 per 200 square feet of pool surface area (not including wading pools or whirlpool baths) plus 1 for each 200 square feet of building area in accessory structures in excess of 1,000 square feet. 	25% 
Public tennis courts and private tennis clubs, and racquetball courts 	2 per court, plus 1 for each 200 square feet of clubhouse floor area in excess of 1,000 square feet. 	20% 
Recreation, indoor not elsewhere classified 	4 per 1,000 square feet gross floor area accessible to the public. 	25% 
Rehabilitation centers, social service homes and halfway houses 	1 per 500 square feet of floor area. 	10% 
Restaurants 	3, plus 1 for each 3 seats of seating capacity where service is provided. 	10% 
Restaurants with no seating 	1 for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 	10% 
Retail sales, large scale 	1 per 500 square feet of floor area. 	5% 
Retail sales and personal services not listed elsewhere 	1 per 250 square feet of floor area. 	10% 
Schools, Elementary 	30, plus 2 per classroom. 	100% 
Schools, Middle 	35, plus 2 spaces per classroom. 	200% 
Schools, High 	1 per employee plus 1 per 10 students of design capacity. 	100% 
Single-family dwellings, mobile homes, family day care homes, foster family homes for children and for adults and group homes, small 	1 per dwelling unit, mobile home, foster family home for children or for adults or group homes, small. 	0; 10% if subsidized housing for low income residents. 
Social service homes 	1 per 2 paid employees and volunteer employees present during largest shift and 1 parking space for every 4 beds. 	10% 
Sorority and fraternity houses with living accommodations 	1 per every 110 square feet of bedroom floor area devoted to members plus 1 per each resident advisor, plus 1 per every 50 square feet of floor area devoted to dining and meeting rooms over 2,500 square feet. 	50% 
Storage associated with the principal use where the floor area of the storage space is greater than 50% of the floor area devoted to the principal use 	1 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area designated for storage. 	
T-hangers (airport) 	1 per 3 hangers. 	None 
Trade, vocational and business not otherwise classified, and professional schools 	1 per employee, plus 1 per 3 students of design capacity. 	20% 
Transportation services (railroad, bus, air terminals) 	1 for each 5 seats of seating capacity in waiting terminals. 	10% 
Two-family and attached dwellings 	2 per dwelling unit. 	0 
Vehicle repair 	1 per 200 square feet of floor area, including any outdoor work space. 	2 spaces 
Vehicle sales and rental 	3, or 1 space per 500 square feet of floor area (including covered display areas, offices and service areas), plus 1 space per 5,000 square feet of outdoor storage and display area, whichever is greater. 	5% 
Veterinary services 	1 for each 500 square feet of floor area exclusive of boarding areas. 	5% 
Wholesale products with retail trade 	10, plus 1 for each 120 square feet retail sales area in excess of 1,000 square feet and 1 per 750 square feet of warehouse area open to the public. 	5% 
Wholesale trade and warehousing with no retail trade 	3, plus 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area. 	5% 
 
1  The parking ratios for these uses shall serve as a guide in determining overflow grass parking requirements. 
B.  Overflow parking. In situations where development proposals contain recreational facilities that are planned for regularly scheduled activities, the reviewing authority may require at site plan review, upon advice of the public works department, additional parking to be provided as overflow grass parking. 
C.  Reduction in number of required parking spaces. At site plan review, the reviewing authority may authorize a reduction in the number of required vehicular parking spaces if it is determined: 1) there will be adequate access to the development by acceptable alternative means, 2) that the reduction will not infringe upon the parking and access available to other properties in the area, and 3) that the reduction is not needed primarily for the erection, construction or placement of any building on any land. In addition, the reviewing authority shall consider the following criteria: 
1.  Evidence that patrons and/or employees of the establishment will arrive by a transportation mode other than private vehicles. 
2.  Evidence that there are an adequate number of parking spaces in the vicinity that are available to the general public who will use the development without reducing the spaces available to and used by other establishments. 
3.  Evidence that the proposed use and likely future uses of the development will generate less parking than the minimum requirement of this chapter. 
4.  Provision of convenient pedestrian and bicyclist access to the site based on its location and the development plan. 
5.  Evidence that a reduction in required parking will not result in unauthorized on-street parking or use of parking provided by nearby businesses. 
6.  In the case of the reuse or redevelopment of a site, evidence that a reduction in the parking requirement will enhance the ability to reuse an existing developed site. 
7.  Whether the uses on site serve the recurring household needs and personal service requirements of the occupants of nearby residential areas, and are located in close proximity to a small service area. 
8.  The number of existing parking spaces within 300 feet of the proposed use.  
Sec. 30-7.6. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
A.  Purpose. In order to prevent undue interference with public use of streets and alleys, every manufacturing, storage, warehouse, department store, variety store, wholesale store, laundry, dry cleaning, dairy, mortuary and other uses similarly and customarily receiving or distributing goods by motor vehicles shall provide loading and unloading space on the premises for that number of vehicles normally at the premises at any one time on an average day of full use. 
B.  Loading and unloading space. 
1.  Every building housing a use mentioned in this section and having over 5,000 square feet of gross floor area but less than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be provided with at least one off-street loading/unloading space, immediately adjacent to the principal building. In addition, one off-street loading/unloading space shall be provided for each additional 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof over 20,000 square feet up to 50,000 square feet, plus one for each 25,000 square feet over 50,000 square feet. Where the requirement exceeds five loading spaces, the traffic engineer shall determine whether additional spaces are needed and to what extent. Such space is defined as an area of at least 50 feet in depth, 12 feet in width and with an overhead clearance of not less than 14 feet, exclusive of access, platform or maneuvering area, to be used exclusively for loading and unloading of merchandise. The exact dimensions of the loading/unloading space(s) shall be subject to the approval of the traffic engineer. 
2.  Access to all truck standing, loading and unloading facilities shall be provided directly from a public street or alley and shall be so designed that all maneuvering areas are located on the property. 
3.  Loading spaces required under this subsection shall be provided onsite as an area additional to off-street parking spaces as required in this article and shall not be considered as supplying off-street parking spaces. 
4.  Loading areas within a transect zone shall be located in the rear of the site, incorporated into the building mass, or screened from public view by a wall (up to a maximum of eight feet) and landscaping.  
Sec. 30-7.7. - Residential parking. 
A.  Residential parking. This section is established to regulate off-street parking on specific property located in the following zoning districts: RC, RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, or RSF-4 or in a district containing single family or two-family dwellings on property zoned planned development (PD). 
1.  Purpose and effect. This section allows residents to take affirmative steps to preserve the character of their residential and single-family neighborhoods and to enhance the public health, welfare and safety as well as the aesthetic value of their property by controlling off-street parking. Furthermore, healthy vegetation with an above-ground network of leaves, shoots, and stems and an extensive fibrous root system below reduces soil erosion and noise, and improves surface and groundwater by filtering rainwater. 
This section acts as an overlay, in that the regulations of the underling zoning district and all other applicable regulations remain in effect and are further regulated by the residential parking overlay district standards described in this section. If provisions of this section conflict with the underling zoning, the provisions of this section shall govern and prevail. 
2.  Criteria. 
a.  The proposed area shall consist of at least 25 compact and contiguous parcels, as defined in this chapter. 
b.  The area shall not cause the creation of an enclave or peninsula, as commonly defined in annexations. 
c.  Each boundary of the area shall be one of the following identifiable landmarks: A street, alley, publicly owned right-of-way, platted subdivision boundary, or a creek. 
d.  No area boundaries shall overlap the boundary of an existing residential parking overlay district or the context area. 
e.  The area shall consist only of parcels that are in a RC, RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, or RSF-4 zoning district, or in a district of single-family or two-family dwellings on property zoned PD. 
3.  Procedures. 
a.  To create a residential parking overlay, a petition requesting imposition of the overlay district on an area that meets the criteria described above shall be submitted to the city manager or designee on forms provided by the city. Each petition shall meet the following requirements: 
i.  The individual circulating the petition forms ("petitioner") shall obtain the requisite petition form from the city manager or designee. 
ii.  The petitioner shall be an "owner", as defined in this chapter, of property located within the proposed overlay district area and shall be a signatory to the petition. 
iii.  The petitioner shall submit to the city manager or designee an accurate, reproducible map of the proposed residential parking overlay district. 
iv.  Each petition shall contain authentic signatures of at least 60 percent of the fee simple record title owners of the lots or parcels within the proposed overlay district area, exclusive of public property. 
v.  To be verified by the city, signatures shall be accompanied by the legibly printed name of the signer, the address of the parcel owned by the signer, the parcel number of the parcel owned by the signer, and the date the petition is signed. 
vi.  Jointly owned parcels are considered owned by a single person, for purpose of the petition, and any co-owner may sign a petition for the parcel. Only one owner of each parcel shall be included in the 60 percent requirement stated above. If a person owns more than one parcel of property within the proposed district area, that person may sign the petition one time for each parcel owned. 
vii.  Signatures dated more than six months prior to the date the petition is filed with the city are not acceptable. 
viii.  For a signature to be verified, Alachua County Property Appraiser records shall indicate that the printed name of the petition signatory is consistent with the name of the property owner as listed in the current records of the Alachua County Property Appraiser. 
ix.  The petition shall clearly and accurately advise each putative signer of the type of restrictions that may be imposed on the property if the overlay district is imposed upon the area. 
x.  The petition shall clearly and accurately describe the proposed boundaries of the area. 
b.  When the petition is submitted to the city manager or designee, the city manager or designee shall verify the names and signatures, and shall determine whether the petition meets the criteria of this section. 
c.  To pay for the cost of verifying signatures, the city shall charge a fee as set forth in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances. 
d.  If an insufficient number of acceptable owner signatures are submitted, the city shall return the petition to the petitioner and the city shall retain the fee. 
e.  If a sufficient number of acceptable owner signatures are submitted, the petitioner may apply for the rezoning of the area with the imposition of the overlay district as provided in this chapter for zoning changes (including application fees, public notice, and public hearings before the city plan board and the city commission). 
f.  Criteria used to evaluate parcels for rezoning. The following criteria shall be used to evaluate the appropriateness of imposing this overlay district on the area: 
i.  The petitioner shall submit evidence of the impact of off-street parking on the quality of vegetation or runoff within the proposed overlay district area. Such evidence includes, but is not limited to, evidence that off-street parking is resulting in a negative impact to the quality of the vegetation of parcels or contributing to a decline in said quality within the proposed area; and 
ii.  The petitioner shall submit evidence that off-street parking is resulting in a negative aesthetic impact to lots or parcels within the proposed area, or the effect of that off-street parking on the environment of the area. 
g.  The petition for imposition of the overlay district shall be considered by the city plan board for its recommendation to the city commission. In order to impose the overlay district upon parcels within an area, an affirmative vote of the city commission is required. If the petition or ordinance fails, a subsequent petition for imposition of the overlay district on all or any portion of the area may not be included in a new petition unless at least one year has transpired from the date of submittal of the previous petition for imposition of the overlay on an area. 
4.  Off-street parking regulations in the context area and in any residential parking overlay. Off-street parking shall be limited to the driveway parking area meeting the dimensional requirements below and leading from the permitted driveway connection to the enclosed parking space (garage or carport), plus two pullout spaces as described below. If there is no garage or carport, the driveway parking area shall meet the dimensional requirements below and be able to provide parking and ingress or egress of vehicles. 
a.  The maximum width of the driveway parking area is the greater of 18 feet or the maximum width of the enclosed parking space. 
b.  Pullout spaces can be no more than nine feet wide and 16 feet long; shall be covered with pavement, gravel, wood chips, bark mulch, or other erosion-preventing material clearly defining the pullout spaces; and shall be contiguous to the driveway parking area. 
c.  Notwithstanding subsections a. and b. above, no more than 40 percent of front open space may be devoted to driveway parking area and pullout spaces. 
d.  Circular driveway parking areas meeting the above dimensional requirements are permitted provided the necessary driveway connections are provided; however only one pullout space is allowed with a circular driveway parking area. 
e.  Access to all driveway parking areas shall be from an approved or existing legal driveway connection. 
f.  All unpaved driveway parking areas and pullout spaces shall be covered with gravel, wood chips, bark mulch, or other erosion-preventing material clearly defining the driveway parking area, and have side borders of plants, pressure treated landscape timbers, railroad ties, pressure treated wood, composite "plastic wood", brick, concrete or similar border materials. 
i.  Erosion preventing material. 
1)  Where bark mulch or wood chips are used, they shall cover the entire surface of the driveway parking area and pullout spaces with a layer that is at least two inches thick. They shall be distributed evenly within the borders and shall be free of bare spots and vegetation. Other types of mulch may be used only after approval from the city manager or designee. 
2)  Where gravel is used, it shall cover the entire surface of the driveway parking area and pullout spaces with a layer that is at least one inch thick. The gravel shall be evenly distributed within the borders and shall be free of bare spots and vegetation. The material used for a gravel parking area and/or pullout space shall be rock or crushed stone, shall not be more than one and one-half inches in diameter, and shall not contain dirt, sticks, construction debris or other foreign material. Sand, rock powder, or other similar material less than one-eighth inch in diameter may be used as a base, but shall not be included when measuring the gravel thickness. 
3)  Leaves, pine needles, grass clippings, canvas, plastic sheets, poly sheets, or other similar rolled sheeting shall not be used as an erosion preventing material. 
4)  The erosion preventing material shall be clearly stated on the submitted parking plan and approved by the city manager or designee prior to its use. 
ii.  Borders. 
1)  Plant borders shall be a one-gallon minimum size at the time of planting, spaced no greater than 36 inches apart. Plants shall be a minimum of 12 inches high when planted and shall be maintained at no less than 12 inches high. 
2)  Wood borders shall be pressure treated or be treated to prevent the decomposition of the wood when the wood is applied to the ground surface. The minimum size of any wood borders or composite plastic wood borders shall be three and one-half inches wide by three and one-half inches high and shall be continuous around the border. Multiple pieces can be stacked to achieve the required size. Where railroad ties are used, the ties shall be structurally sound and fully intact and shall be continuous around the border. All wood borders or composite plastic wood borders shall be affixed to the ground by driving a metal stake through the wood/plastic into the ground. At least two stakes shall be driven into each wood or composite plastic wood border segment. The distance between stakes shall not be more than four feet. The metal stake shall be a minimum of three-eighths of an inch in diameter and driven a minimum of 12 inches below the ground surface. The metal stake shall be driven flush with the surface of the wood/plastic. 
3)  Brick curbing shall be set in a mortar base and shall be a minimum of three and one-half inches wide by three and one-half inches high. Concrete curbing may be pre-cast, formed or machine extruded and shall be a minimum of six inches wide by six inches high and consist of a concrete mix with a minimum strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch. Brick and concrete curbing shall be continuous around the border. Pre-cast concrete curbing shall be affixed to the ground by driving a metal stake through the curbing into the ground. At least two stakes shall be driven into each piece of pre-cast concrete. The distance between stakes shall not be more than four feet. The metal stake shall be a minimum of three-eighths of an inch in diameter and driven a minimum of 12 inches below the ground surface. The metal stake shall be driven flush with the surface of the curbing. 
4)  Other borders may be used only after approval of the city manager or designee. All parking plans shall include a full description, including specifications, of the proposed border. 
g.  Off-street parking on other areas of property regulated by this subsection will be allowed on the day of major university related events as determined by the city manager or designee, such as University of Florida commencement programs and University of Florida home football games, subject to the following regulations: 
i.  Parking is allowed only on the day of the event commencing at 8:00 a.m. and concluding at 12:00 a.m. or three hours after conclusion of the event, whichever occurs later. Vehicles may remain parked overnight, provided they are not occupied and may only be picked up the day after the event between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. 
ii.  All trash, signs, and other physical items associated with the parking must be removed by 6:00 p.m. the day after the event. 
iii.  If any portable toilets are provided, they may be placed on the property the day prior to the event and must be removed by 6:00 p.m. on the second day after the event. 
iv.  The parking area must be located solely within private property and may not extend onto any public property or public right-of-way. 
h.  The city manager or designee may exempt a property from the driveway parking area limitations if all of the following conditions are found: 
i.  The driveway parking area is clearly defined. 
ii.  The driveway parking area is maintained in a safe, sanitary and neat condition. 
iii.  The driveway parking area does not contribute to soil erosion. 
iv.  The requirements of this section would impose an inordinate burden on the landowner due to topographical road configuration constraints or other significant design constraints. 
i.  Each owner of property regulated by this subsection shall provide a parking plan showing the driveway parking areas and any pullout spaces. This plan shall be submitted as part of an application for a landlord permit. For residential properties that do not require landlord permits, the parking plan shall be submitted upon request of the city manager or designee within 30 calendar days of receiving a written request for a parking plan from the city manager or designee. Within 45 calendar days of the city manager or designee's approval of the new parking plan, the new plan shall be implemented and the parking area and any pullout spaces shall be constructed in the manner in this approved parking plan. When the new plan is implemented, the city manager or designee shall inspect the parking area and any pullout spaces for compliance. 
j.  No driveway parking area regulated by this subsection may be leased, rented, or otherwise provided for consideration to someone not residing on the property, except as specifically provided otherwise in this article. 
k.  If a property is found by the city manager or designee to not be in compliance with one or more of the provisions of the existing parking plan for that property, as approved by the city manager or designee, the owner of that property may be required to submit to the city manager or designee a new, modified parking plan which is in compliance with the requirements of this section. This modified parking plan for the non-compliant property shall be received by the city manager or designee within 30 calendar days of the owner's receipt of a written request for the new parking plan. Within 45 calendar days of the city manager or designee's approval of the new parking plan, the new plan shall be implemented and the parking area and any pullout spaces shall be constructed in the manner in this approved parking plan. When the new plan is implemented, the city manager or designee shall inspect the parking area and any pullout spaces for compliance. 
l.  Where applicable, this plan shall be submitted as part of an application for a landlord permit and shall be approved by the city manager or designee prior to the issuance of a landlord permit. In all cases, each owner of property zoned RC, RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3, or RSF-4 zoning district, or that contains single-family or two-family dwellings on property zoned planned development (PD), which is within the context area, shall provide the city manager or designee with an updated parking plan showing the driveway parking areas and any pullout spaces no later than April 1, 2007, or in conjunction with the landlord permit application, whichever date comes earlier. 
B.  College Park/University Heights Unpaved Parking Overlay. With the exception of any properties that are regulated by subsection A. above, off-street unpaved parking within the College Park and University Heights areas as depicted in Figures V-18 and V-19 below shall be subject to the following regulations. 
Figure V-18—College Park
 
Figure V-19—University Heights
 
1.  Exemptions. The city manager or designee may exempt a property from this subsection upon a finding that each of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The parking area is clearly defined; 
b.  The parking area is maintained in a safe and neat condition; 
c.  The parking area does not contribute to soil erosion or run-off of materials that would negatively impact the stormwater system; and 
d.  The requirements of this subsection would impose an inordinate burden on the property owner due to significant design constraints. 
2.  Parking plan. Off-street parking shall be limited to the parking area meeting the dimensional requirements below and leading from the permitted driveway connection to the parking area. Each owner of property regulated by this section shall submit to the code enforcement division, at no fee, a parking plan that clearly depicts: 
a.  The location and extent of the proposed parking area; 
b.  A general circulation plan showing how vehicles will safely access the parking area from a legal driveway connection; and 
c.  The location and type of borders and parking area coverage materials to be used. 
The city manager or designee shall approve a parking plan if it meets the requirements of this section and other applicable requirements of the Land Development Code. Within 90 calendar days of approval by the city manager or designee, the parking plan shall be implemented and the city manager or designee shall inspect the parking area for compliance. 
3.  Borders. All unpaved parking areas shall be bordered with plants, pressure-treated landscape timbers, railroad ties, pressure-treated wood, composite "plastic wood," brick, concrete or similar materials that provide a clear delineation of the parking area and that inhibit runoff of the parking area coverage material. 
a.  Plant borders at the time of planting shall be at least one-gallon in size, at least 12 inches in height, and spaced no greater than 36 inches apart. Any plant borders shall be maintained at a height of at least 12 inches. 
b.  Wood, composite, or brick borders shall be at least three and one-half inches high by three and one-half inches wide and shall be securely affixed to the ground. Wood borders shall be pressure-treated or otherwise treated to inhibit decomposition. 
4.  Parking area coverage material. All unpaved parking areas shall be covered and maintained with gravel, wood chips, mulch, leaves, or similar materials as further specified below: 
# of parking spaces 	Allowable parking area
coverage material 
1—4 	• mulch, 
	• wood chips, 
	• leaves, 
	• pine needles, 
	• gravel, or 
	• pervious pavement materials (e.g., pavers) approved by the public works department 
5 to 8 	• gravel, or 
	• pervious pavement materials (e.g., pavers) approved by the public works department. 
8 or more 	Parking area shall conform to the applicable parking lot standards of the Land Development Code. 
 
a.  Coverage material shall be distributed evenly to cover the entire unpaved parking area with a depth of at least one inch and shall contain no bare spots and/or vegetation. 
b.  Pervious and/or permeable pavement materials shall be allowable subject to the review and approval by the public works department. 
c.  Grass clippings, canvas, plastic sheets, poly sheets, or other similar rolled sheeting shall not be used as a parking area coverage material. 
5.  Parking area lease prohibition. No parking area regulated by this section may be leased, rented or otherwise provided for consideration, except as otherwise provided in this section. This prohibition shall not apply to leasing to tenants that occupy the same development where the parking spaces are located. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 13, 2-21-19)  
ARTICLE VIII. - PROTECTION OF RESOURCES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-8.1. - Purpose. 
A.  Purpose. This article is established for the purpose of protecting the immediate and long-term public health, safety and general welfare by preserving, enhancing, conserving or restoring the natural environment and cultural resources. The intent with respect to the urban forest is to establish and maintain a sustainable tree canopy in which the healthiest and strongest existing trees are preserved during development, and new high quality shade trees are planted. Development and other activities within the city shall be in accordance with this purpose. 
B.  Objectives. The provisions of this article are intended: 
1.  To conserve energy through the cooling and shading effects of trees; 
2.  To conserve water through the preservation of existing natural vegetation, the use of xeriscape techniques, and other water-conserving irrigation and landscape practices; 
3.  To mitigate nuisances such as noise, glare, heat, air pollution and stormwater runoff; 
4.  To preserve, enhance or restore the natural environment through the protection and establishment of native vegetation and existing natural systems for the enjoyment of present and future populations; 
5.  To promote a linked open space system throughout the city and county; 
6.  To preserve, enhance or restore the unique aesthetic character of the community; 
7.  To mitigate, through buffering, potentially adverse impacts between land uses of differing type and intensity, and to ensure sufficient landscaping within areas designated for multiple-family uses and mixed uses; 
8.  To assist in controlling vehicular and pedestrian movement to and within developed sites by: 
a.  Clearly delineating the boundaries of vehicular use areas, in such a manner that movement, noise and glare do not adversely impact activity in adjoining areas; 
b.  Establishing the points of ingress and egress so as to eliminate confusion and to control physical access to the site; 
c.  Establishing the direction of internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
9.  To prevent personal injury, loss of life and excessive property damage due to flooding; 
10.  To prevent the installation of structures which reduce the flood channel capacity and increase flood heights, the installation of which may cause excessive property damage; 
11.  To reduce public expenditures for emergency operations, evacuations and restorations; 
12.  To prevent damage to industries, transportation and utility systems; 
13.  To restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
14.  To require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
15.  To minimize the alteration of natural floodplains, creek channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
16.  To minimize or prohibit filling, grading, dredging and other development which increases erosion, sedimentation or flood damage; 
17.  To prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
18.  To protect and enhance property values through regulation of the natural resources in the city; 
19.  To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area; 
20.  To protect wetlands as areas for the natural storage of surface waters, and their function as a means to reduce pollution; 
21.  To protect and restore the quality of groundwater and surface water through on-site treatment of stormwater runoff; 
22.  To control the rate and quantity of stormwater discharging from any developed site; 
23.  To protect groundwater levels; 
24.  To prevent the breeding of mosquitoes; 
25.  To protect the diverse plant and animal communities found in association with creeks, lakes, uplands, floodplains, nature parks and wetlands; 
26.  To prevent soil erosion and sedimentation loadings to creeks, lakes and wetlands; 
27.  To maintain the stability of creek and lake banks; 
28.  To prevent adverse impacts to the water quality of creeks, lakes, wetlands, floodplains, groundwater and uplands; 
29.  To protect municipal drinking water quality; 
30.  To enhance the aesthetic and tree canopy qualities of significant entryway streets in order to convey the image of the city as "a city in a forest"; 
31.  To protect or restore significant entryway streets in order to promote transportation safety and to discourage blight; 
32.  To protect the environmental, education and passive recreation functions of public parks and open spaces from nearby development, and, in some instances, to protect nearby development from such public properties; 
33.  To protect public park wildlife, vegetation and park uses from potential adverse impacts by nearby land uses. Such impacts can include stormwater pollution, pesticides, noise disturbances, visual unsightliness and light pollution; 
34.  To encourage development and preservation of a network of greenway transportation corridors throughout the city and county; 
35.  To provide safe, convenient, scenic, historic and nonmotorized transportation linkages between land uses; 
36.  To provide wildlife corridors, and other forms of environmental conservation and environmental education; 
37.  To provide for recreation and access to recreation; 
38.  To provide greenway buffering to protect environmental features and neighborhoods from nearby land uses; 
39.  To preserve biological diversity and viable populations of special protection species dependent on upland, transitional and wetland ecological communities; 
40.  To ensure adequate, safe, economic, reliable and environmentally sound water and wastewater utility services for the public; 
41.  To promote economic development in a manner that will enhance the quality of life; 
42.  To diminish the severity and frequency of southern pine beetle outbreaks in Gainesville by reducing the density of loblolly pines in urban areas; 
43.  To preserve high quality heritage trees, especially where they occur within 20 feet of the public right-of-way; and 
44.  To favor replanting with native species of high quality shade trees, including requiring such trees to be planted in locations that will reintroduce seed sources to adjacent natural communities.  
Sec. 30-8.2. - General environmental performance standards. 
A.  Applicability. All uses and activities permitted in any zoning district shall conform to the standards of performance described in this section. 
B.  Showing of probable compliance. Uses and activities required to comply with this section shall make a showing of probable compliance with the performance standards described in this section. This showing shall be in the form of a letter submitted with a zoning compliance permit or development plan, as applicable, prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Florida, certifying that the use or activity complies with all performance standards described in this section. 
1.  Fire and explosion hazards. All activities and all storage of flammable and explosive materials or products at any place shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazards of fire and explosion, including adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment, as prescribed by the fire prevention code adopted in chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances. 
2.  Radiation. All sources of ionizing radiation shall be registered or licensed by the Florida Department of Health. The handling of radioactive materials, the discharge of such materials into air or water, and the disposal of radioactive wastes shall be in conformance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
3.  Electromagnetic radiation. Electromagnetic radiation generated by activities shall not adversely affect any operation or equipment other than those of the creation of the radiation. Interference with radio and television reception is prohibited. Equipment or activities generating electromagnetic radiation shall conform to the regulations of and, where appropriate, be licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. 
4.  Waste disposal. All waste disposal including discharge of any liquid or solid waste into any public or private sewage system, the ground, or any lake, creek, or wetland shall be in accordance with state, federal, and local law and applicable regulations of state, federal and local agencies. 
5.  Vibration. No use shall at any time create earth-born vibration which when measured at the boundary property line of the source operation exceeds the maximum allowable peak particle velocity set forth below. Ground vibration shall be measured as particle velocity using accelerometers. Particle velocity shall be recorded in three mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum allowable peak particle velocity shall apply to each of the three measurements. 
Frequency (Cycles per Second) 	Maximum Peak Particle Velocity (Inches Per Second) 
0 to 10 	0.05 
10 to 19 	0.50 
20 to 29 	1.00 
30 to 39 	1.50 
40 and over 	2.00 
 
6.  Sound. All uses and activities shall not exceed the sound pressure levels set forth in chapter 15 of the Code of Ordinances. 
7.  Heat, cold, dampness or movement of air. Activities on any property which produce any adverse effect on the temperature, motion or humidity of the atmosphere beyond the lot lines are not permitted. 
8.  Odor. No use shall be operated in any zoning district in such a manner that the emission of odorous matter occurs in such quantity or volume as to produce a nuisance, source of discomfort, or hazard beyond the bounding property lines of such a use. For the purpose of this performance standard, the presence of such a described odor shall be determined by observation by a person or persons designated by the city manager or designee. In any case, where the operator of an odor-emitting use may disagree with the enforcing officer where specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and procedures specified by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) E679 and E1432, entitled "Standard Practice for Determination of Odor and Taste Thresholds By a Forced-Choice Ascending Concentration Series Method of Limits" and "Standard Practice for Defining and Calculating Individual and Group Sensory Thresholds for Forced-Choice Data Sets of Intermediate Size," respectively. The operator and the city shall equally share the cost of conducting the more elaborate ASTM E679 Procedure. 
9.  Air quality. All development shall maintain air quality levels that comply with state and national ambient air quality standards. 
10.  Air pollution emissions. No industrial operation or use shall cause, create, or allow the emission of air contaminants which at the emission point or within the bounds of the property are in violation of the standards specified by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, or successor agency, or any governmental entity with regulatory jurisdiction, whichever standards are more stringent. 
11.  Other air pollution. Open storage and open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements, which are the source of windblown or airborne dust or other particulate matter; or which involve dust or other particulate air contaminant generating equipment including but not limited to paint spraying, grain or seed handling, sand or gravel processing or storage or sand blasting shall be conducted such that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the boundary property line or the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding standards set by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, or successor agency, or any governmental entity with regulatory jurisdiction, whichever standards are more stringent. 
12.  Toxics. No industrial operation or use shall emit toxic or noxious matter at a concentration exceeding ambient air quality standards for the State of Florida across the property line of the parcel on which the operation or use is located. Where toxic materials are not listed in the ambient air quality standards of the state, concentrations shall not exceed one percent of the threshold limit values (TLVs) adopted by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). If a toxic substance is not listed by the ACGIH, verification of safe levels of the proposed toxic material for public health, plant and animal life will be required. 
C.  Utility service. All utility services, including but not limited to those of franchised utilities, electric power and light, telephone, cable services, water, sewer and gas, shall be installed beneath the surface of the ground, unless the city manager or designee determines that the soil, topography and other compelling condition makes it unreasonable or impractical. The subsurface mounting of incidental appurtenances, including but not limited to transformer boxes or pedestal-mounted boxes for the provision of utilities, electric meters, back flow preventers and fire hydrants, is not required.  
DIVISION 2. - TREES AND LANDSCAPE 
 
Sec. 30-8.3. - Elements of compliance. 
All property within the city shall be subject to the following regulations, except as exempted by subsection B. below. No parcel within the city may be cleared, grubbed, filled or excavated, nor shall any building be demolished, altered or reconstructed in a manner that negatively impacts regulated trees, changes the site plan, site use or increases the impervious surface area except in compliance with this article. Requirements of these sections do not exempt property owners from compliance with any other section of this chapter. 
A.  Minimum requirements for landscaped areas. All areas designed to meet the requirements of these sections shall comply with the following: 
1.  Street trees shall be provided a minimum rootzone volume of 700 cubic feet, except street trees that share a rootzone volume shall require a minimum of 550 cubic feet. All other required shade trees shall be provided a minimum of 420 cubic feet of rootzone volume. Where existing conditions preclude the provision of the minimum rootzone volume, the reviewing board or city manager or designee may approve a lesser volume that meets the arboriculture needs of the tree within the existing conditions. Underground utility lines shall not be located within the rootzone volume, except for those lines that are four-inch diameter or less, and then only where the utility separation requirements in subsection 2. below are met. Prior to planting, any limerock or construction debris found in this area shall be removed, and rootzone media soil shall be provided to a depth of at least three feet. Shade trees shall be located a minimum of ten feet from a building face or from major architectural features of the building (including but not limited to balconies, awnings, bay windows or porches). 
2.  A minimum separation requirement of seven and one-half feet is required between new trees and existing or proposed water, wastewater force main, reclaimed water, gas, electric and telecommunications main and service utility lines, to protect against root incursion. A minimum separation requirement of ten feet is required between new trees and existing or proposed wastewater gravity collection mains and laterals. Where feasible, separations should be marginally increased in order to account for inaccuracies in surveying, engineering or construction. Reduced separation distances to three and one-half feet may be allowed at the discretion of the utility company. In these instances the utility company may require one of the following measures to protect the utility lines, in accordance with the standards established by the utility company: 
a.  Compaction of the soil immediately adjacent to the underground lines to 98 percent proctor density from the utility line to within 12 inches of ground surface; 
b.  Encasing the utility line with excavatable flowable fill, steel casing, or other acceptable methods; 
c.  Wrapping the utility line with an herbicide-impregnated geo-textile bio-barrier cloth; 
d.  Protecting the utility line with structural barriers of cast-in-place or pre-cast concrete panels, steel or high-density plastic sheet-pile barriers; or 
e.  Steel casing, installed in accordance with standards established by the utility company. 
Where an existing tree is to be preserved, trenchless installation shall be required for the installation of underground utilities, using directional boring or jacking-and-boring of a casing pipe throughout the tree root plate. 
3.  An irrigation system, or a readily available water supply within a distance of 100 feet, shall be supplied for all landscaped areas. An automatic irrigation system shall be provided for development if the total area of impervious surfaces devoted to vehicular use areas exceeds 10,000 square feet. Such irrigation shall promote water conservation by such methods as drip irrigation and/or efficient sprinkler zoning, as well as reducing the amount of irrigation as plants become established. Each required tree shall be served by a drip ring or bubblers or other appropriate means necessary to ensure that the entire rootball is irrigated. The irrigation system shall be designed and located to minimize the watering of impervious surfaces. Successful establishment of trees should occur within one year. After that time, use of the automatic irrigation system may be discontinued. If the required trees die within three years of planting, they shall be replaced in accordance with this article, and replanted trees will require irrigation throughout the next establishment phase. 
4.  Landscape areas that are not planted shall be grassed or mulched with organic materials. Grassed areas shall be planted with sod that has been certified free of noxious weeds by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Division of Plant Industry. 
5.  When a landscaped area is adjacent to or within a vehicular use area, curbing shall be used to protect landscaped areas from encroachment. Parking spaces shall be designed to provide pervious surface for the vehicle overhang area. Shrubs and trees shall be placed away from the wheel stop, so that they will not be encroached upon by vehicles. In lieu of curbing, the alternative means of preventing encroachment shall be shown on the site plan. 
6.  All required trees shall be selected from the Gainesville tree list. Tree species not appearing on the Gainesville tree list may be planted only with prior approval of the city manager or designee or appropriate reviewing board. Developments which require 16 or more shade trees shall have at least four different high quality shade tree genera. Street tree diversity is to be attained city-wide in order to reduce the effect of loss of street tree species due to insect or disease outbreaks, even though street tree diversity may not be attained on an individual street. The applicant or landscape contractor shall schedule an on-site meeting with the city manager or designee prior to the installation of any trees or shrubs to ensure compatibility with infrastructure and compliance with landscape code requirements. 
7.  Any landscaped area adjacent to an intersection or driveway shall conform to the requirements for the vision triangle contained in the City of Gainesville Engineering Design and Construction Manual. 
8.  Trees located near the street shall be planted in locations that meet the clear zone requirements of the city public works department or the maintaining agency. 
B.  Exemptions to landscaping requirements. 
1.  Lots designed or designated for single-family residential dwellings and the developed portion of any lot over two acres in actual single-family residential use are exempt from the requirements of this section, except as provided in section 30-8.7. 
2.  Development within the approach and Airport Runway Protection Zone areas as specified on the adopted Gainesville Regional Airport master plan, on file with the director of aviation, Gainesville Regional Airport, is exempt from the provision of required shade trees in areas where federal regulations prohibit shade trees or where shade tree growth can be expected to penetrate airport zone surfaces regulated under Federal Aviation Regulations 14 CFR, Part 77. If permitted, understory trees must be substituted. Trees may be removed from such areas upon filing a tree removal permit accompanied by submission of written authorization from the Gainesville/Alachua County Regional Airport Authority or FDOT to the City Manager's designee. Reforestation is not required in areas where federal regulations prohibit trees or where shade tree growth can be expected to penetrate airport zone surfaces regulated under Federal Aviation Regulations 14 CFR, Part 77. Mitigation will not be required except for high-quality heritage trees, which must be mitigated in accordance with section 30-8.7. 
3.  Where required shade trees are expected to conflict with planned solar energy generation, developments may compensate for the required trees by relocating them to a designated area or preserving an equal number of existing high-quality shade trees elsewhere on the site. At least 140 square feet must be provided for each new shade tree to be planted, and existing trees must be preserved in accordance with section 30-8.8. These trees must be located so that they can grow to maturity without obstructing the generation of solar energy, and the area where they are planted or preserved must be delineated and noted as a "designated tree area" on the development plans. 
C.  Expansions, 50,000 square feet or more. Expansions of existing developments that contain 50,000 square feet or more shall comply with the following regulations: 
Proposed Development 	Mandatory Compliance 
1. Any expansion which increases the gross floor area of a development by 10% or less. 	The expansion area, all areas adjacent to the public right-of-way, as practicable, and all parking spaces directly related to the expansion area. 
2. Any expansion which increases the gross floor area of a development by more than 10% but less than 20%. 	The expansion area, all areas adjacent to the public right-of-way, and all property within 25 feet, where practicable, plus 25% of the remainder of the development. Removal of asphalt to create street buffers and parking lot islands will be considered practicable. 
3. Any expansion which increases the gross floor area of a development by 20% or more but less than 35%. 	The expansion area, all areas adjacent to the public right-of-way, and all property within 25 feet, where practicable, plus 50% of the remainder of the development. Removal of asphalt to create street buffers and parking lot islands will be considered practicable. 
4. Expansion which increases the gross floor area of a development by 35% or more. 	The entire development. 
 
5.  For purposes of this subsection, repeated expansions of property, including the construction or erection of separate buildings or accessory structures, which meet the threshold in the table shall comply with the provisions of this article as provided above. 
6.  The determination of the exact location of the remainder area which shall be brought into landscape compliance shall be made by the appropriate reviewing board. In determining the exact location of such remainder area, the following factors shall be considered: 
a.  Buffering incompatible land uses; 
b.  Improvement to areas of visual or environmental impact; 
c.  The economic and technical feasibility of landscaping particular areas; and 
d.  The visibility of landscaping areas from public roads or sidewalks. 
D.  Expansions, less than 50,000 square feet. Expansions of existing developments that contain less than 50,000 square feet shall comply with the following regulations: 
1.  Expansions of vehicular use area shall meet the requirements of section 30-8.4 for the expanded area and shall also meet requirements for street and use buffers adjacent to the expanded area. 
2.  Whenever expansion of a developed area, independently or cumulatively, totals 4,000 square feet or more than 35 percent of the gross square footage of the developed area, whichever is less, the entire site shall be brought into compliance with this article. For the purposes of this subsection, repeated expansions or alterations of the property, including the construction or erection of separate buildings or accessory structures, constructed within a period of 36 months, which meet the above threshold, shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
3.  Any new use of property which alters the use of existing structures from a residential use to a nonresidential use shall be required to meet all applicable landscaping requirements. The city manager or designee shall determine the applicable requirements based on the character and orientation of the proposed mixed use development. 
4.  The use of property, including outdoor activities and parking, which expands the lot area of any use, when such property adjoins property in actual use as a single-family residence or shown in any single-family zoning district, shall be required to conform with all buffer requirements. 
5.  Expansions of outdoor storage shall require screening in accordance with the requirements in section 30-5.19. 
E.  Minimum submittal criteria. All landscape plans shall be drawn to scale and have a north arrow, and accurately depict all buildings, pavement, on-site facilities, utilities and lighting systems. The landscape drawing or accompanying development plan shall give the permitted use of adjacent parcels and the total square footage of all pavement on-site. Stormwater basins shall be designated as either wet or dry. A plant schedule shall be provided showing the botanical name, size, spacing and number of all required plant materials. Architectural symbols depicting trees to be installed shall not exceed the scale equivalent of five feet in diameter with a solid line; a hatched line around the solid line shall show the expected canopy dimension after 20 years as identified in the Gainesville tree list. Any native tree or shrub may be substituted for the identified plant with city staff approval, provided that the tree or shrub is adaptable to the amount of sun/shade, wet/dry and size conditions where it will be planted, and insofar as the provisions for diversity, shading and/or screening described in the article are met. Changing tree species shall not diminish the total number of high quality shade trees in their required locations. Plant material shown in addition to the required elements of the landscape plan may be labeled as optional and shall not be subject to inspection. 
F.  Design principles and standards. All landscaped areas required by this article shall conform to the following general guidelines: 
1.  The preservation of structurally sound native trees of high quality shade tree species and shrubs is strongly encouraged to maintain healthy, varied and energy-efficient vegetation throughout the city, and to maintain habitat for native wildlife species. Developments should be designed to preserve existing high quality heritage trees, especially those located within 20 feet of the public right-of-way. 
2.  The landscaping plan should integrate the elements of the proposed development with existing topography, hydrology and soils in order to prevent adverse impacts such as sedimentation of surface waters, erosion and dust. 
3.  The functional elements of the development plan, particularly the drainage systems and internal circulation systems for vehicles and pedestrians, should be integrated into the landscape plan. The landscaped areas should be integrated, especially to promote the continuity of on-site and off-site open space and greenway systems, and to enhance environmental features, particularly those features regulated by the environmental overlay districts (article VIII). 
4.  The selection and placement of landscaping materials should maximize the conservation of energy through shading of buildings, streets, pedestrian ways, bikeways and parking areas. Where possible, shade trees should be planted along internal sidewalks that connect buildings to the street sidewalk and to other buildings on the site. 
5.  Landscaping design should consider the aesthetic and functional aspects of vegetation, both when initially installed and when the vegetation has reached maturity. Newly installed plants should be placed at intervals appropriate to their expected function as short-term or long-term elements. The natural and visual environment should be enhanced through the use of materials which achieve a variety with respect to seasonal changes, species of living material selected, textures, colors and size at maturity. 
6.  The placement of trees around buildings should permit access to the building by emergency vehicles. 
7.  The installation of the following invasive nonnative species is prohibited, as is installation of any species labeled as "Prohibited" in the most recently published version of the Institute of Food and Agricultural Science (IFAS) Invasive Species Assessment: 
INVASIVE, NONNATIVE PLANT SPECIES 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
Air potato 	Dioscorea bulbifera 
Arrow bamboo 	Pseudosasa japonica 
Brazilian pepper 	Schinus terebenthifolius 
Catclaw vine 	Macfadyena unguis- cati 
Chinaberry 	Melia azedarach 
Chinese privet 	Ligustrum sinense 
Chinese tallow tree 	Sapium sebiferum 
Chinese wisteria 	Wisteria sinensis 
Climbing fern 	Lygodium japonicum and Lvgodium microphyllum 
Cogon grass 	Imperata cylindrica 
Coral berry 	Ardisia crenata 
Coral ardesia 	Ardisia iaponica 
Elephant's ears 	Xanthosoma sagittifolium 
Glossy privet 	Ligustrum lucidum 
Golden raintree 	Koelreuteria paniculata and Koelreuteria bipinnata 
Golden bamboo 	Phvllostachys aurea 
Henon bamboo 	P. nigra cv. "Henon" 
Hydrilla 	Hydrilla verticulata 
Hygrophia 	Hygrophia polysperma 
Japanese ardisia 	Ardisia iaponica 
Japanese honeysuckle 	Lonicera japonica 
Japanese paper mulberry 	Brousonettia papyrifera 
Kudzu 	Pueraria lobata 
Mimosa 	Albizia julibrissin 
Miramar weed 	Hvgrophila polysperma 
Oyster plant 	Tradescantia spathacea 
Palm leaf bamboo 	Sasa palmate (Arundinaria palmata) 
Skunk vine 	Paederia foetida 
Tropical soda apple 	Solanum viarum 
Wandering spiderwort 	
Water hyacinth 	Eichornia crassipes 
White-flowered small-leaved spiderwort 	Tradescantia fluminensis 
Wild taro 	Colocasia esculenta 
 
8.  For all new development, or redevelopment of existing property, the applicant shall remove invasive nonnative plant species listed on the Florida Prohibited Aquatic Plants List or the Florida Noxious Weed List from the property in accordance with the management plan prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. On property with invasive nonnative plant species, a plan shall be submitted with the development application that includes a timeline, success criteria, treatment recommendations, and identifies methods that will have minimal impact on non-target species. All herbicide applications to control invasive, nonnative plants in wetland or upland set-aside areas (including buffers) shall be applied by a contractor licensed by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Division of Agricultural Environmental Services, with a current certification in Natural Areas Weed Management. The city manager or designee should inspect such sites for a minimum of three years after completion to verify effectiveness of control efforts. The plan shall state the entity responsible for additional treatments during the three-year follow-up if the populations of invasive nonnative plants rebound and cover more than ten percent of any previously infested area within the wetland or upland set-aside areas. 
9.  Loblolly and slash pines should be at least 25 feet apart post-development to reduce southern pine beetle infestation outbreaks. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 14, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-8.4. - Vehicular use areas. 
A.  Perimeter requirements. 
1.  Perimeter landscaped area required. All vehicular use areas shall be separated by a perimeter landscaped area, a minimum of nine feet in width, from any public or private street and from any adjacent properties. 
2.  Exemptions. This landscape area is not required: 
a.  When the paved ground surface area is completely screened from adjacent properties or streets by intervening buildings or structures; or 
b.  When an agreement to operate abutting properties as essentially one contiguous parking facility is in force, and both sites are in compliance with vehicular use area landscaping requirements. The agreement shall be executed by the owners of the abutting properties, and shall bind their successors, heirs and assigns. Prior to the issuance of any building permit for any site having such a contiguous parking facility, the agreement shall be recorded in the public records of the county; 
3.  Automotive sales uses. For automotive sales uses, the perimeter landscape area shall only be required for 300 feet along each street frontage in the area devoted to automobile display, with the remainder of the required plant materials being proposed for planting elsewhere on the site, such as around stormwater areas or the building foundation. Perimeter landscape areas shall be required for all storage, accessory service and customer parking areas at any auto sales facility. 
4.  Modifications. The appropriate reviewing authority may determine that: 
a.  Screening is better achieved by relocation of the landscape strip; 
b.  There is an unresolvable conflict between other elements of the development plan and the location, width or height of the perimeter landscape area, and that the public interest is therefore best served by relocation of the landscape area, lowering the height of required material or the substitution of a solid fence or wall in conjunction with a reduction in width provided that the number of shade trees that would have otherwise been required are planted elsewhere on the development site; or 
c.  On redevelopment sites where the conflict between existing utility line separation distances and the shade trees required within the perimeter landscaped area cannot be resolved through the practices listed in section 30-8.3.A.2., then the area shall be planted with shrubs and understory trees acceptable to the utility company. On projects where new utility lines are planned, sufficient space shall be allocated to meet both the utility separation requirements and the minimum tree-planting requirement. 
5.  Required plant material. The perimeter landscape area shall contain: 
a.  Shrubs, arranged to provide a visual screen of 75 percent opacity and achieve a height of at least three feet within three years; and 
b.  High quality shade trees at a minimum average of three trees for every 100 feet of the linear distance of the perimeter landscape area, excluding the width of driveways that cross the landscape area. The distance between such trees shall not exceed 55 feet nor shall they be planted closer than 25 feet apart. 
c.  The development review board or city plan board during development plan review, or staff during administrative review, may determine that natural vegetation is sufficient to screen adjacent properties and rights-of-way. In such instance the existing vegetation, including understory plants and bushes, is protected from pruning and removal except that diseased plant material and invasive nonnative species shall be replaced in accordance with this section. Where the property is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way or utility easement, these areas shall not be substituted for the perimeter landscape area or the required landscaping. Where encroachments are made for utility connections, replacement plants appropriate to the ecosystem shall be required. 
B.  Interior landscaped areas. The interior of any vehicular use area shall also be landscaped in compliance with the following: 
1.  Landscape islands, equal to the size of one parking space, shall be located at an average of every ten parking spaces. At no time shall a row of parking have landscape islands greater than 126 feet apart or closer than 36 feet apart. Additionally, terminal landscape islands containing a tree shall enclose each row of parking spaces. 
2.  Each required landscape island shall contain at least one high quality shade tree listed on the Gainesville tree list as a species appropriate for "lot" planting. Such tree(s) shall be located within the landscaped area to maximize the shading of the pavement. 
3.  All parking lots with two or more rows of interior parking shall contain eight-foot-wide landscape strips between the rows allowing for two-foot vehicle overhangs on each side. Shade trees shall be planted every 50 feet on average within these landscaped areas, but outside of the two-foot vehicle overhangs. As an alternative, every other row of head-to-head parking may provide a 16-foot-wide curbed landscape strip with shade trees every 35 feet on average. As needed, these wider landscape strips may contain sidewalks. 
4.  The development review board or city plan board through development plan review, or staff when only staff review is required, may allow the relocation of interior landscaped areas to preserve existing trees, or where it is determined, upon review and recommendation of the city manager or designee, that the relocation is necessary for the safe maneuvering of vehicles or pedestrians. 
5.  In those vehicular use areas including but not limited to auto dealerships, storage of service or delivery vehicles, or attendant parking where interior landscaping would interfere with the customary storage or display of vehicles, the development review board or city plan board through development plan review, or staff when only staff review is required, may allow some or all of the required interior landscaping to be located near the perimeters of the paved area, including such perimeters which may be adjacent to a building on the site. Such landscaped area would be in addition to required perimeter landscaping in the amount of one square foot of landscaped area for each 60 square feet of paved area. For each 140 square feet of relocated landscaped area, a high quality shade tree shall be provided.  
Sec. 30-8.5. - Compatibility buffers. 
This section is intended to provide the minimum requirements for separation of land uses of differing type and intensity. The need for a buffer strip between land uses shall not impede the development of appropriate pedestrian and bicycle accessways between these uses. Where such accessways are installed, they shall be landscaped in a manner to clearly delineate such trails and bikeways and also to provide shade trees as appropriate. Where certain uses or combinations of uses are difficult to categorize, as in planned developments or public service facilities, it is the intent of this section that buffering shall be provided which mitigates the impacts of such uses. 
A.  Required buffer strip areas. Buffer strips between properties are intended to provide visual screening and sound attenuation of more intense land uses from abutting less intense land uses. The required buffer type, shown in Chart A below, depends on the land use designation of the subject property which is being developed and the land use designations of the abutting properties. The required width of the each buffer type and the required amount of shade trees, understory trees, and shrubs are shown in Chart B below: 
CHART A. LAND USE BUFFER TYPES 
FUTURE LAND USE DESIGNATION 
Abutting property ?
 
 
Subject property ? 	Single Family Res. Low 	Res. Medium
Res. High
MU Office/Res Office 	MU Low
MU Medium
Urban Core
UMU UMU High 	Commercial Business Ind. 	Industrial 	Education Recreation Public Facilities 	Agriculture Conservation 
Single-Family 
Residential Low 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	A 
Res. Medium 
Res. High 
MU Office/Residential 
Office 	A 	- 	- 	- 	- 	A 	A 
MU Low 
MU Medium 
Urban Core UMU UMU High 	B 	A 	- 	- 	- 	A 	B 
Commercial 
Business Ind. 	C 	B 	A 	- 	- 	B 	C 
Industrial 	C 	C 	C 	B 	- 	C 	C 
Education 
Recreation 
Public Facilities 	A 	A 	- 	- 	- 	- 	A 
Agriculture 
Conservation 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
 
CHART B. REQUIRED WIDTH AND PLANTINGS FOR BUFFER TYPES 
BUFFER TYPE 	MIN. WIDTH 	SHADE TREES (per 100 linear feet) 	UNDERSTORY TREES (per 100 linear feet) 	SHRUBS (per 100 linear feet) 
A 	9' 	2 	2 	20 
B 	9' 	3 	2 	20 
C 	15' 	3 	3 	25 
 
B.  Buffer widths. The appropriate reviewing board, or the city manager or designee, may require the expansion of the minimum width of the buffer strip to ensure that trees will meet separation requirements from utility lines, buildings, or paved areas, or to allow for the inclusion of an existing high-quality shade tree in the buffer strip. 
C.  Driveways and sidewalks. The widths of driveways and pedestrian or bicycle facilities that cross through a required buffer shall be subtracted from the linear feet of buffer length for the purposes of calculating the number of required plantings in Chart B above. 
D.  Existing trees and natural vegetation in buffers. Any regulated, high quality shade trees existing within the minimum required buffer width shall be protected in accordance with section 30-8.8. Credit for preserving existing trees shall be applied in accordance with this article. High quality heritage trees within buffer areas should be preserved with the area underneath the canopy dripline protected. Sidewalks and bicycle access infrastructure may be permitted within the protection zones of a high quality heritage tree but not within the root plate. Natural vegetation, if it achieves a continuous 75 percent opacity for 10 months of the year, may be substituted for the required shrubs. If a buffer that preserved existing vegetation is subsequently cleared by the property owner or when permits for tree removal are granted post-development, then the required shrubs and trees in accordance with this section shall be required. 
E.  Invasive nonnative vegetation in buffers. All buffers shall be maintained to remove invasive nonnative plant species and curtail natural regeneration of seedling loblolly and slash pines. The density of loblolly and slash pines in a natural buffer should be managed so the remaining pines grow no closer than 25 feet and seedling regeneration is curtailed. 
F.  Sound attenuation. The reviewing board, or city manager or designee, may address the need for sound attenuation of certain equipment, such as refrigeration units, motors, fans, power tools, etc., or uses such as loading, vehicle repair, outdoor recreation, etc., by requiring a study, prepared by a licensed engineer or architect, to address the potential for a noise disturbance to be transmitted to adjacent properties by the proposed use, and may require the installation of a wall, fence or berm in addition to required landscape material. The wall, fence or berm may be located within the required buffer or directly around the equipment or use which requires sound attenuation. 
G.  Street trees. Street trees shall be planted along the sides of all streets within a development and on the development side of any contiguous street. Street trees shall be planted for every 30 to 50 feet of street frontage, depending on the canopy area needed for the tree species. The widths of driveways along a street shall be subtracted from the linear feet of street frontage length for the purposes of calculating the number of required street trees. In no case shall trees be spaced closer together than 25 feet or farther apart than 60 feet. Alleys are exempt from this requirement for street trees. 
1.  Street trees shall be high quality shade trees and shall be planted in tree lawns with a minimum width of eight feet, or within tree wells with minimum four-foot by four-foot surface openings. 
a.  On-street parking spaces may be located between street trees, as long as the required number of trees is planted along the street frontage and the minimum rootzone volume is provided for each tree. 
b.  Tree wells may be enclosed with pavers or other hardscape materials above the required rootzone volume. The city manager or designee may determine if installation of an aeration system is necessary to conduit water and oxygen to the roots of trees within tree wells. 
2.  Where possible, street trees shall be planted between the street and the public sidewalk. Street trees may be planted between the sidewalk and adjacent buildings only where the location of existing or proposed utility lines along the street, or the clear zone requirements of the public works department or other maintaining agency, prevent the location of trees between the street and sidewalk. Where street trees are approved to be planted between the sidewalk and adjacent buildings, the trees may be located as close as five feet away from building face. 
3.  The reviewing board, or the city manager or designee, may require the adjustment of the prescribed build-to line in order to accommodate the required street trees and ensure that the trees will meet separation requirements from utility lines, buildings, and paved areas. 
4.  Where possible, developments shall be designed to preserve as street trees any existing champion or high quality heritage trees which are located in the right-of-way or on private property within 20 feet of the right-of-way. Where these trees are preserved, no new construction or grading shall occur within the tree root plate, and new buildings shall be designed so that no more than 25 percent of the crown of the trees is removed. The area underneath the canopy of the preserved trees shall be exempt from tree planting requirements, and the required distances between street trees may be modified. 
5.  A minimum ten-foot separation shall be provided between street trees and street stormwater inlets, except where bioretention inlets that incorporate trees are utilized. 
6.  Where the required street trees would overlap with trees that are required to satisfy perimeter landscaping requirements for vehicular use areas, only the requirements for the vehicular use area shall be met. 
H.  Parking structures along a street. Except at points of ingress and egress, and except as required in article IV for transect zones, parking structures shall provide a ten-foot-wide landscaping strip between the public sidewalk and the structure, which is designed to screen automobiles from pedestrians on the street. This strip shall be planted with evergreen shade trees at an average of four trees for every 100 feet of the linear distance of the street frontage of the structure, excluding the width of driveways. The required trees shall be supplemented with a continuous line of shrubs. This landscaping strip is required when the ground floor use is parking, but is not required where parking structures are shielded from the street by liner buildings or provide office or commercial uses along the first floor street frontage.  
Sec. 30-8.6. - Stormwater management areas. 
A.  All stormwater basins shall be designed and landscaped to meet the following criteria: 
1.  Shade trees shall be planted at an average of one tree for every 35 linear feet of the basin perimeter. Spacing of trees may be closer when trees are planted in groups for aesthetic effect, but the minimum distance between the trees shall be ten linear feet. Trees shall be selected from the Gainesville tree list that are appropriate for use within stormwater areas, and all landscaping shall be selected according to the function as a wet or dry basin. Trees shall be located at least 20 feet away from inflow and outflow structures. Bioretention swales and exfiltration facilities are exempt from these tree planting requirements. 
2.  Twenty-five percent or more of the basin perimeter or littoral zone shall be landscaped with shrubs, groundcover, native perennials, or aquatic plants. 
B.  Individual stormwater basins that are greater than 5,000 square feet in total area shall be designed with curvilinear sides that mimic a natural wetland, lake, or stream. The landscaping for these basins shall be integrated with the other required site landscaping. 
C.  Individual stormwater basins that are greater than 40,000 square feet in total area shall also be designed to meet at least one of the following criteria: 
1.  Provide a recreational or functional pathway for pedestrians or bicyclists and an aesthetic focal point such as a water feature or pedestrian structure; or 
2.  Be designed to preserve and incorporate a significant tree or tree grouping; or 
3.  Be designed to maintain an existing wetland function or to preserve or establish habitat for native animal species.  
Sec. 30-8.7. - Permits for tree removal; mitigation. 
A.  Removal or relocation permits. Except as provided below, no living regulated tree may be removed or relocated without a removal permit and mitigation as provided for in this section. Only the tree advisory board may approve or deny the removal, relocation or replacement of champion trees. 
B.  Exemptions. 
1.  On property with single-family dwellings, permits shall be required only for the removal of champion or heritage trees. 
2.  Removal of loblolly or slash pines less than 20 inches in diameter from a natural or naturalized landscape shall not require mitigation planting, unless the removals result in a uniform tree density on the site of less than one tree per 900 square feet of unpaved area. Where resulting tree density would be less, sufficient mitigation trees meeting the standard of section 30-8.10 shall be established to achieve the specified minimum density. 
3.  Removal of regulated trees in connection with ecosystem management or restoration on parcels with conservation easements, in conservation management areas or on parcels managed as nature parks or preserves, provided the following criteria are met: 
a.  A plan for the removal and revegetation of the area has been approved by the city manager or designee; 
b.  The only trees that may be removed are of the following species: Loblolly Pine, Slash Pine, Water Oak, Laurel Oak, Sweetgum, Sugarberry, and any species not native to Alachua County; 
c.  The tree removal is being done in furtherance of restoration of a natural community or communities appropriate to the site as indicated by soils, remnant vegetation, and hydrological and geological conditions; 
d.  The applicant has demonstrated that after the removals, the land will be maintained in a manner that promotes the continuation of the restored natural community; and 
e.  The plan has been approved by the nature centers commission. 
4.  For the immediate protection of the health, safety, or welfare of the public, trees may be removed without obtaining a permit in advance. However, the property owner or its authorized agent shall file a permit application during the next city work day. Permit approval shall be granted, provided the trees removed are mitigated in accordance with this code. 
C.  Methods of mitigation. Mitigation is allowed by two methods: 1) mitigation trees (on an inch-for-inch basis or as otherwise specified); and 2) mitigation payment. The amount of mitigation is as specified in subsections D. and E. below. 
1.  Mitigation trees. Mitigation trees shall be of high quality shade species as identified on the Gainesville tree list and sited in accordance with the requirements of section 30-8.3.A. The installation of new trees for a development as required by this chapter may count as mitigation for trees removed from the site, except where those removed trees are of a high-quality species. Increasing the diameter of trees required to be planted with a development shall not be used to meet mitigation requirements. The preference is for mitigation trees to be planted on the site, but where it is demonstrated that no space is available, mitigation trees may be planted offsite within city limits as approved by the city manager or designee. 
2.  Mitigation payment. Mitigation payment shall be based on tree appraised value, or as otherwise specified in this code. Payment shall be made prior to the approval of a final development order, or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any development requiring only building permits. Mitigation payments received by the city shall be deposited in the city tree mitigation fund, which must be used in accordance with this subsection. This fund may be used for new tree plantings associated with public improvement projects or for the preservation of trees through the purchase of conservation lands, but shall not be used for tree maintenance or toward the installation of new trees that would already be required for a development. In addition, this fund may be used for an ecological assessment of the urban forest every five years, and for an update of the urban forest management plan every ten years. 
a.  Offsets for tree mitigation payment. A tree mitigation payment may be offset by installing improvements that create an improved growing environment for existing or proposed trees located within the project's street tree landscape zone within the public right-of-way, including: 
i.  Use of a pre-manufactured, modular structural product to suspend and support paving over the root zone volume area of the tree in order to prevent soil compaction. 
ii.  Provision of root zone volume greater than the required minimum as specified in section 30-8.3.A, provided that the root zone volume does not exceed six feet in depth. Credit will be granted per cubic foot over the required minimum up to 2,000 cubic feet total root zone volume. Trees must be provided with a minimum of 1,000 cubic feet of root zone volume to be eligible. 
Proposed improvements and installation methods must be consistent with industry standards, and must be approved by the city arborist or urban forestry inspector prior to installation and inspected and approved prior to any credit towards the project's tree mitigation payment. The requested offset may not exceed the project's total tree mitigation payment, and proposed improvements must be used on the project requiring tree mitigation. Improvements must be installed by a qualified installer of the product as identified by the manufacturer's specifications. 
D.  Removal and mitigation of regulated trees subject to subdivision or development plan approval. When tree removal or relocation is contemplated in conjunction with any development requiring approval of a development plan or subdivision plat, such removal or relocation shall be considered and either approved or denied at the same time a development plan or plat is approved or denied, based upon the criteria specified in subsection F. of this section. No separate tree removal permit is required. All of the required plans, data or other information required with the application shall be included on the proposed development plan or on the supporting documents submitted with the plan or the plat. The following requirements apply: 
1.  Decisions on tree removal shall be based on a tree survey or a qualitative tree survey. The landscaping plan shall show all trees to be preserved, provide for protective tree barriers that meet the requirements of section 30-8.8, and specify the details of the mitigation required in this section. 
2.  Construction drawings shall be submitted to the building department and application for building permits made before any trees are removed. 
3.  After a certificate of occupancy has been issued for a development, any additional tree removal shall require either a tree removal permit or a development plan amendment. Failure to obtain a tree removal permit before removing or relocating any existing regulated tree or any tree that was planted to comply with the approved development plan shall be subject to the measures for enforcement specified in section 30-8.43. 
4.  The requirements for mitigation of regulated trees approved for removal as part of development plan or subdivision plat review are as follows: 
CATEGORY 	MITIGATION 
High quality heritage trees, in fair or better condition. 	Mitigation payment based on tree appraised value, limited to three trees per acre averaged over the entire site. If more than three trees per acre in this category are located on the site then the trees with the highest tree appraised value throughout the site shall be used to calculate the payment. High quality heritage trees proposed for removal in excess of the overall average of three per acre shall require mitigation trees on an inch-for-inch on a diameter basis. 
Heritage trees of other than high quality species, in fair or better condition, excluding laurel oaks and water oaks. 	Mitigation trees on an inch-for-inch diameter basis. 
Any heritage trees in less than fair or better condition; any heritage laurel oak or water oak; and any other regulated tree. 	Mitigation trees consisting of two trees of high quality shade species established for each tree removed. 
 
E.  Removal and mitigation of regulated trees not part of subdivision or development plan approval. Any person desiring to remove or relocate a regulated tree, except tree removal approved as part of subdivision or development plan approval, shall file a tree removal permit with the city manager or designee. As a condition to granting a permit, the applicant shall mitigate each tree being removed. The following requirements apply: 
1.  Permit applications shall include the name of the property owner, address from which tree will be removed, tree species and diameter, and reason for removal of the tree. The permit application shall be signed by the property owner and, if applicable, its authorized agent. Applications for tree removal shall also include a scaled drawing of the site showing tree size and location, and a statement of how any other regulated trees are to be protected during any approved tree removal and any associated construction or clearing, or grade changes. The city manager or designee shall attempt to verify the information contained in the application and shall either approve or deny the application as to each regulated tree proposed to be removed. 
2.  Where construction is associated with the tree removal, construction drawings shall be submitted to the building department and application for building permits made before any trees are removed. 
3.  The requirements for mitigation of regulated trees not associated with development plan or subdivision plat review are as follows: 
CATEGORY 	MITIGATION 
Single-Family Dwellings 
High quality heritage trees, in fair or better condition, wherever they are located on the property. 	Mitigation trees on an inch-for-inch diameter basis, with a minimum of two shade trees of high quality species planted on site for each tree removed. 
Heritage trees of other than high quality species and high quality heritage trees in less than fair or better condition, wherever they are located between the property lines and legal setbacks. 	Mitigation trees consisting of two shade trees of high quality species planted on the site for each tree removed. 
All Other Uses 
High quality heritage trees, in fair or better condition. 	Mitigation payment based on tree appraised value, and mitigation trees consisting of a minimum of two shade trees of high quality species planted on site for each tree removed. 
Heritage trees of other than high quality species, in fair or better condition; and high quality heritage trees, in fair or better condition, which are causing structural problems to buildings or underground utilities. 	Mitigation trees on an inch-for-inch diameter basis, with a minimum of two shade trees of high quality species planted on site for each tree removed. 
Any heritage trees in less than fair or better condition; and any other regulated tree. 	Mitigation trees consisting of two shade trees of high quality species planted on the site for each tree removed. 
 
F.  Permit approval criteria. Removal or relocation of a regulated tree may be approved by the reviewing board, city manager or designee based upon one of the following findings, which shall be supported by competent substantial evidence provided by the applicant: 
1.  The tree poses a safety hazard or has been weakened by disease, age, storm, fire or other injury; 
2.  The tree contains a disease or infestation that could spread to other trees; 
3.  The tree prevents the reasonable development of the site, including the installation of solar energy equipment or the installation or replacement of utility lines; 
4.  The tree is causing or is likely to cause structural damage or problems to buildings or underground facilities due to excessive root or trunk growth, or soil expansion and contraction caused by uneven water uptake; or 
5.  The tree should be removed for some other reason related to the public health, safety or welfare. This finding cannot serve as the sole basis for removal of high quality trees. 
The city manager or designee may require the applicant to provide verification of the findings in the form of a written report signed and sealed by an appropriate licensed professional within the State of Florida. Regulated trees shall not be removed, damaged or relocated for the purpose of installing, replacing or maintaining utility lines and connections unless no reasonably practical alternative is available, as determined by the city manager or designee. Where a tree may be preserved by cutting the tree roots instead of removing a tree, that strategy shall be preferred. 
G.  Natural emergencies or disasters. In the case of natural emergencies or disasters such as hurricanes, windstorms, floods or other disasters, issuances of permits for the removal of damaged trees may be waived by the city manager or designee. Such waiver may not be for an indefinite period and shall expire when the city manager or designee determines that emergency conditions have ended. 
H.  Commercial tree removal permits. Commercial tree removal permits may be granted for the removal of trees associated with forestry management, tree harvest and other similar commercial purposes in accordance with the requirements of this subsection. 
1.  Applicability. Commercial tree removal permits may be requested in lieu of other tree removal permits required by this section where no development of the property is intended. Where development of the property is planned, the petitioner shall address tree removal within the development plan review or normal tree removal processes. 
2.  Permit granting authority. The city manager or designee or the development review board have authority to grant commercial tree removal permits as described below. 
3.  Receipt of request. Owners of property may request the appropriate authority to grant a permit for the commercial removal of trees by filing such an application with the city, on forms supplied by the city, together with the appropriate fee. The request shall be accompanied with the following information supplied by the applicant: 
a.  Suitability of the trees for harvest. 
b.  Harvesting methods to be used. 
c.  Sedimentation and erosion control measures to be used. 
d.  Plan of property showing location of required buffers next to water bodies and property lines and tree canopy to remain as applicable. 
e.  Tree protection measures for trees to remain. 
f.  Species of trees to be used for replacement. 
4.  Notice. Whenever a property is under consideration for a permit, except any property designated agriculture on the future land use map, all owners of property adjacent to the property shall be given notice by mail. Such notice shall be mailed at least 15 calendar days prior to the granting of the permit. For the purpose of this notification, an owner of property shall be deemed to be the person who, by his/her address, is so shown on the tax rolls of the city. If any such property is part of the common area of a condominium, notice shall be sent to all of the condominium unit owners as shown on the latest tax rolls. Additionally, the property under consideration shall also have a sign posted at least five calendar days prior to the date the permit is to be granted. The sign shall specify that the property is under consideration for a permit allowing tree removal for commercial purposes and specify the date the permit is to be granted. 
5.  Procedure for review. If less than 20 percent of the noticed property owners file a written objection to the proposed tree removal within 15 calendar days of the mailing of the notice, the commercial tree removal permit may be issued provided all other provisions of this section and this chapter have been met. 
a.  If 20 percent or more of such noticed property owners file a written objection within 15 calendar days of the date of mailing of the notice, the development review board shall hold a public hearing in accordance with its rules. The development review board, in deciding whether to approve or disapprove the application, shall consider the factors delineated in subsections H.7. and 8. of this section. 
b.  Parcels designated agriculture on the future land use map. All applications for tree removal on such parcels shall be reviewed by the city manager or designee, who, in deciding whether to approve or deny the application, shall consider the factors delineated in subsections H.7. and 8. of this section. Appeals of the decision of the city manager or designee shall be made in accordance with provisions for appeal as provided in this chapter. 
6.  Action on application. Upon receipt of a completed application and following the notice period specified above, or after the permit has been granted after a hearing under subsection H.5., the city manager or designee will issue the commercial tree removal permit, except as may be modified below, with the following conditions: 
a.  Unless otherwise specified herein, trees will be removed according to best management practices, as specified in "A Landowner's Handbook for Controlling Erosion from Forestry Operations," published by the state department of agriculture and consumer services, division of forestry, or subsequent manuals on file with the public works department. 
b.  No regulated tree shall be removed and no logging road shall be constructed: 
i.  Within 35 feet of the break in slope at the top of the bank of any creek; 
ii.  Within 35 feet of the landward extent of a lake or wetland; or 
iii.  Within a designated conservation management area. 
This requirement may be waived where crossing of the creek by a bridge is necessary to access the property where trees are to be removed. Such waiver shall be limited to the area necessary to construct the bridge. For the purposes of this subsection, creeks shall be those identified by the surface water district provisions of article VIII. 
c.  Following removal of the trees granted by the permit, the petitioner shall within 18 months provide for reforestation of the site by one of the following means: 
i.  Where forestry or other agricultural use of the property is to continue in the conservation or agriculture districts, pine seedlings or other forestry or agricultural crops, including pasture, may be planted. 
ii.  Where forestry use is to be abandoned or in districts where it is not a permitted use, replacement of trees shall be required as per this article. This requirement may be waived when an adequate number of trees of appropriate size and species remain on-site to meet this requirement and are certified by the city manager or designee to be in good health and free from damage caused by harvest operation which may result in the death of the tree. 
d.  All invasive nonnative tree species listed in section 30-8.3 may be required to be removed from the property. 
7.  Imposition of additional conditions. The city manager or designee or development review board, as appropriate, may impose other reasonable conditions where need is demonstrated. Such conditions may include restrictions on percentage of canopy removed or the prohibition of tree removal from certain portions of the site under consideration. The city manager or designee, or development review board, as appropriate, shall be guided by, but not restricted to, the following criteria in imposing such additional conditions: 
a.  The need to provide buffers to adjacent developed property; 
b.  The need to protect soils highly susceptible to soil erosion as identified by the soil survey of the county; 
c.  The need to protect slopes in excess of ten percent, particularly near creeks and other bodies of water; 
d.  The need to protect existing wetlands, floodplains and flood channels and other environmentally sensitive areas as shown on existing maps, photographs and other reliable and available sources; and 
e.  The need to preserve endangered, threatened or special concern animal and vegetative species, habitats and communities, rare hardwood hammocks or champion trees as identified from competent sources. 
8.  Removal of trees specifically planted or managed for harvest. Where environmental and other factors limit the removal of trees on 75 percent or more of the site under consideration, the commercial tree removal permit may be denied. However, factors identified above may not be used to unduly prohibit the harvest of trees where it is demonstrated that the trees to be harvested were specifically planted for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 170971 , § 3, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-8.8. - Tree preservation during development and construction. 
A.  Barriers required. Prior to clearing, demolition, or other construction activities, the city manager or designee or reviewing board shall determine which trees, if any, require protection. Protective barriers shall be constructed, as necessary, to prevent the destruction or damaging of regulated trees that are located within 50 feet of any construction activity or storage of equipment and materials. Trees identified for preservation which are destroyed or severely damaged shall be mitigated in accordance with section 30-8.7 prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or use. To avoid conflicts between barrier placements and demolition and construction activities, barriers shall be drawn to scale on the demolition, grading and paving sheets of the development plan. 
B.  Barrier zones. All regulated trees in areas of demolition or construction that have not been permitted nor designated for removal by either the terms of the permit or approved development order shall be protected by barrier zones erected and inspected prior to construction of any structures, road, utility service or other improvements. Barricades shall comply with the following: 
1.  Protective barriers shall be plainly visible and shall create a continuous boundary around trees or vegetation clusters in order to prevent encroachment by machinery, vehicles or stored materials. To further protect tree roots, a layer of wood chips at least eight inches thick shall cover the soil within the barricade. Barricades shall be at least three feet tall and shall be constructed of either wooden corner posts at least two by four inches buried at least one foot deep, with at least two courses of wooden side slats at least one by four inches with colored flagging or colored mesh attached, or constructed of one-inch angle iron corner posts with brightly colored mesh construction fencing attached. High quality heritage trees shall be protected by galvanized chain link fencing a minimum of 48 inches high, 11.5-gauge wire, two and three-eighths inch mesh size secured with one and seven-eighths inch line posts no further than ten feet apart secured at a depth of three feet below soil line. Corners shall be secured with two and three-eighths inch line posts secured to a depth of four feet below soil line. 
2.  Barriers shall be placed at the greater of the following: 
a.  At or outside the dripline for all heritage and champion trees and all regulated pine and palm trees; 
b.  At a minimum of two-thirds of the area of the dripline for all other regulated species; or 
c.  At the tree root plate. 
3.  If complying with the above placement of barriers is found to unduly restrict development of the property, the city manager or designee, or the appropriate reviewing board may approve alternative barrier placements or methods of protection provided that at least 50 percent of the area under the canopy dripline remains undisturbed (no grade change or root cut) and further provided that there shall be no disturbance to the tree root plate. Protective barriers may not be removed or relocated without such approval. 
4.  No trenching allowed within the protective barrier zone. Hand dig to install utility if approved by city manager or designee. Where roots greater than one inch in diameter are damaged or exposed, they shall be cut cleanly and re-covered with soil within one hour of damage or exposure. 
5.  Protective barriers shall remain in place and intact until such time as landscape operations begin. If construction needs dictate a temporary removal (for less than 24 hours), the city manager or designee, may approve or deny the temporary removal of protective barriers. 
6.  Landscape preparation in the protected area shall be limited to shallow discing of the area. Discing shall be limited to a depth of four inches unless specifically approved otherwise by the city manager or designee. 
7.  No building materials, machinery or harmful chemicals shall be placed within protective barriers, except short-duration placements of clean fill soil that will not harm the tree. Such short-duration placements shall not exceed seven calendar days. The city manager or designee shall be notified of the dates the short duration placement will begin and end. The original soil grade that existed within the protected areas prior to the placement of such fill shall be restored. 
8.  The American National Standards Institute A-300 Part V: Management of Trees and Shrubs During Site Planning, Site Development, and Site Construction or other nationally recognized arboricultural standards approved by the city manager or designee shall be used as guidelines for tree protection, planting, pruning and care during development and construction. 
C.  Preservation generally. Trees may be preserved on development sites in locations where a new tree would be required. Credit for the preservation of such a tree will be given if the requirements listed below are met. During construction, if the requirements are not being met and/or the preserved tree is unlikely to survive in satisfactory condition, the owner shall apply for a tree removal permit in accordance with the requirements of this code. 
1.  Fifty percent of the area within the dripline of the tree shall be naturally preserved, both above- and below-ground. Under no circumstances shall permission be given for any construction activity within the tree root plate. The 50 percent protection zone shall include the entire tree root plate. Landscape materials are permitted within the 50 percent protection zone but not within the tree root plate. Within the 50 percent protection zone there shall be no alteration to the existing grade, no trenching or cutting of roots, and no storage of materials or fill. No heavy equipment shall be permitted within the protection zone. All work shall be done by hand. There shall be no compaction of the soil, as from heavy construction equipment, and no concrete, paint, chemicals or other foreign substances placed within this protection zone. 
2.  The city manager or designee may approve paving blocks within the protection zone, provided that all work is done by hand (no machinery), and that the soil area under the pavers is not compacted beyond the bulk density limits of 1.40 g/cc in clay, 1.50 g/cc in loam, or 1.70 g/cc in sand. No lime rock or other material shall be used underneath the pavers. Pavers may not be placed within the tree root plate. 
3.  There shall be no evidence of active insect infestation potentially lethal to the trees and no damage from skinning, barking or bumping. 
4.  The root plate of regulated trees within the public right-of-way should not be impacted by adjacent development, even where the tree root plate encroaches on the private property. The installation of new utilities or improvements to public utilities required to serve the development should not require the removal of trees on the public right-of-way, where the required separations from the utilities can be met. 
5.  If any preserved tree is not alive and healthy three years after the certificate of occupancy is granted, it shall be removed and replaced with the tree or trees which originally would have been required by this code. The area that was preserved to accommodate the preserved tree shall be maintained in an unpaved condition and the replacement trees established in this area. 
6.  The city shall maintain, and make available to the public, descriptions and illustrations of tree preservation and protection practices which will assist in assuring that preserved trees survive construction and land development. 
D.  Inspections. The city manager or designee shall conduct periodic inspections of the site before work begins and/or during clearing, construction and/or post-construction phases of development in order to ensure compliance with these regulations and the intent of this section. 
E.  Denial; conditions. The reviewing board or city manager or designee may deny a proposal for development because one or more champion or high quality heritage trees have not been preserved or adequately protected, or may require special conditions of approval that may include but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Requiring the trees to be protected with chain link barricades. 
2.  Requiring a soil aeration system in the vicinity of tree roots as needed, particularly where fill will be added over roots of preserved trees or where compaction may reduce the availability of water and oxygen to tree roots.  
Sec. 30-8.9. - Installation and maintenance of landscape materials. 
A.  Installation. 
1.  Quality. All plants shall be Florida Nursery Grade Number 1 or better, according to the Florida Department of Agriculture Division of Plant Industry Grades and Standards for nursery plants. They shall be healthy, disease-free and pest-free, and hardy for the North Florida region. Nursery invoices or labels shall clearly specify that Grade Number 1 or better plants were purchased for installation. 
2.  Tree size. Trees must have a minimum height of seven feet and a minimum trunk caliper of two inches. Trees must be in minimum 30-gallon containers or field-grown material and must have a ball diameter of at least 28 inches. Trees must have healthy root systems that have been pruned according to the Florida Grades and Standards best practices. Tree species must be selected from the Gainesville tree list with estimated size at maturity at least as large as the tree being replaced. 
3.  Tree planting and mulching specifications. Trees should be planted in holes at least twice the diameter of the rootball. The final level of the newly planted tree should place the root-trunk union between .5 and 1.5 inches above grade. Mulch should be no deeper than one inch over the top of the rootball. A tree ring to hold water in place should be constructed to overlap the meeting of the edge of the rootball and surrounding soil. This tree ring and an area one foot outside it should be covered with four inches of mulch. 
4.  Utility and landscaping compatibility. Lighting fixtures, transformer boxes, fire hydrants, power, cable television or telephone lines, sewer or water pipes, or any other existing or proposed utility facilities and associated appurtenances, shall be located and designed to provide adequate service in the presence of landscape materials when such landscape reaches maturity. Reasonable efforts shall be made to install utility service without impacting existing trees. Excavation to install utility services shall remain at least five feet outside the root plate of any existing high quality heritage tree. Lighting fixtures shall be located a minimum of ten feet from all required shade trees. No shade tree that exceeds 40 feet in height at maturity shall be placed within 15 feet of any overhead utility. Fire hydrant connections and building fire connections shall not be obstructed by plant material, nor shall dangerous plants such as Spanish bayonet be located within 15 feet of such facilities. Small, low-growing shrubs (ten inches or less in height) may be planted to soften the visual impact of these facilities, provided that the necessary access to such facilities is maintained. 
5.  Native trees. At least 75% of trees on the required landscape plan should be native species. Cultivars of native trees are considered native species. 
6.  Environmental suitability. The use and location of all landscaping materials shall be compatible with the soil and light needs of the proposed plant material. At the time of the required pre-purchase on-site inspection with the city manager or designee, substitution of plant species may be approved due to environmental unsuitability of the specified plant materials or due to existing infrastructure conditions on the site. If changes will occur for more than 25 percent of the trees on the site, then the changes shall be red-lined on the plans on file with the community development and building inspections departments. Tree substitutions should be for trees that reach the same maximum height at maturity. 
7.  Water conservation. The use of grass, lawn, or turf shall be minimized to conserve water. All sod shall be inspected prior to purchase and installation and shall be certified as free of noxious weeds by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Division of Plant Industry. All landscaped areas not covered with vegetation shall be covered with organic mulches. No plastic surface covers shall be used. 
B.  Replacement of dead material. All trees planted in compliance with an approved development plan or as mitigation for the removal of regulated trees shall be maintained in good health. Within six months of a determination by the city manager or designee that a required tree or plant is dead or severely damaged or diseased, the tree or plant shall be replaced by the owner in accordance with the standards in section 30-8.9. If replacement trees die repeatedly, the city manager or designee may require that additional high quality shade trees be planted on the site. 
C.  Pruning. All trees may be pruned to maintain shape and promote their shade-giving qualities and to remove diseased or dying portions in areas where falling limbs could be a hazard to people or property. Tree pruning shall be done in accordance with the most current version of the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations "Tree. Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance" (ANSI A300) and "Pruning. Trimming. Repairing. Maintaining, and Removing Trees, and Cutting Brush —Safety Requirements"(ANSI Z133). No more than 25 percent of the crown should be removed at one time. On young trees, limb removal shall leave no more than 33 percent of the trunk bare of branches. So that shade trees can grow with sturdy structure, the top branch or leader shall not be removed. Hooks shall not be used to climb trees unless the tree is being taken down. Mature trees overgrowing vehicular use areas shall be pruned to allow the passage of emergency vehicles. Excessive pruning, pollarding, or pruning of trees into round balls of crown or branches, which results in an unnecessary reduction of shade and promotes weak branch attachments is prohibited. If the city manager or designee finds same additional shade trees shall be required to be planted on the site on up to an inch-for-inch basis. 
(Ord. No. 170971 , § 4, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-8.10. - Gainesville Tree List. 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 	Mature Urban Height 	Est. Crown (20 Yr) 	Avg. Spread (35 Yr) 	Native 	High Quality Shade 	OK Under OHL 	Street Buffer 	Trees in Natural Buffer 	Lot 	Gate 	Wet/Dry 	Retention Basins 
Ash, Green 	Fraxinus pennsylvanica 	60' 	25' 	50' 	x 	x 		x 	x 	x 		W 	x 
Ash, White 	Fraxinus americana 	60' 	30' 	60' 	x 	x 		S 	x 	x 	L 		
Bay, Red 	Persea borbonia 	40' 	15' 	25' 	x 		x 		x 				
Bay, Swamp 	Persea palustris 	35' 	15' 	20' 	x 				x 			W 	x 
Basswood 	Tilia caroliniana 	50' 	30' 	55' 	x 			S 	x 	x 			x 
Birch, River 	Betula nigra 	45' 	25' 	35' 	x 		x 	U 	x 		M 	W 	x 
Blackgum 	Nyssa sylvatica 	45' 	25' 	35' 	x 		x 	S 	x 	x 	M 		x 
Boxelder 	Acer negundo 	50' 	30' 	40' 	x 				x 				
Buckeye, Red 	Aesculus pavia 	25' 	10' 	15' 	x 		x 	U 	x 				x 
Buckthorn, Carolina 	Rhamnus caroliniana 	20' 	10' 	15' 	x 		x 	U 	x 				
Bumelia 	Sideroxylon tenax 	20' 	7' 	12' 	x 		x 	U 	x 				
Bumelia, Silver 	Sideroxylon alachuense 	20' 	7' 	12' 	x 		x 	U 	x 				
Catalpa, Southern 	Catalpa bignonoides 	60' 	20' 	30' 									
Cedar, Atlantic White 	Chamaecyparis thyoides 	45' 	15' 	25' 	x 				x 				x 
Cedar, Eastern Red 	Juniperus virginiana 	60' 	15' 	25' 	x 		x 	U 	x 			D 	
Cedar, Southern Red 	Juniperus silicicola 	60' 	20' 	30' 	x 				x 				
Cherry-laurel 	Prunus caroliniana 	40' 	20' 	20' 	x 			U 	x 				
Chinese Pistachio 	Pistacia chinensis 	50' 	25' 	45' 			x 	U 					
Crabapple 	Malus angustifolia 	25' 	20' 	20' 	x 				x 				
Crape Myrtle 	Lagerstromia indica 	35' 	15' 	25' 			x 	U 			S 		
Cypress, Bald 	Taxodium distichum 	50' 	20' 	30' 	x 	x 	x 	U 	x 		M 	W 	x 
Cypress, Pond 	Taxodium ascendens 	50' 	15' 	20' 	x 	x 	x 	U 	x 			W 	x 
Devil's-walkingstick 	Aralia spinosa 	30' 	10' 	15' 	x 				x 				
Dogwood, Flowering 	Cornus florida 	35' 	25' 	35' 	x 		x 	U 	x 		S 		
Elm, Cedar 	Ulmus crassifolia 	60' 	30' 	50' 	x 	x 		S 	x 	x 	L 		
Elm, Chinese (Drake) 	Ulmus parvifolia CV. Drake 	40' 	30' 	40' 			x 	S 		x 	M 		
Elm, Florida 	Ulmus americana floridana 	60' 	30' 	50' 	x 	x 		S 	x 	x 	L 		
Elm, Water 	Planera aquatica 	25' 	15' 	20' 	x 		x 		x 			W 	x 
Elm, Winged 	Ulmus alata 	65' 	30' 	60' 	x 	x 		S 	x 	x 	M 		
Fringe Tree 	Chionanthus virginicus 	25' 	10' 	20' 	x 		x 		x 		S 		x 
Fringe Tree, Chinese 	Chionanthus retusus 	30' 	15' 	25' 			x 	U 			S 		
Hawthorn, Green 	Crataegus viridis 	25' 	7' 	10' 	x 		x 		x 				
Hawthorn, Parsley 	Crataegus marshalii 	20' 	7' 	10' 	x 		x 		x 				x 
Hawthorn, May 	Crataegus aestivalis 	25' 	10' 	15' 	x 		x 		x 		S 	W 	
Hawthorn, Cockspur 	Crataegus crusgalli 	20' 	7' 	10' 	x 		x 		x 				
Hawthorn, 1-flrd 	Crataegus uniflora 	15' 	7' 	10' 	x 		x 		x 				
Hercules Club 	Zanthoxylum clava-herculis 	50' 	25' 	40' 	x 				x 				
Hickory, Mockernut 	Carya tomentosa 	45' 	20' 	30' 	x 	x 		S 	x 			D 	
Hickory, Pignut 	Carya glabra 	55' 	20' 	30' 	x 	x 		S 	x 				
Hickory, Water 	Carya aquatica 	40' 	30' 	50' 	x 				x 			W 	x 
Holly, American 	Ilex opaca 	35' 	15' 	25' 	x 	x 	x 	U 	x 		M 		
Holly, dahoon 	Ilex cassine 	30' 	15' 	25' 	x 	x 	x 	U 	x 		S 	W 	x 
Holly, East Palatka 	Ilex × attenuata "E. Palatka" 	35' 	20' 	30' 	x 		x 	U 		x 	S 		
Holly, Savannah, etc. 	Ilex × attenuata varieties 	40' 	15' 	35' 	x 		x 	U 		x 	S 		
Holly, Weeping 	Ilex vomitoria' Pendula' 	35' 	15' 	25' 			x 	U 					
Holly, Yaupon 	Ilex vomitoria 	20' 	15' 	20' 	x 		x 	U 	x 				
Hop-hornbeam 	Ostrya virginiana 	35' 	25' 	35' 	x 	x 	x 	U 	x 		S 		
Hornbeam 	Carpinus caroliniana 	35' 	25' 	35' 	x 		x 	U 	x 		S 	W 	x 
Jerusalem-thorn 	Parkinsonia aculeata 	30' 	25' 	30' 			x 						
Loblolly Bay 	Gordonia lasianthus 	60' 	20' 	35' 	x 				x 			W 	
Locust, Black 	Robinia pseudoacacia 	50' 	20' 	35' 									
Locust, Honey 	Gleditsia triacanthos 	40' 	20' 	35' 	x 		x 	U 	x 		S 		
Loquat 	Eriobotrya japonica 	30' 	20' 	30' 	not recommended for planting 
Magnolia, Ash 	Magnolia ashei 	20' 	15' 	20' 	x 		x 				S 		
Magnolia, Oriental 	Magnolia spp. 	25' 	15' 	25' 				U 					
Magnolia, Southern 	Magnolia grandifloria 	90' 	20' 	35' 	x 	x 		S 	x 	x 	L 		
Magnolia, Sweetbay 	Magnolia virginiana 	55' 	25' 	40' 	x 				x 			W 	x 
Maple, Florida 	Acer barbatum (floridanum) 	50' 	25' 	40' 	x 	x 		S 	x 	x 	M 		
Maple, Red 	Acer rubrum 	55' 	25' 	40' 	x 				x 		M 	W 	x 
Mulberry, Red 	Morus rubra 	50' 	25' 	35' 	x 				x 				
Oak, Basket 	Quercus michauxii 	60' 	25' 	40' 	x 	x 		S 	x 	x 			x 
Oak, Bluejack 	Quercus incana 	40' 	25' 	30' 	x 		x 	U 	x 			D 	
Oak, Bluff (local) 	Quercus austrina 	60' 	30' 	60' 	x 	x 		S 	x 	x 	L 		
Oak, Diamondleaf 	Quercus laurifolia 	100' 	40' 	60' 	x 				x 				
Oak, Durand 	Quercus durandii 	70' 	40' 	60' 	x 								
Oak, Laurel 	Quercus hemisphaerica 	100' 	40' 	60' 	x 	not recommended for planting 
Oak, Live 	Quercus virginiana 	80' 	45' 	80' 	x 	x 		S 	x 	x 	L 		
Oak, Post 	Quercus stellata 	60' 	25' 	40' 	x 				x 	x 		D 	
Oak, Sand Live 	Quercus geminata 	60' 	30' 	50' 	x 	x 			x 	x 		D 	
Oak, Shumard 	Quercus shumardii 	100' 	30' 	50' 	x 			S 	x 	x 	L 		x 
Oak, Southern Red 	Quercus falcata 	65' 	30' 	50' 	x 	x 		S 	x 	x 			
Oak, Turkey 	Quercus laevis 	60' 	25' 	40' 	x 		x 		x 	x 			
Oak, White 	Quercus alba 	65' 	20' 	35' 	x 			S 	x 	x 	L 		
Olive, Wild 	Osmanthus americanus 	35' 	20' 	30' 	x 		x 	U 			S 		
Palm, Cabbage 	Sabal palmetto 	80' 	14' 	12' 	x 				x 		M 	W 	
Palm, Date 	Phoenix spp. 	60' 	26' 	24' 									
Palm, Pindo 	Butia capitata 	20' 	14' 	12' 			x 						
Palm, Washington 	Washingtonia robusta 	90' 	12' 	10' 									
Pear, Bradford 	Pyrus calleryana (Aristocrat) 	40' 	15' 	20' 			x 	U 			S 		
Pecan 	Carya illinoiensis 	70' 	35' 	55' 		x 		S 	x 				
Persimmon 	Diospyros virginiana 	60' 	15' 	30' 	x 	x 			x 				x 
Pine, Loblolly 	Pinus taeda (rust res.) 	110' 	20' 	30' 	x 								
Pine, Longleaf 	Pinus palustris 	90' 	20' 	30' 	x 	x 		U 	X 		L 		
Pine, Pond 	Pinus serotina 	90' 	20' 	30' 	x 							W 	x 
Pine, Shortleaf 	Pinus echinata 	100' 	15' 	25' 	x 								
Pine, Slash 	Pinus elliottii (rust res.) 	100' 	20' 	30' 	x 								
Pine, Spruce 	Pinus glabra 	50' 	25' 	40' 	x 			U 	x 	x 	M 		
Plum, American 	Prunus americana 	30' 	20' 	30' 	x 		x 	U 	x 				
Plum, Chickasaw 	P. angustifolia 	20' 	15' 	25' 	x 		x 	U 	x 		S 		
Plum, Flatwoods 	Prunus umbellata 	20' 	15' 	25' 	x 		x 	U 	x 		S 		
Podocarpus 	Podocarpus macrophylla 	40' 	10' 	15' 									
Redbud 	Cercis canadensis 	30' 	25' 	30' 	x 			U 	x 		S 		
Rusty Blackhaw 	Viburnum rufidulum 	30' 	15' 	20' 	x 			U 	x 		S 		
Sassafras 	Sassafras albidum 	30' 	10' 	15' 	x 				x 				
Silverbell (Two wing) 	Halesia diptera 	25' 	10' 	15' 	x 		x 	U 	x 				x 
Snowbell, American 	Styrax americana 	20' 	10' 	15' 	x 		x 	U 	x 			W 	x 
Soapberry 	Sapindus marginatus 	35' 	15' 	20' 	x 				x 	x 			
Sparkleberry Tree 	Vaccinium arboreum 	20' 	10' 	15' 	x 		x 		x 		S 		
Sugarberry 	Celtis laevigata 	100' 	30' 	50' 	x 			S 	x 	x 			
Sweetgum, Formosa 	Liquidambar formosana 	40' 	20' 	30' 			x 	U 					
Sweetgum 	Liquidambar styraciflua 	100' 	30' 	50' 	x 				x 			W 	
Sycamore 	Platanus occidentalis 	100' 	40' 	60' 	x 			S 		x 	L 		
Tulip Tree 	Liriodendron tulipifera 	100' 	25' 	40' 	x 	x 		S 	x 		L 	W 	x 
Tupelo, Black 	Nyssa sylvatica 	60' 	20' 	25' 	x 	x 			x 				x 
Tupelo, Ogeechee 	Nyssa ogeche 	60' 	25' 	40' 	x 				x 			W 	x 
Tupelo, Swamp 	Nyssa biflora 	60' 	25' 	40' 	x 				x 			W 	x 
Tupelo, Water 	Nyssa aquatica 	60' 	25' 	40' 	x 				x 			W 	x 
Viburnum, Walter 	Viburnum obovatum 	15' 	10' 	15' 	x 		x 	U 	x 				x 
Walnut, Black 	Juglans nigra 	50' 	20' 	25' 	x 								
Xylosma (Logwood) 	Xylosma Congestum 	15' 	8' 	12' 									
Yew, Florida 	Taxus floridana 	15' 	8' 	12' 	x 				x 				
 
U= Understory S = shade trees in Street Buffer column 
Mature Urban Height refers to the expectation for trees planted in urban condition.  
DIVISION 3. - NATURAL AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES 
 
Sec. 30-8.11. - Generally. 
A.  Purpose and intent. Natural and archaeological resources within and around the City of Gainesville provide environmental and social benefits and functions, such as water quality improvement, flood storage and attenuation, erosion control, biological diversity, and groundwater recharge, along with recreational, aesthetic and educational opportunities for people. It is the purpose and intent of this section to: 
1.  Protect, conserve and restore natural and archaeological resources, and their environmental functions, which are of aesthetic, ecological, economic, educational, historical, recreational, or scientific value to the city and its citizens; 
2.  Preserve the ecological values and functions of significant natural communities, in order to maintain and enhance the diversity and distribution of native plant and animal species, especially for species listed for protection by state and federal agencies; 
3.  Conserve, enhance, and manage the ecological integrity of natural systems that have aesthetic, ecological, economic, educational, historical, recreational, or scientific value due to the interrelationships within the ecosystem and its natural communities, and among the populations of species within the communities; 
4.  Promote connectivity and minimize fragmentation of natural systems, and to protect wetlands, floodplains, and associated uplands in a broad systems context through resource-based planning across multiple parcels rather than by individual parcel; 
5.  Provide a greater degree of protection for strategic ecosystem resource areas in recognition that the larger resource areas within strategic ecosystems provide the broadest range of benefits, functions, and values listed above; 
6.  Provide protection for Floridan aquifer high recharge areas, and for archaeological and geological resources, which are significant due to the interrelationships of natural or cultural resource values, characteristics, or due to unique hazards or vulnerabilities posed by developed land uses; 
7.  Avoid loss or degradation of such benefits and functions, to minimize unavoidable degradation or loss of benefits and functions and to require sustainable mitigation that fully offsets any unavoidable loss or degradation of such benefits and functions; and 
8.  Ensure that development activities that cause the unavoidable degradation or loss of benefits or functions provided by these resources are clearly in the public interest before approval of same. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to adversely impact any natural and archaeological resource regulated under this chapter without first obtaining the required natural and archaeological resources review and approval in accordance with these regulations. In addition to the regulations set forth in these sections, there may be other regulations within the City Code of Ordinances and the Alachua County Code of Ordinances that are applicable, including but not limited to: 
1.  Water quality code - Chapter 77, Alachua County Code. 
2.  Hazardous materials management code - Chapter 353, Alachua County Code. 
3.  Wellfield protection zone - City Land Development Code. 
4.  Surface waters and wetlands - City Land Development Code. 
5.  Landscape and tree management - City Land Development Code. 
6.  Historic preservation/conservation - City Land Development Code. 
7.  Stormwater management - City Land Development Code. 
C.  Scope of review. The following types of applications shall be reviewed to determine whether proposed development impacts a regulated natural or archaeological resource and if so, whether the proposed development complies with the Comprehensive Plan, the Land Development Code and other applicable law with respect to regulated natural and archaeological resources: 
1.  Future land use map amendments (including large-scale and small-scale); 
2.  Rezonings and amendments to rezoning ordinances; 
3.  Development plans; 
4.  Subdivisions/plats; 
5.  Special use permits; 
6.  Commercial tree removal permits; and 
7.  Other development applications; including but not limited to special exceptions and variances, but excluding building permits. 
D.  Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from review of impacts to regulated natural or archaeological resources. Such activities may, however, require a permit or review under other applicable sections of the Land Development Code. 
1.  Certain small parcels of record. Any parcel of record as of November 13, 1991, that is less than or equal to five acres in size, and does not contain listed species, and does not include in whole or in part an archaeological site identified by a Florida Master Site file number. However, this exemption does not apply in the event the planning parcel equals or is greater than five acres in size. 
2.  Bona-fide agriculture/silviculture activities. Ongoing bona fide agriculture or silviculture operations. However, for bona fide agricultural or silvicultural activities that are part of an application in subsection C. above and located within strategic ecosystems, identification and verification of best management practices shall be required as follows in order to remain exempt from resource review. All references to statutes, publications and rules in this subsection refer to the most current version, as may be amended or renumbered from time to time. 
a.  The owner or operator shall submit to the city a signed statement identifying and verifying the use of current applicable best management practices. The most recent federal, state, and water management district best management practices (BMPs) shall be required, including, but not limited to, the following: 
i.  Best Management Practices for Silviculture (2003), incorporated in Rule 5I-6.002, F.A.C., and available from the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services (FDACS). 
ii.  BMPs for Agrichemical Handling and Farm Equipment Maintenance (1998), published by FDACS and FDEP. 
iii.  Water Quality BMPs for Cow/Calf Operations (1999), published by the Florida Cattleman's Association. 
iv.  Water Quality/Quantity Best Management Practices for Florida Vegetable and Agronomic Crops (2005), available from FDACS. 
v.  Protecting Natural Wetlands: A Guide to Stormwater BMPs (1996), published by the U.S. EPA. 
b.  Alternatively, required use of best management practices may be satisfied by participation in one or more of the following programs: 
i.  Non-silvicultural activities: Notice of Intent filed with the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services as outlined in the Florida Administrative Code. 
ii.  Silvicultural activities: 
1)  Notice of Intent filed with Florida Forest Service, as outlined in Rule 5I-6.004, Florida Administrative Code; 
2)  Certification by one of the following: Forest Stewardship Council, American Forest and Paper Association's Sustainable Forestry Initiative, American Forest Foundation's American Tree Farm System, Green Tag Forestry, Forest Stewardship Program; or 
3)  Participation in one of the following cost-share programs: Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP), Wildlife Habitat Incentives Program (WHIP), or Forest Land Enhancement Program (FLEP). 
3.  Removal of invasive non-native vegetation on conservation lands. Projects for which a plan has been approved by a federal, state, or local agency or water management district for the removal of undesirable invasive or non-native vegetation on lands owned, controlled, or managed for conservation purposes, excluding vegetation in surface waters and wetlands, which are separately regulated under section 30-8.19 of this Code. 
4.  Vegetation on government-maintained land. Alteration of vegetation pursuant to an adopted management or restoration plan for government-maintained parks, recreation areas, wildlife management areas, conservation areas and preserves. 
5.  Activities authorized by city-approved management plan. Activities consistent with a management plan adopted by, or reviewed and approved by the city, provided that the activities further the natural values and functions of the natural communities present. Examples of such activities include clearing firebreaks for prescribed burns or construction of fences. 
6.  Existing utility installations, drainage or stormwater easements, and road right-of-way. Alteration of vegetation within an existing utility, drainage, or stormwater easement after installation, where the vegetation is interfering with services provided by a utility or alteration of vegetation within an existing road right-of-way for normal maintenance activities. Alteration associated with new construction, expansion of existing facilities, and development activity at an existing site that extends beyond the existing easement area is not an exempt activity. 
7.  Fencing and firebreaks. The minimal removal of trees or understory necessary to construct a fence or wall, or to establish a firebreak, provided that: 
a.  No regulated tree(s) is removed; 
b.  The path cleared for the fence does not exceed 10 feet in width on either side of the fence or wall; 
c.  No equipment heavier than a one-ton pick-up truck is used; 
d.  Handheld outdoor power equipment or a standard farm tractor is used in clearing for the installation; 
e.  No dredge or fill activity is required other than the installation of fence and wall materials; 
f.  Access to navigable waterways will not be impaired by the construction; and 
g.  Firebreaks established and maintained along each side of a fence or wall shall not exceed 10 feet in width, unless specified by an approved land management plan, by the local fire officer, or, if applicable, in Best Management Practices for Silviculture (2003), incorporated in Rule 5I-6.002, F.A.C., both as may be amended or renumbered from time to time. 
8.  Survey or other required test. The necessary removal of vegetation by, or at the direction of, a State of Florida licensed professional surveyor and mapper, professional geologist, or professional engineer to conduct a survey or other required test, provided that no regulated tree is removed and the path cleared does not exceed ten feet in width. 
9.  Text amendments. Text amendments to PD zoning or PUD land use ordinances that are unrelated to development activity, including, but not limited to, changes in or additions of allowable uses, changes in the expiration dates, or changes in elevations or building facades. 
10.  De minimis impact. Any development activity or application for development review that is of such low intensity as to have a de minimis impact on regulated natural and archaeological resources as determined by the city manager or designee based on a professional review of the development site and application. This may include, but is not limited to, applications involving previously developed sites or small expansions at existing developed sites. 
11.  County land use and zoning. The property has county land use and zoning and will be reviewed under the county's regulations. 
12.  Certain prior city approvals. The property has a final master plan approved by the city prior to August 2, 2012; or has a valid PD zoning ordinance approved by the city prior to August 2, 2012 that addresses natural and archeological resources. 
13.  Certain sinkholes. Sinkholes that form on developed sites may be filled, repaired or otherwise stabilized in order to maintain or prevent structural damage to an existing building or facility (such as a stormwater basin or parking lot). 
E.  Levels of review. The level of resource review shall be classified as follows: 
1.  Basic review. Unless exempt, all applications shall undergo basic review. Basic review shall consist of determining, from available data sources and site visits (where necessary), the potential presence of any regulated natural or archaeological resource. If the basic review indicates the presence of any regulated natural or archaeological resource, then a level 1 review is required. Future land use map amendments (except for PUD) and rezonings (except for PD) both require only basic review. 
2.  Level 1 review. When the applicant has knowledge of the presence of any regulated natural or archaeological resource or if the basic review indicates the potential presence of any regulated natural or archaeological resource, then a level 1 review is required and the applicant shall submit a resources assessment of the natural and archaeological resources on the planning parcel. Level 1 review shall consist of a more detailed review of the project data and the potential impacts identified in the basic review and as further identified in a resources assessment. Level 1 review may include, but is not limited to, coordination with appropriate regulatory agencies, site visits/ground-truthing and recommendation of modifications to the development proposal in order to avoid and minimize impacts to any regulated natural or archaeological resource. If during review it is determined that a management plan for impacts to a regulated natural or archaeological resource is required or a mitigation plan is required, then a level 2 review is required. 
3.  Level 2 review. Level 2 review shall consist of extensive review of the potential impacts, including coordination with appropriate regulatory agencies, recommendation of modifications to the development proposal in order to avoid and minimize potential impacts, review of and comment on the mitigation plan to address remaining impacts or review of the management plan. 
F.  Review of planning parcel. The parcels involved in an application undergoing review to determine the presence of regulated natural and/or archaeological resources shall not be disaggregated, processed in piecemeal fashion, reviewed or developed in any manner that results in lesser natural resource protections than would otherwise be required if the planning parcel was considered as part of the application. 
1.  Applications for parcels that contain, or potentially contain, regulated natural and/or archaeological resources shall include documentation for the planning parcel. 
2.  The review and resource assessment required by this Code shall be done for the planning parcel. Where regulated natural or archaeological resources are identified in the resources assessment, in order to proceed with development on any portion of the parcel, the applicant shall demonstrate that developing the project on the parcel does not result in lesser protection of the regulated resources than would otherwise be required if the entire planning parcel were considered as part of the development proposal. 
G.  Methodology agreement. Prior to submittal of any application that requires a level 1 or level 2 review, a binding methodology agreement which includes, but is not limited to, the boundary of the planning parcel, boundary of proposed development, boundary of the geographic study area for resource assessment (if less than the full planning parcel), and the level of review, shall be signed by the city and the applicant. 
H.  Staff review. The city manager or designee is authorized to conduct all staff reviews pursuant to this section. The city manager or designee shall review and evaluate applications and resources assessments and make recommendations to the decision-making authority. Upon reviewing an application or resources assessment, the city manager or designee shall issue a written report that describes: The scope of the review conducted; the presence (or absence) of regulated natural or archaeological resources; the potential (or actual) impacts that the development will have on the regulated natural or archaeological resources; whether the proposed development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and complies with the Land Development Code and other applicable law with respect to the regulated natural or archaeological resources; appropriate site designs and strategies that maintain and protect the functions and values of the natural and archaeological resources; and recommendations to address the impacts. This written report may be issued in the form of technical review comments. 
I.  Review fees. The fees for all reviews are set forth in appendix A, schedule of fees, rates and charges. The fee will cover up to three reviews within a two-year period for the same project. By way of example, a single project that is required to undergo basic and level 1 reviews due to three applications filed within a two-year period for a PD rezoning, a special use permit and a development plan will be charged one level 1 review fee, not three level 1 review fees. The fees shall be paid within five business days (excluding weekends and city holidays) of the date of written notice from the city that a level 1 or level 2 review is required. Failure to timely pay the review fees shall result in the application being deemed incomplete and returned to the applicant. 
J.  Pre-application resource consultation. In order to assist applicants in assessing the probability that any of the regulated natural or archaeological resources are located at a site and to assist planning a development layout and design, an optional, pre-application resource consultation is available. Prior to the submittal of any application listed in section 30-8.11.C., an applicant may request this optional consultation. Staff will review submitted materials provided by the applicant and may visit the site with the applicant, if requested. There is no fee for this pre-application consultation. Any determinations based on this review are non-binding and are made solely for informational purposes and shall not be construed as an approval or denial or agreement to approve or deny a development order associated with the parcel. 
K.  Optional binding resource determination process. Prior to the submittal of any application listed in section 30-8.11.C., an applicant may apply for an optional, binding resource determination of regulated natural and archaeological resources. The purpose of a resource determination is to assist the applicant in determining if and where regulated natural and archaeological resources are present on the planning parcel prior to the preparation of detailed development plans and site layouts. This determination does not vest the applicant for any development rights that will be conferred as part of the final development review and approval process, and any determinations made during the resource determination review shall not be construed as an approval or denial or agreement to approve or deny a development order associated with the planning parcel. 
1.  Methodology agreement. Prior to submitting an application for a binding resource determination, the applicant and the city shall execute a methodology agreement as set forth in section 30-8.11 and establish specific calendar dates when the on-site resources assessment will be conducted. 
2.  Requirements for a pre-application resource determination. Upon execution of the methodology agreement, the applicant may submit an application for a binding resource determination on the form provided by the city. The application shall include payment of the required review fee set forth in appendix A of the city code of ordinances, and a resources assessment per the data requirements of section 30-8.12 for a level 1 review. Since the sole purpose of this binding resource determination is to determine if and where natural and archaeological resources are present on the planning parcel, the applicant shall not submit information about proposed protection areas, impacts of proposed development, or proposed measures to avoid, minimize, or mitigate impacts on regulated natural and archaeological resources and the city will not review or make binding determinations on any of the foregoing matters. 
3.  Staff review. The city manager or designee will review the application for completeness and request additional information as required if the application is deemed incomplete. After review of the application, which may include a site visit to the planning parcel, the city reviewer shall issue a written analysis of the application. The written analysis shall provide a verbal description and graphic depiction of the presence and location of significant natural communities, listed species or listed species habitat, strategic ecosystem resources, significant archaeological resources, Floridan aquifer high recharge areas, and significant geological features; any comments or conditions associated with the written analysis; and a recommendation to the city plan board. 
4.  Board review. City staff shall submit the written analysis to the city plan board. 
a.  Public hearing. The city plan board shall hold a public hearing on the resource determination. 
b.  Notice. Notice shall be mailed at least ten calendar days prior to the public hearing to all property owners within 400 feet of the planning parcel. For this purpose, the owner of property shall be deemed to be the person whose name and address is listed in the latest ad valorem tax records provided by the county property appraiser. 
c.  City plan board action. 
i.  In considering whether to approve or deny a binding resource determination, the city plan board shall consider the evidence presented in the public hearing, including the written analysis of the city reviewer. The burden of presenting competent substantial evidence in support of the application shall be upon the applicant. 
ii.  Action on the application shall be one of the following: 1) approval; 2) approval subject to conditions; or 3) denial, with a statement of the reasons for denial. 
d.  Appeal of decision. Appeal of the city plan board's decision on an application for a binding resource determination to the appropriate reviewing authority shall be as provided in this chapter. 
5.  Approval length, expiration and resource preservation. An approved resource determination is valid for a period of two years from the date of the final decision of the city plan board and is subject to the requirements set forth below. The resource determination shall expire at the end of the two year period. No extension shall be granted. 
a.  The resources assessment will be updated at the time of development plan application review to determine the presence of regulated sinkholes or listed species. This update is subject to the payment of the update fee set forth in appendix A of the city code of ordinances. 
b.  Updates will be required at the time of development plan review if changes have occurred on or adjacent to the planning parcel that could alter the resource assessment. These changes include, but are not limited to, flood, fire, major storm, or adjacent new development that might impact the planning parcel and the presence and location of the resources. This update is subject to the payment of the associated fee in appendix A of the city code of ordinances. 
c.  During the two-year period the resource determination is valid, the applicant shall use best practices to preserve and protect any regulated natural and archaeological resources on the planning parcel. 
d.  Approval of the resource determination establishes only the presence and location of the resources and does not exempt the applicant from level 1 review or level 2 review, if applicable, at the time of submittal of any application listed in section 30-8.11.C.  
Sec. 30-8.12. - Resources assessment. 
A.  A resources assessment, if required, shall be prepared by person(s) qualified in the appropriate fields of study, conducted according to professionally accepted standards, and based on data considered to be recent with respect to the resource. The resources assessment shall be submitted to the city for staff review and evaluation as part of a complete application for level 1 or level 2 resource review. 
B.  The assessment shall use and report professionally accepted scientific methodology specific for each natural and archaeological resource, in order to assess the actual and potential presence of regulated natural and archaeological resources. The assessment shall include background research and analysis of available existing data, as well as ground-truthing and resource location by hand-held GPS, at a minimum accuracy of the sub-3 meter standard. Field surveys shall be conducted during the seasons, times of day, and field conditions under which each regulated natural and archaeological resource characteristic would most likely be observed. If field surveys are not conducted, the presumption is that the resource is present. Background research and analysis with aerial map review and ground-truthing of resources adjacent to, and up to 50 feet away from the site shall be required. However, this shall not require entry onto property without the permission of the owner. At a minimum, the assessment shall include a report, with numbered pages, that includes: 
1.  Cover letter and/or executive summary, including written explanation of the need and intent of the development proposal, description of construction or alteration methodologies, and signed statement as to the likely presence of regulated natural or archaeological resources. 
2.  Maps of regulated natural and archaeological resources, drawn to scale, including a north arrow and scale, showing the following: 
a.  Location of project site in relation to major roads or other readily identifiable landmarks, showing parcel boundaries with dimensions. 
b.  Existing roads, structures, wells, utilities, and other existing conditions and noteworthy features. 
c.  Identification of all regulated natural and archaeological resources, labeled by resource type. 
d.  General vegetation characteristics and quality. 
e.  General soil types. 
f.  Proposed location of protected conservation resources and open space. 
g.  Potential connections to existing green space, open space, trails, and adjacent preservation or conservation resources. 
3.  Data and analysis that includes evaluation of the following: 
a.  Existing quality and characteristics of regulated natural or archaeological resources. 
b.  Impact of the development proposal on each individual regulated natural and archaeological resource and on the ecosystems in which they function. 
c.  Proposed measures to protect regulated natural and archaeological resources, specifically addressing avoidance, minimization, or mitigation of impacts on regulated natural and archaeological resources. 
d.  Methods of stormwater pollution prevention. 
4.  Names, qualifications, and resumes of all personnel involved in the assessment, and their roles with respect to the assessment. 
C.  Additional data and analysis, as determined by the city manager or designee, may be required in the resources assessment as appropriate to the complexity of the proposed development activity and types of regulated natural or archaeological resources identified. Such information may include but is not limited to: 
1.  Copies of historical and recent aerial photographs, topographic and other resource maps reviewed. 
2.  Land use and land cover classifications according to the Florida Land Use, Cover and Forms Classification System (FDOT); FNAI Guide; or the Florida regional water management district systems. 
3.  Wetlands, surface waters, or 100-year floodplains, floodways, flood channels or other special flood hazard areas identified by the National Wetlands Inventory; United States Geological Survey; Florida regional water management districts; Federal Emergency Management Agency; or the city public works department. 
4.  Wildlife corridors, biodiversity hot spots, strategic habitat conservation areas, or element occurrences identified by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission; FNAI; Florida Department of Environmental Protection; or North Central Florida Regional Planning Council. 
5.  Inventories of natural resources or archaeological sites within a planning parcel that includes additional lands under common ownership or control. 
6.  For a proposal involving only a portion of a planning parcel, detailed assessments of areas more than 50 feet beyond the boundary of the proposed development that are necessary to understand the scope of impact of proposed development on areas not included in the development application. However, this shall not require entry onto property without the permission of the owner. 
7.  A mitigation proposal, management plan, and/or monitoring plan, if applicable. 
8.  Field surveys of the natural communities and an inventory of the listed plant and animal species that are present. The field survey shall be required prior to vegetation removal on any portion of a planning parcel where either direct or indirect impact to significant natural communities, listed species habitat, or strategic ecosystem is known or reasonably likely to occur. Applicants are encouraged to arrange a pre-application conference with city staff prior to undertaking a survey. The field survey shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Non-destructive techniques designed to minimize disturbance of species shall be required, except where destructive or disruptive techniques (such as capture studies) are the preferred means to document species use given the size of the site and complexity of the resource. 
b.  The survey shall include detailed descriptions and maps indicating: 
i.  Field methods, conditions, dates, times of day, observations and results. 
ii.  Transect locations, where applicable. 
iii.  Natural communities or habitats, including dominant species, as field checked across the site. 
iv.  Representative color photographs taken at ground level. 
v.  Recent aerial photographs. 
vi.  Actual and potential presence of listed plant and animal species, including indicators (sightings, signs, tracks, trails, nests, evidence of feeding, etc.), population estimates, and occupied habitat boundaries. 
vii.  Professional opinions and conclusions regarding ecological value of the site. 
c.  The city shall be notified of the schedule for significant fieldwork and allowed the opportunity to observe or independently verify survey techniques. Results of the survey may be field verified by the city. 
9.  Archaeological surveys. Parcels containing known or probable archaeological resources shall require site specific surveys and analyses for archaeological resources. Surveys and analysis of archaeological resources shall, at a minimum, conform to Chapter 1A-46, Florida Administrative Code, and the provisions and standards contained in the "Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for Archaeology and Historic Preservation," September 29, 1983, prepared under the authority of Sections 101(f), (g), and (h), and Section 110 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, all as may be amended or renumbered from time to time. Maps of known archaeological sites are maintained by the Florida Department of State, Division of Historical Resources, Master Site File. Areas of known or probable archaeological resources have been modeled in Alachua County, "An Archaeological Survey of Unincorporated Alachua County, Florida" (Phase 1 and Phase 2), by Southeastern Archaeological Research, Inc., October 2001, as may be updated from time to time. 
10.  Significant natural communities. The locations and general extent of natural communities and/or land cover types that potentially constitute significant natural communities have been mapped on a state-wide basis by public agencies and non-profit private organizations, available from the Florida Geographic Data Library. 
a.  The resources assessment shall use digital data sources, including but not limited to the following: 
i.  Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission maps of land cover, strategic habitat conservation areas, and biodiversity hot spots. 
ii.  FNAI maps of areas of potential conservation interest and element occurrences. 
iii.  Water management district land cover maps. 
iv.  Digital aerial photographic series. 
b.  Where map review indicates the likelihood of impact to significant natural communities, ground-truthing shall be used to identify the existence, scope and extent of the natural communities associated with the application. Significant natural communities shall be delineated based on consideration and assessment of at least the following factors: 
i.  Quality of native ecosystem. 
ii.  Overall quality of biological diversity. 
iii.  Wildlife habitat value. 
iv.  Presence of listed species. 
v.  Proximity to other natural preserve areas and corridors. 
vi.  Impact by prohibited and invasive non-native vegetation. 
vii.  Habitat size that will support a viable population. 
11.  Listed species. Descriptions of the natural communities or habitats with which these species are commonly associated are available in a variety of written and electronic formats. 
a.  The resources assessment shall use digital data sources, including but not limited to the following: 
i.  Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission maps of land cover, strategic habitat conservation areas, and biodiversity hot spots. 
ii.  FNAI maps of areas of potential conservation interest and element occurrences. 
iii.  Water management district land cover maps. 
iv.  Digital aerial photographic series. 
b.  Where map review indicates the likelihood of listed species habitat, ground-truthing shall be required in order to identify the existence, scope and extent of the listed species population(s) and habitats associated with the application. Listed species habitat shall be delineated based on consideration and assessment of at least the following factors: 
i.  Quality of native ecosystem. 
ii.  Overall quality of biological diversity. 
iii.  Habitat value. 
iv.  Presence of listed species. 
v.  Location, density, and grouping characteristics of the listed species populations. 
vi.  Proximity to other natural preserve areas and corridors. 
vii.  Impact by prohibited and invasive non-native vegetation. 
viii.  Habitat size that will support a viable population. 
12.  Strategic ecosystems. The specific location and extent of regulated strategic ecosystem resources shall be determined through ground-truthing using the KBN/Golder Associates report as a guide to determine the location and extent of the significant natural community or communities, or other natural resources, consistent with the pertinent site summary for the indicated areas as described in the KBN/Golder report. Those areas found not to contain regulated strategic ecosystem resources may be developed provided the ecological integrity of the strategic ecosystem as a whole will be sufficiently protected. The resources assessment shall include: 
a.  General analysis of adjacent properties sufficient to provide resource context; 
b.  Ownership and use information, including parcel numbers and acreage, for all land under common ownership or control within the strategic ecosystem or contiguous to the proposed development site; 
c.  All proposed protection and management strategies for the regulated natural and archaeological resources on the planning parcel; and 
d.  An evaluation of whether the development proposal is sufficiently protective of the ecological integrity of the strategic ecosystem, and a finding shall be made by the city manager or designee as to whether the development proposal should be revised to sufficiently protect the strategic ecosystem resource in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
13.  Significant geological resource features. The specific location and extent of sinkholes and other geological features shall be determined through ground-truthing. Closed depressions are areas where there is a significant probability that there are sand-filled sinkholes that have no surface indication. A professional geologic study may be required with the objective of locating any sinkholes that are not visible from the surface. If geological resource features are located, the study shall map all of these resources and their buffers.  
Sec. 30-8.13. - Regulation of natural and archaeological resources. 
A.  Applicability. If basic and level 1 review confirms the presence of a regulated natural or archaeological resource, then the planning parcel shall be further regulated as set forth in this section. 
B.  Set-asides, density or intensity transfers. Density or intensity transfers within the planning parcel shall be allowed where set-asides for resource protection are required. In order to be eligible for the density or intensity transfer, the area of the planning parcel that is receiving density or intensity shall be included in the development proposal and the transfer shall be noted on the approved development order. In the instance where a regulated resource extends across a jurisdictional boundary with the county or another municipality, these regulations shall only apply to the area within Gainesville city limits. The unit number/amount of density/intensity available for transfer will be calculated on the basis of that which is allowed by right within the established zoning district in which the parcel is located, but only for the specific area of the required set-aside attributable solely to regulation under these natural and archaeological resource protection regulations. In the event the transfer within the planning parcel cannot be fully used because of other Land Development Code limitations (such as, but not limited to, height or floor area ratio), the applicant may propose alternative compliance as set forth in section 30-8.16. 
C.  Maximum set-aside areas. The maximum set-aside areas shall be determined as follows: 
1.  On a planning parcel that does not fall fully or partially within the area of strategic ecosystems, as shown on the environmentally significant land and resource map of the future land use map series, no more than 25 percent of the upland portion of the parcel may be required to be set aside for protection of all regulated natural and archaeological resources. 
2.  On a planning parcel that does fall fully or partially within the mapped strategic ecosystems area but does not contain evaluated and delineated strategic ecosystem resources, no more than 25 percent of the upland portion of the parcel may be required to be set aside for protection of all regulated natural and archaeological resources. 
3.  On a planning parcel that does fall fully or partially within the mapped area of strategic ecosystems and contains evaluated and delineated strategic ecosystem resources, no more than 50 percent of the upland portion of the parcel may be required to be set aside for protection of all regulated natural and archaeological resources, including the uplands within the identified strategic ecosystems resource area. 
These set-aside maximums may be exceeded when the following environmental resource areas, which shall be protected due to other City Code, state or federal law, are present on a planning parcel: 1) Setbacks/buffers of surface waters and wetlands required by other City Code, state or federal law; or 2) Preservation of archaeological or geological resource areas, and listed species habitat or other critical habitat through regulation by state or federal law. 
In every case, these otherwise protected upland areas will be counted first in the determination of the upland set-aside area. In the event that these otherwise protected areas cumulatively do exceed the upland set-aside maximums above, then no additional natural and archaeological set asides will be required. 
D.  Significant natural communities. 
1.  On-site protection and set-aside limitations. Significant natural communities shall be preserved and protected on-site, as follows: The city shall work with the applicant to select that portion of the significant natural community or communities that will be included in the set-aside area, based on the limitations and factors identified in this Code and the FNAI Guide. The applicant may relocate existing vegetation to another portion of the site or establish a new area of native plants on another portion of the site, as part of an approved management plan. 
2.  Alternatives to on-site protection. Alternatives to on-site protection of significant natural communities may be considered in the following circumstances: 
a.  When physical constraints of the parcel preclude maintenance of ecological integrity of preserved vegetation, given considerations as to size of the development site, habitat quality, connectivity, adjacent uses, and feasibility of management; 
b.  When opportunities exist for long-term protection and management of significant natural communities of equal or greater habitat value than would have otherwise been protected; or 
c.  When establishment of conservation management areas within a project would result in small, fragmented areas with limited ecological integrity and value compared to available alternatives. 
3.  Standards for alternatives to on-site protection. If one or more of the circumstances identified above exists, an applicant may propose one or more of the following options, which shall be evaluated to determine whether the alternative provides better protection than on-site protection. 
a.  The applicant may provide an off-site conservation management area of at least two acres of comparable habitat area for every one acre of on-site significant habitat that would have otherwise required protection by this section; or 
b.  The applicant may propose an alternative mitigation plan or an alternative compliance plan as provided in this Code, with establishment of a conservation management area and approved management plan, as applicable. Such plans are subject to approval by the city. 
E.  Listed species. If the resources assessment identifies the presence of listed species or potentially occupied listed species habitat, the applicant shall submit a management plan to the city for review and approval that meets federal, state and city regulatory requirements for the species and affords appropriate protection of the listed species and its habitat(s). Where listed species are regulated by the state or federal government, the applicant shall submit to the city the state or federally approved habitat survey and associated management or mitigation plans prior to the issuance of a development order. The city shall consult and coordinate with other permitting agencies, as appropriate. All activities shall comply with applicable state and federal laws, regulations, performance standards, and management guidelines. 
1.  On-site habitat protection and set-aside limitations. Listed species habitat shall be preserved and protected on-site. The city shall work with the applicant to select that portion of the listed species habitat that will be included in the set-aside area, based on the limitations and factors identified in this Code, recommendations of state or federal agencies with jurisdictional authority for the protection of listed species, and the FNAI Guide. 
2.  Alternatives to on-site habitat protection. Alternatives to on-site listed species habitat protection may be considered in the following circumstances: 
a.  When scientific data demonstrates that on-site protection will not be conducive to the long-term health of the listed species or listed species habitat; or 
b.  When evidence demonstrates that the protected habitat would be prohibitively difficult to manage adequately due to the management requirements of the habitat; or 
c.  When protected areas would be less than the smallest minimum territorial requirements of identified species individuals, and cannot be connected with other protected areas which would result in sufficient territorial requirements; or 
d.  When relocation of a listed species is recommended after consultation with the appropriate state or federal agency, provided that the listed species is relocated prior to any site modifications, in accordance with the city's development order and any authorizations required by a state or federal resource agency. 
3.  Standards for alternatives to on-site habitat protection. If one or more of the circumstances identified above exists, an applicant may propose one of the following options, which shall be evaluated to determine whether the alternative provides better protection than on-site protection: 
a.  For every one acre of on-site listed species habitat not protected, an off-site protection area shall provide two acres of comparable habitat as a conservation management area. The city may consider alternative mitigation proposals which provide equal or greater protection; or 
b.  An alternative mitigation plan or an alternative compliance plan as provided in this Code, with establishment of a conservation management area and approved management plan, as applicable. 
4.  Special design standards. Development approval conditions may limit or preclude development of structures, impervious surfaces, and other uses within an appropriate distance of protected species and habitat, if necessary, for the continued viability of the listed species habitat as determined by State of Florida and federal standards if same exists, or by best professional practices based on species. Depending on the type of species, the following special design standards may be required adjacent to regulated listed species habitat to minimize disturbance: 
a.  A minimum setback of 25 feet from the protected listed species habitat may be required for construction activities. Clearing, grading, and filling may be prohibited within the setback area unless the applicant can demonstrate that vegetation within the protected area will not be damaged. 
b.  Landscaping within required setbacks may require utilization of native plants that are compatible with existing native plant communities, soils, and climatic conditions. 
c.  Habitat corridors may be required between protected habitat areas on-site, and between protected areas off-site. 
F.  Strategic ecosystems. 
1.  Protection. Areas of evaluated and delineated strategic ecosystem that will be preserved and protected are subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Mechanisms to coordinate management activities with adjacent resources in the strategic ecosystem shall be provided, and a management plan shall be required. 
b.  Vegetation loss, grade change, and disturbance of the development site shall be minimized by careful site design fitted to the topography and soil; removal of vegetation shall be limited to only that necessary to develop the site. 
c.  Access, infrastructure, stormwater management and utilities shall be sited with consideration to minimizing impacts across multiple properties, providing for wildfire mitigation, and maximizing opportunities for shared facilities such as common driveways, utility access, and building impact areas. 
d.  The applicant shall consult with the city to select that portion of the strategic ecosystem resources that will be included in the set-aside area, based on the provisions of this Code. No development or other adverse impact to the set-aside portion of the planning parcel shall be allowed, except where necessary to allow access where none is otherwise available. In such case, impact is allowed only in the least sensitive portion of the system and subject to mitigation requirements. 
e.  Where impact is proposed in the remaining ground-truthed strategic ecosystem resource area outside the required set-aside, the following shall apply: 
i.  The applicant shall locate development on buildable area outside of the strategic ecosystem to the greatest extent practicable. 
ii.  Parcels, lots, building areas and driveways shall be configured to minimize overall impact to strategic ecosystem integrity. 
iii.  Subdivisions and non-residential development shall meet requirements for cluster subdivisions set forth in the Land Development Code, unless otherwise regulated by an adopted planned development ordinance. 
2.  Location of set-aside. The following shall be considered in determining the location of the set-aside requirement for the strategic ecosystem resource: 
a.  Features that define the strategic ecosystem; 
b.  Areas critical for system connectivity, and significant natural community areas; 
c.  Ability to implement and conduct management strategies; 
d.  Protection and management of additional resources for all properties within the city's limits under common ownership and control within the strategic ecosystem; and 
e.  If the planning parcel has a city land use or zoning designation, in whole or in part, of Conservation, the upland areas of the Conservation portion shall count toward meeting the strategic ecosystem set-aside requirements. 
3.  An agriculture/silviculture land use management plan shall be required before any agricultural or silvicultural activity occurs on land containing strategic ecosystem resources that is not used for bona-fide agriculture or silviculture, in accordance with one of the following: 
a.  The agriculture/silviculture management plan shall provide for retention of the ecological integrity and value of the strategic ecosystem, and may include protection of resource areas through methods including but not limited to conservation easements or participation in a conservation program sponsored by the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service or the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs. 
b.  The agriculture/silviculture management plan shall be submitted to the city for review and approval by staff. Management plans not meeting the general standards of this section will require review and approval through the development review process. The agriculture/silviculture management plan may be satisfied by any agricultural or silvicultural certification program's required management plan, provided it demonstrates that the ecological integrity and value of the strategic ecosystem resource is protected. 
G.  Floridan aquifer high recharge areas. The following requirements apply to development on parcels within Floridan Aquifer high recharge areas to ensure both short and long-term protection of the aquifer and groundwater resources: 
1.  Existing facilities that handle or store hazardous materials. Existing facilities shall meet the requirements of Alachua County's Hazardous Materials Management Code. Corrective action to retrofit or upgrade facilities that handle or store hazardous materials consistent with standards applicable to new facilities shall be required when existing facilities are proposed to be modified as part of a development plan. Development review and permitting activities for modification/expansion of existing facilities shall include careful evaluation and implementation of engineering and management controls, setbacks and buffers, and monitoring. 
2.  New facilities that handle or store hazardous materials. New development that involves handling or storing of hazardous materials shall be prohibited in Floridan Aquifer high recharge areas unless it can be demonstrated that the materials, in the quantity and/or solution stored or the conditions under which it is to be stored, do not pose a hazard to human health or the environment. If permitted, such activities shall be subject to the general requirements, siting prohibitions, storage facility standards, and secondary containment and monitoring requirements contained in Alachua County's Hazardous Materials Management Code. 
H.  Significant archaeological resources. 
1.  Development on parcels identified as containing known or probable archaeological resources shall be conditioned, based on recommendation from an archaeological resource-trained professional, to protect the resource, including but not limited to, insuring proper archaeological investigation prior to development and construction. Avoidance, minimization, and mitigation of adverse impacts on significant archaeological resources shall be required as appropriate to the scale and significance of the resource. 
2.  The discovery of unmarked human remains or burials during development activity, or other activity, is governed by F.S. §§ 872.02 and 872.05, as same may be amended or renumbered from time to time. 
I.  Significant geological resource features. The purpose of management strategies for significant geological resource features is to protect water quality, hydrologic integrity, and ecological values associated with the feature and its hydrologic regime. Management strategies may include, but are not limited to, filling and development restrictions, buffers, runoff diversion, muck and debris removal, berm and weir construction, and filtration. 
1.  Sinkholes. Open sinkholes and sinkholes with stream inflow shall be identified and protected as conservation management areas. The sinkhole shall be fully protected or restored as a natural area, and the applicant shall submit a plan that demonstrates the elimination of access and the restoration of the land to a natural condition, including stabilization of erosion channels, limiting drainage from non-natural areas, and restoration of buffer areas that have been disturbed. Where the applicant seeks to continue access or make improvements to existing access to a sinkhole, an applicant shall demonstrate the following in the management plan, or if access to the sinkhole is proposed after a management plan has been approved, a revised management plan shall be submitted for review, demonstrating the following: 
a.  That there is a recreational or scientific benefit that the public derives from the retention or creation of access. If access exists, show that use of the area is such that closing the access would not be practical based on the current level of use. 
b.  That all sources of erosion or pollution within the sinkhole buffer and the sinkhole are mitigated to eliminate or reduce erosion and pollution to the lowest reasonable level. 
c.  That the access is the minimum needed to meet the needs. The route chosen shall be the least damaging and least vulnerable to erosion. 
d.  That a plan for the maintenance of the access, stormwater controls, waste collection, and landscaping has been submitted, approved by the city, and funded. 
2.  Protection strategies. It is recognized that strategies for protection of significant geological resource features vary based on the unique characteristics of the resource and require specific tailoring to address diverse geometries, connections to surface water and ground water, habitat functions and values, and the dynamics of natural systems processes. Such strategies required by the city may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Significant geological resource features shall be designated and protected as conservation management areas. Significant geological resource features that are capable of being managed on-site shall be identified on development proposals and protected during construction and after development. 
b.  Features may be incorporated as aesthetic elements into the development project design. 
c.  Natural topographic features may be retained through lot layout and infrastructure siting. 
d.  Stormwater management facilities shall be located outside the immediate drainage area associated with sinkholes and other similar karst geological formations, where practicable; and be designed to avoid and minimize impacts of stormwater discharge to the resource area and its characteristic features. The drainage area is the local geographic area which contributes surface water runoff to the resource area, and the management objective is to limit impervious surfaces and design drainage systems so as to ensure that sediments or contaminated water do not reach the sinkhole, solution cavities, or other similar direct conduits to groundwater. 
e.  Buffers shall be required around significant geologic resources in order to maintain natural context, edge vegetation, and structural protection. The buffer areas around sinkholes or other karst surficial features are intended to protect the resource and groundwater by providing areas where surface or subsurface flows are preserved or restored to a natural condition. In the absence of scientific information which demonstrates that another buffer width is appropriate, the following default buffer widths shall be applied: 
i.  Sinkholes: An average of 50 feet, but no less than 35 feet away from the outermost closed contour. 
ii.  Caves, lineaments, ridges, and escarpments: an average of 75 feet, but no less than 50 feet, away from the outermost contour associated with the feature. 
iii.  Springs, and significant geological resource features located within springsheds: an average of 150 feet, but no less than 100 feet, away from the outermost contour associated with the feature. 
f.  Where slopes greater than or equal to five percent are found adjacent to sinkholes and inflowing watercourses, existing vegetation shall be substantially retained to minimize erosion consistent with best management practices and surface water and wetland buffers. Development shall be designed to include retention of the natural character of watercourses, seepage slopes and buffers associated with significant geological features. 
g.  In instances where geological resource features function as habitats for listed species, special protection will be provided in consideration of the habitat characteristics and requirements of the species. 
h.  Use of best management practices may be required to minimize erosion and maintain water quality, as provided in the Alachua County Water Quality Code 
i.  Alternatives to on-site protection may be considered when physical constraints of the parcel preclude maintenance of the integrity of the resource, based on considerations such as size of the development site, resource quality, connectivity to the Floridan Aquifer, adjacent uses, or feasibility of management.  
Sec. 30-8.14. - Conservation management areas and management plans. 
A.  Identification of conservation management areas. The extent of land to be protected within a conservation management area shall include the regulated natural or archaeological resource area(s) which have been evaluated and delineated through the resources assessment, consisting of required set-asides, buffers, setbacks and linkages that preserve the natural system functions of the resource(s). Conservation management areas shall be designed and maintained in areas with generally intact vegetation, including canopy, understory and groundcover where applicable, in functional, clustered arrangement, with logical contiguous boundaries to eliminate or minimize fragmentation to the greatest extent practicable. Where alternative sites exist on the planning parcel, the site or sites selected shall be the best suited to preserve ecological integrity, maximize use by wildlife and maintain the long-term viability of significant natural communities. The selection shall be based upon the following: 
1.  Function and value of natural and archaeological resources; 
2.  Quality and condition of natural and archaeological resources; 
3.  Protectability and manageability; 
4.  Size and shape, avoiding enclaves of development or areas fragmented by development, and providing, where appropriate, adequate buffers from the secondary impacts of development and adequate wildlife corridors; 
5.  Contiguity with adjacent existing natural communities, functional wetland system, floodplain, or habitat corridor; 
6.  Existing species population sizes and life history requirements; 
7.  Proximity and accessibility to other populations of the same species; 
8.  Compatibility of conservation with adjacent land uses; and 
9.  Coordination with the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission and other agencies, as the city deems appropriate to the resource. 
B.  Uses of conservation management areas. The use of conservation management areas shall be limited to that which is compatible with protection of the ecological integrity of the regulated natural or archaeological resources. The following uses may be permitted as part of an approved management plan, provided they do not adversely affect natural and archaeological resource function and ecological integrity: 
1.  Nature trails (mulched walking paths, elevated wooden walkways); 
2.  Low-intensity, passive recreational activities such as wildlife viewing and hiking; 
3.  Scientific and educational activities (interpretive trails and signage, observation points); 
4.  Site investigative work such as surveys, soil logs, and percolation tests; 
5.  Scenic, archaeological, wildlife, or scientific preserves; 
6.  Ongoing bona-fide agricultural and/or silvicultural activities that: 
a.  Are consistent with the protection of the regulated natural and archaeological resource(s) identified on the site for protection under the management plan; or 
b.  Follow certification programs or best management practices. 
7.  Single-family residential dwellings established as part of an approved management plan; 
8.  Constructing fences where no fill activity is required; and 
9.  Other uses demonstrated to be compatible with regulated natural and archaeological resource protections as outlined in the management plan. 
C.  Prohibited activities. Activities that are prohibited within conservation management areas, unless part of an approved management plan, include the following: 
1.  Construction or placing of buildings, roads, signs, billboards or other advertising, utilities, or other structures on or above the ground; 
2.  Dumping or placing of soil or other substance or material as landfill or dumping or placing of trash, waste, or unsightly or offensive materials; 
3.  Removal or destruction of native vegetation; 
4.  Excavation, dredging, or removal of soil, rock, or other material substance in such manner as to affect the surface; 
5.  Surface use except for purposes that permit the land or water area to remain predominantly in its natural condition; 
6.  Activities detrimental to drainage, flood control, water conservation, erosion control, soil conservation, or fish and wildlife habitat preservation; 
7.  Acts or uses detrimental to such retention of land or water areas; 
8.  Acts or uses detrimental to the preservation of the structural integrity or physical appearance of sites or properties of historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural significance; and 
9.  Wastewater and stormwater discharges to conservation management areas are generally prohibited. However, discharges may be allowed only in surface waters, wetlands, and significant geologic features if the following criteria are satisfied: 
a.  The quantity, timing, and quality of discharge maintains or improves water quality, biological health, and function of the natural ecosystem; 
b.  Downstream waters are not affected by nutrient loading; 
c.  The project owner or responsible entity prepares and implements a maintenance and monitoring plan acceptable to the city; 
d.  The project owner or responsible entity corrects any failures in design or operation of the wastewater and/or stormwater system that cause degradation of water quality, biological health, or the function of the natural ecosystem; 
e.  The owner or responsible entity posts a performance bond or similar financial guarantee to assure implementation of maintenance and monitoring in compliance with the Land Development Code; and 
f.  Treatment is provided in accordance with the requirements of the Land Development Code and the requirements of the appropriate water management district. 
D.  Conservation management areas location. Conservation management areas shall be located within common open space and/or within the boundaries of a single individual lot or parcel. 
E.  Boundary marking and protection. Prior to and during development, the conservation management area boundaries shall be clearly marked and appropriately protected as follows: 
1.  Physical barriers shall be installed around the outer extent of the set aside portion of conservation management areas as necessary to prevent disturbance by individuals and equipment. Protective barriers shall be installed and approved prior to commencement of permitted activities and maintained in place until activities are complete; 
2.  Erosion and turbidity control measures shall be required in order to prevent runoff of turbid water into conservation management areas; and 
3.  The owner or responsible entity shall completely restore any portion of a protected conservation management area damaged during the activity. Certificates of occupancy or completion shall not be issued until restoration activity has been completed. 
F.  Permanent protection of conservation management areas. Conservation management areas shall be permanently protected in perpetuity using a legal instrument that runs with the land, in a form acceptable to the city, and duly recorded in the Public Records of Alachua County, which assures the preservation and maintenance of the conservation management area. The preferred legal instrument shall be a conservation easement in accordance with F.S. § 704.06, which restricts the use of the land in perpetuity to conservation uses, or other uses consistent with conservation, and is expressly enforceable by the city. Other forms of dedication may be considered by the city if comparable protection is demonstrated which assures the preservation and maintenance of the conservation management area in accordance with the approved management plan. A boundary or special purpose survey certified by a professional land surveyor registered in the state and meeting minimum technical standards adopted pursuant to F.S. § 472.027, is required for the establishment and dedication of the conservation management area. 
G.  Plat and plan notations. The boundaries of designated conservation management areas, including any required buffers, shall be clearly delineated on development plans, plats, and deed restrictions, and a legal description of the boundaries shall be included. 
H.  Field markers. Permanent survey markers using iron or concrete monuments to delineate the boundary between conservation management areas and contiguous land shall be set, according to current survey standards. Markers shall be installed prior to issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy or other final approval, and shall be maintained by the owner in perpetuity. 
I.  Signage. The perimeter of conservation management areas shall be permanently identified with city-approved signs that identify the area as protected conservation area. Signage that is required by another governmental agency and also meets the city requirements may be used. 
J.  Rezoning or land use change. Conservation management areas may have a land use or zoning change to a conservation land use category or zoning district through a city-initiated or a landowner-initiated process. 
K.  Management requirements for conservation management areas. Conservation management areas shall be maintained in compliance with the provisions of this Code, the conservation easement, the approved management plan, and the following standards. If a management plan is required, the scope of maintenance shall be specified in the management plan. The owner or responsible entity shall not be held responsible for maintenance which exceeds this scope due to external causes, such as through disasters or other events beyond the control of the responsible entity. 
1.  Unless the area is dedicated to the public use and accepted by the city, the cost and responsibility of managing the conservation management area shall be borne by the owner or responsible entity. 
2.  Management shall maintain or enhance the ecological value of the conservation management area and support the protection and maintenance of the identified resource. Management shall include, but not be limited to, the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Non-native vegetation shall not be introduced into the conservation management area. Invasive, non-native vegetation shall be eliminated or controlled to a level of noninterference with the growth of native vegetation according to specific goals of the approved management plan. Removal shall be accomplished through ecologically sound techniques, including but not limited to, manual removal, hand-held power equipment, and prescribed burning. Control of non-native trees which are in use as a nesting site shall be postponed until the nesting season is over. All non-native vegetative debris shall be disposed of outside of the conservation management area. 
b.  Dead trees that are not a hazard to humans or private property and that provide habitat for wildlife shall remain in the conservation management area. 
c.  Where non-native vegetation is removed, replacement with appropriate native species may be required if specified in the conservation easement and/or approved management plan. 
d.  Fencing may be required to control access to the conservation management area. 
L.  Management plan. A management plan for a conservation management area shall be required for all development applications involving properties within, or partly within, a strategic ecosystem or properties that meet two of the following three criteria: Contains regulated natural or archaeological resources greater than or equal to five acres in size; contains at least one listed species; or provides the opportunity for a wildlife corridor adjacent to nature parks and public conservation/preservation areas. 
1.  The management plan shall be prepared at the expense of the applicant by person(s) qualified in the appropriate fields of study, and conducted according to professionally accepted standards. The management plan shall include the following: 
a.  Description of goals and objectives based on type of natural resources to be managed; 
b.  Description of all proposed uses, including existing and any proposed physical and access improvements; 
c.  Description of prohibited activities within buffers or set-aside areas; 
d.  Descriptions of ongoing activities that will be performed to protect, restore, or enhance the natural or archaeological resources to be protected. These may include: 
i.  Removal or control of invasive non-native vegetation and debris; 
ii.  Replanting with native plants as necessary; 
iii.  Provision for listed species habitat needs, including restricting, at appropriate times, intrusions into sensitive foraging, breeding, roosting, and nesting areas; 
iv.  Fencing or other institutional controls to minimize impact of human activities on wildlife and vegetation, such as predation by pets; 
v.  Prescribed burning, thinning, or comparable activities performed in an environmentally sensitive manner to restore or maintain habitat; 
vi.  Cooperative efforts and agreements to help promote or conduct certain management activities, such as cleanups, maintenance, public education, observation, monitoring, and reporting; 
vii.  Any additional measures determined to be necessary to protect and maintain the functions and values of conservation areas in conjunction with wildfire mitigation; 
viii.  Schedules, estimated costs, staffing requirements, and assignments of responsibility for specific implementation activities to be performed as part of the management plan, and identification of means by which funding will be provided; 
ix.  Performance standards with criteria for assessing goals and objectives; 
x.  Three-year monitoring plan with schedule and responsibility; 
xi.  Ownership and entity responsible for management activities; 
xii.  Provision for changes to be reviewed and approved by the city; 
xiii.  Contingency plans for corrective measures or change if goals are not met. 
2.  The management plan shall be submitted for staff review and approval by the appropriate decision making authority, and shall comply with the provisions of this Code. 
3.  Modifications to an approved management plan that do not result in lesser protection of the resources present may be allowed, subject to approval by the city manager or designee. 
4.  The existence of the management plan shall be noted on plans and plats, covenants and restrictions, conservation easements and other documents as appropriate to the type of development and manner of protection provided. 
5.  The property owner or responsible entity shall acknowledge and confirm its obligation and financial ability to maintain and manage the conservation management area.  
Sec. 30-8.15. - Avoidance, minimization, mitigation and monitoring. 
Development approval shall only be granted for activities that are located, designed, constructed, and maintained to avoid, minimize, and, where necessary, mitigate adverse impacts on regulated natural and archaeological resources, consistent with these sections. Fulfillment of the set-aside requirement shall constitute full compliance with avoidance, minimization, and mitigation related to the upland resources area of the set-aside, except as provided for strategic ecosystems in section 30-8.13. 
A.  Avoidance. Avoidance of loss of the environmental and social benefits and functions of natural and archaeological resources is of the highest priority. The owner shall avoid loss of natural and archaeological resources by implementing practicable design alternatives to minimize adverse impacts to natural and archaeological resources. Specific measures for avoidance which will be required prior to authorization of any adverse impact may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Limiting the scope, degree or magnitude of the proposed activity; 
2.  Using appropriate and best available technology; 
3.  Sensitive site design, siting of facilities, and construction staging activities; 
4.  Exploring alternative on-site locations to avoid or reduce impacts of activities; 
5.  Scheduling proposed activities at times of minimum biological activity to avoid periods of migration, rearing, resting, nesting and other species-specific cycles and activities; 
6.  Managing the access to conservation management areas, such as fencing designed to separate wildlife and pets or to exclude humans from sensitive denning or breeding area; and 
7.  Preserving and providing perimeter buffering around archaeological sites in order to maintain the security and integrity of the resources. This may include, if necessary, alteration to the proposed development plan. 
B.  Minimization. Where an applicant proves it cannot avoid impacts to regulated natural and archaeological resources due to an extraordinary hardship owing to conditions peculiar to the land or structure and not the result of the actions of the applicant, the following measures may be required to minimize impacts to regulated natural and archaeological resources: 
1.  Minimum setbacks for clearing of native plants adjacent to regulated natural resources, or for construction of impervious surfaces greater than 100 square feet in base coverage; 
2.  Limiting native plant removal to the minimum necessary to carry out the proposed activity or to meet fire hazard standards. Protection of tree crowns and root zones may be required for all trees planned for preservation; 
3.  Roads and other development features located to follow existing topography and minimize cut and fill; 
4.  Designing stormwater to maximize overland flow through natural drainage systems and grassed overland (roadside and lot line) swales; multi-purpose use of stormwater management systems; use across or for multiple properties; 
5.  Using performance-based treatment systems, or siting septic tanks and drainfields to prevent discharges that adversely impact the environmental quality of regulated natural and archaeological resources; 
6.  Adaptive use of archaeological landforms or properties consistent with preservation of their archaeological character; and 
7.  Other reasonable protective measures necessary to minimize adverse effects may be required depending on conditions specific to a particular site. 
C.  Mitigation. Where an applicant proves that development activities cause or will cause impacts to regulated natural and archaeological resources and cannot be avoided or minimized, and after consideration of any extraordinary hardship owing to conditions peculiar to the land or structure and not the result of the actions of the applicant, mitigation shall be required. The mitigation shall provide compensation for the loss of all functions and values of the impacted resources through restoration, enhancement, and protection of resource areas of equal ecological value. In the case of archaeological resources, mitigation may include, but is not limited to, allowing an opportunity for the acquisition of fee or less-than-fee interest in the archaeological resource by a governmental unit, an organization, or by any other entity committed to the preservation, restoration, or rehabilitation of the resource(s). 
1.  The requirement for the protection of a mitigation area of comparable resource type shall be based on the following criteria: 
a.  A replacement ratio of one to one for physical access when no other physical access is available and impact is in the least sensitive portion of the resource for the limited purpose of providing access to the parcel. 
b.  Except as provided in subsection C.1.a., a replacement ratio of two to one for impacts to regulated strategic ecosystem resources. 
c.  Except as provided in subsections C.1.a. and C.1.b., a replacement ratio of two to one for impacts to regulated natural and archaeological resources; except the replacement ratio is reduced to one to one for parcels less than or equal to five acres which do not include regulated strategic ecosystem resources and when an extraordinary hardship is caused by the small parcel size and/or configuration and owing to conditions that are not the result of actions by the applicant, as determined by the appropriate reviewing entity. 
2.  Resource-based mitigation shall be provided on-site or off-site. The order of preference in which mitigation will be considered shall be: 
a.  On-site restoration or enhancement. An applicant may mitigate for impacts on-site by conducting resource restoration or enhancement on the planning parcel, species relocation within the planning parcel, if applicable, or other measures to restore the quality, function and value of the resource. The establishment of a conservation management area and/or conservation easement, acceptable to the city may be required to ensure the continued viability of the area to be restored or enhanced. 
b.  Off-site preservation. The applicant may provide off-site mitigation through the preservation of land through off-site dedication, transfer of fee or less-than-fee simple title to a land conservation agency, non-profit conservation organization, or other entity approved by the city. Areas designated as conservation management areas for mitigation under this chapter shall not be used as credit towards mitigation for other projects or to mitigate for impacts to other regulated environmental resources such as trees or surface waters/wetlands. Mitigation areas are eligible only if the area would not otherwise be required to be set aside. Mitigation of impacts to a regulated listed species or its habitat that is required by a state or federal agency shall be applied towards off-site mitigation if it is for the same development project and meets the following requirements: 
i.  Off-site protection sites shall meet all appropriate size, site selection and design, protection, ownership and maintenance, and other provisions of this Code applicable to on-site conservation management areas. Fencing may be required to control access to the mitigation area. 
ii.  Off-site conservation management areas shall be located in the following order of priority: 1) Adjacent to the planning parcel; 2) Within the City of Gainesville municipal limits; 3) Within the City of Gainesville urban reserve area; and 4) Within other municipalities or the unincorporated area of Alachua County outside of the City of Gainesville urban reserve area. 
3.  A mitigation proposal shall be submitted with the resources assessment. The mitigation proposal shall require the same assessment and specify the same details for mitigation areas as required for resources assessments in section 30-8.12. The cost and timing of any off-site acquisitions shall be specified. The mitigation proposal shall meet the following general mitigation standards, and shall be evaluated based on an assessment of the natural functions and values of both the proposed impact areas and the proposed mitigation areas. The mitigation proposal shall be acceptable only where it is determined that the mitigation will fully offset the loss of the functions and values of the regulated resource. The mitigation proposal shall demonstrate: 
a.  The hydrologic, soil, slope, and other basic characteristics of the proposed mitigation project shall be adequate to achieve proposed mitigation project goals; and 
b.  The mitigation area shall be at least as well established and sustainable as the existing regulated natural or archaeological resource it is intended to replace. 
4.  A management plan shall be required and shall include contingency plans for corrective measures or change if goals are not met. The management plan shall generally provide for, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Where plantings are required, success shall be measured by maintenance of at least 80 percent survivorship of all plantings. Semiannual replanting shall be required to maintain required survivorship. 
b.  Removal and/or control of non-native invasive vegetation. 
c.  The owner/applicant is responsible for submitting monitoring reports of the status of the mitigation area to the city manager or designee no less than annually. In the event the owner/applicant transfers fee simple ownership of the mitigation area to a third-party agency or entity whose purposes include protecting and preserving natural or archeological resources, the city manager or designee may waive the annual monitoring report requirement upon a finding that the agency or entity has substantial expertise in management of such resources. Indicators appropriate to the resource shall be tracked and evaluated. Such indicators may include water quality chemistry, number of surviving plantings and any plantings made to maintain required survivorship. The final report for release of the performance guarantee shall include, at a minimum: 
i.  Discussion of the projected relative success or failure of the project in mitigating for lost natural resource area value and function; 
ii.  Analysis of measures undertaken during the project that contributed to success; 
iii.  Analysis of problems encountered during the project that decreased success; 
iv.  Recommendations to increase the success of similar, future projects; and 
v.  Summary of data collected. 
5.  Management and monitoring. For all mitigation projects, the owner/applicant shall be responsible for management and monitoring for a minimum of three years, unless waived by the city manager or designee, as provided in subsection 4. above. This period may be extended as necessary, based on the complexity of the resource or type of mitigation proposed, in order to demonstrate substantial establishment and success of mitigation. Management and monitoring shall comply with the provisions of this Code and with the approved mitigation management plan. 
6.  Performance guarantee. A performance guarantee shall be required in an amount equal to 110 percent of the estimated cost of mitigation, management and monitoring activities, to ensure the adequate monitoring and long-term viability of mitigation activities. The guarantee shall be provided for the duration of the time period required for maintenance and monitoring and until completion is certified by the city. The performance guarantee shall be kept in full force until all obligations are satisfied. The guarantee shall be in one of the financial assurance forms stated in section 30-8.21 and shall be submitted to the city. Within six months after the end of the period established for management and monitoring, the applicant shall submit a final report that details and certifies compliance with the requirements of this Code.  
Sec. 30-8.16. - Alternative compliance. 
An applicant may submit a proposal for alternative compliance which varies from the strict application of these natural and archaeological resource regulations to accommodate an extraordinary hardship or to utilize innovative design. Requests for alternative compliance from any natural or archaeological resource provision shall be reviewed and decided by the board or staff responsible for reviewing and taking action on the development application. An alternative compliance plan shall be approved only upon a finding that it fulfills the intent and purposes of the City of Gainesville's Comprehensive Plan and of these regulations as well as, or more effectively than, adherence to the strict requirements of these regulations. When granted, the alternative compliance shall be the minimum deviation from the requirements necessary to permit reasonable use or access. Mitigation may be required as a condition of granting the alternative compliance. 
A.  Extraordinary hardship. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating the existence of an extraordinary hardship due to unique site characteristics and the reasons for alternative compliance. The application shall set forth facts demonstrating each of the following: 
1.  That the applicant did not create their own hardship by taking actions that makes the property unable to be developed. Diminished value or inconvenience, or lack of due diligence, is not considered extraordinary hardship. 
2.  There are no feasible on-site alternatives to the proposal. Feasible on-site alternatives include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Reduction in density or intensity; 
b.  Reduction in scope or size; 
c.  Change in timing, phasing, or implementation; or 
d.  Layout revision or other innovative site design considerations. 
B.  Innovative design. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that an innovative site design may be utilized that better protects regulated natural and archaeological resources. The application shall set forth facts demonstrating that the proposed innovative design will protect regulated natural and archaeological resources and will not jeopardize the ecological integrity of those resources on or adjacent to the property.  
DIVISION 4. - SURFACE WATERS AND WETLANDS 
 
Sec. 30-8.17. - Regulated surface waters and wetlands. 
All regulated surface waters and wetlands that are located in whole or in part within city limits are regulated by this article. Regulated surface waters and wetlands are as follows: 
A.  Surface waters delineated pursuant to Rule 62-340.600, F.A.C., as may be amended or renumbered from time to time. 
B.  Wetlands delineated pursuant to Rule 62-340.300, F.A.C., as may be amended or renumbered from time to time.  
Sec. 30-8.18. - Exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of the surface waters and wetlands sections of this article shall not apply to: 
1.  Unless otherwise provided herein, any construction, development or use initiated pursuant to any valid building permit or approved development plan issued or approved before April 12, 2004. 
2.  Any public works or utilities projects initiated by the city or by a property owner acting with the authorization of the city and state agencies (the state department of environmental protection or the appropriate water management district) to provide utility services or to maintain or modify existing public works or utilities infrastructure or to provide controlled stormwater discharge to the creek, lake or wetland. However, such projects shall not be exempt from first avoiding loss or degradation of wetland functions and habitats, and then minimizing unavoidable loss or degradation of wetland function and habitats. Such projects that cause unavoidable loss or degradation of wetland functions or habitats shall be clearly in the public interest. 
3.  Repairs or replacement to the site structure(s) that do not increase the external dimensions of site impervious surface. When such development does increase said dimensions, the development up to the point at which dimensions increase will be exempt. 
4.  Additions or accessory structures that do not add more than 100 square feet of impervious surface area cumulative from April 12, 2004, including any construction that does not require a building permit, and are at a distance greater than 50 feet from the landward extent of the wetland, or greater than 75 feet from the landward extent of the lake, or greater 35 feet from the break in slope at the top of the bank of a regulated creek. However, the placement of limerock surface, irrespective of size, shall comply with the provisions of these sections. 
5.  Any construction or development initiated pursuant to the development plan of a planned development approved prior to April 12, 2004, if the development plan depicts the location of the buildings and structures on the site or if special consideration has been given to the issue of creek, lake or wetland protection as evidenced by specific limitations and/or restrictions having been placed on the lots or buildings during the approval process. 
6.  Construction of public or private nature trails if the proposed plan is consistent with the intent of these sections and complies with each of the following restrictions: 
a.  There is no significant alteration of creek, lake or wetland drainage patterns or special protection species population reduction or habitat alteration due to the trail. 
b.  The natural grade within the buffer area is maintained to the maximum feasible extent. 
c.  The maximum width for private trails within 35 feet of the break in slope at the top of the bank of a regulated creek or within 50 feet of a wetland is 50 inches. The maximum width for private trails within 75 feet of a regulated lake is 50 inches. A private trail greater than 50 inches in width that is located between 35 feet and 150 feet from the break in slope at the top of the bank of a regulated creek, is presumed detrimental to the creek unless the trail plan demonstrates otherwise. The width of public trails shall be set during site plan review. 
d.  Materials used for the trails construction are limited to asphaltic concrete, concrete, wood, compacted earth, mulch, crushed shells or other materials that will not result in the creek receiving significant amounts of sediment or other adverse material harmful to the creek water quality. If materials other than asphaltic concrete or concrete are used, such materials shall be stabilized to prevent washouts or soil erosion. 
e.  Developers, their successors and assigns of private trails shall provide the city with a maintenance agreement which is acceptable to the city attorney and provide for maintenance and preservation of the trail to ensure there is no adverse impact to creek, lake or wetland vegetation, water quality, or creek or lake bank soils. 
7.  The reestablishment of native vegetation. When the reestablishment of native vegetation is for any property other than a single-family residential dwelling, a vegetative reestablishment plan shall be subject to the approval of the city manager or designee to ensure the appropriateness of the vegetation proposed and to ensure the incorporation of proper sediment control measures. 
8.  All human-built impoundments, lakes, streams, ponds, and artificial or created wetlands, provided that development activities in these areas will not adversely impact natural or mitigation surface waters and wetlands. If these facilities were required as a mitigation project, they shall not be exempt from the provisions of these sections. If any surface waters or wetlands are part of a stormwater management facility approved by the city, the same functions shall be provided and any modifications shall be subject to approval by the public works department. 
9.  Stormwater management facilities are allowed within wetland buffers provided that: The stormwater management facility will not adversely impact natural or mitigation surface waters and wetlands; the hydroperiod of the wetland will be maintained or restored; the stormwater management facility will have a maximum slope of 4:1; littoral zones will be established and maintained in all wet detention facilities; and that landscaping of stormwater management facilities will conform to section 30-8.3 and all other applicable requirements of chapter 30, and to the Design Manual. Stormwater management facilities are not exempt from the buffer requirements of section 30-8.20 for regulated creeks or lakes. 
B.  All development, even if exempt or otherwise granted an exemption from any other provisions of these sections, shall incorporate either the city's general criteria for controlling erosion and sediment or equivalent practices.  
Sec. 30-8.19. - Surface waters and wetlands review. 
A.  Scope of review. The following types of applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed development impacts regulated surface waters or wetlands, and if so, whether the proposed development complies with the Comprehensive Plan, the Land Development Code and other applicable law with respect to surface waters and wetlands: 
1.  Future land use map amendments (including large-scale and small-scale); 
2.  Rezonings and amendments to rezoning ordinances; 
3.  Development plans (including minor plan, minor plan II, intermediate plan and major plan); 
4.  Subdivisions/plats; 
5.  Special use permits; 
6.  Commercial tree removal permits; and 
7.  Other development applications, including without limitation special exceptions and variances. 
B.  Reviewing authority. The city manager or designee is authorized to conduct all reviews pursuant to this section. 
C.  Level of review. The level of review shall be classified as follows: 
1.  Basic review. All applications shall undergo basic review. Basic review shall consist of determining, from available data sources and site visits (where necessary), the potential presence of any regulated surface waters and wetlands. If the basic review indicates the presence of any regulated surface waters or wetlands, then a level 1 review is required. 
2.  Level 1 review. Level 1 review shall consist of more detailed review of the project data and the potential impacts identified in the basic review, including coordination with appropriate regulatory agencies, site visits and recommendation of modifications to the development proposal in order to avoid or minimize impacts to the regulated surface waters or wetlands. If during environmental review it is determined that a mitigation plan for impacts to the regulated surface waters and wetlands is required, then a level 2 review is required. 
3.  Level 2 review. Level 2 review shall consist of extensive review of the potential environmental impacts, including coordination with appropriate regulatory agencies, recommendation of modifications to the development proposal in order to avoid and minimize potential impacts; and review of and comment on the mitigation plan to address remaining impacts. 
D.  Review report. Upon reviewing an application, the reviewing authority shall issue a written report that describes: The scope of the review conducted; the presence (or absence) of regulated surface waters and wetlands; whether the proposed development complies with the Comprehensive Plan, the Land Development Code and other applicable law with respect to the regulated surface waters and wetlands; the potential (or actual) impacts that the development will have on the environmental features of concern and the reviewing authority's recommendations to address the impacts. 
E.  Review fees. The fees for all reviews are set forth in appendix A, schedule of fees, rates and charges. The fee will cover up to three reviews within a two-year period for the same project. By way of example, a single project that is required to undergo basic and level 1 reviews due to three applications filed within a two-year period for a PD rezoning, a special use permit and a development plan will be charged one level 1 review fee, not three level 1 review fees. The fees shall be paid within five business (excludes weekends and city holidays) days of the date of written notice from the city that a level 1 or level 2 review is required. Failure to timely pay the review fees shall result in the application being deemed incomplete and returned to the applicant.  
Sec. 30-8.20. - General requirements and procedures. 
A.  Wetlands and required wetland buffers shall not be included within any platted lots or blocks of any subdivision (not including lot splits and minor subdivisions) that is approved after April 12, 2004. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided, there shall be no development in, on or over a surface water or wetland, or within 75 feet of the landward extent of a regulated lake, or within 35 feet of the break in slope at the top of the bank of any regulated creek. 
C.  A minimum buffer distance of 35 feet and an average minimum buffer distance of 50 feet shall be required between the developed area and the landward extent of any wetland or surface water, other than (as provided in the preceding paragraph) a regulated lake or creek. Figure 1 depicts the minimum 50-foot buffer distance without encroachment. Wherever the buffer distance is less than 50 feet, the amount of such encroachment along the 50-foot buffer line shall be mitigated along an equal length of buffer line contiguous to the encroachment. Such mitigation shall consist of increasing the minimum buffer distance so that the average minimum buffer distance of 50 feet is maintained at that location. Figures 2 and 3 depict encroachment of the 50-foot distance with required mitigation contiguous to the encroachment. The required increase in minimum buffer distance can be provided along an equal length of buffer line not contiguous to the encroachment only if greater protection of wetland resources can be attained, subject to the approval of the city manager or designee or appropriate reviewing board. See Figure 4 for depiction of increased minimum buffer distance along equal length of buffer line not contiguous to the encroachment. 
D.  The average minimum distance of 50 feet shall be maintained under all circumstances unless it is established, prior to permitting, by competent, substantial evidence that a distance greater than 50 feet is required for the protection of wetland functions, as required by this article. Buffers shall remain in an undisturbed condition except for drainage features that will not adversely affect wetland functions and public infrastructure exempted by section 30-8.18. Outfall structures from stormwater retention or detention basins can be allowed within required buffers. The buffer shall not apply to surface waters or wetlands created by humans, except those wetlands that are created for mitigation. The buffer shall be clearly delineated with permanent markers. 
E.  Within required wetland or surface water buffers, there shall be no placement of impervious surfaces or sod, except as otherwise allowed pursuant to this article. All invasive, non-native plant species listed in section 30-8.3 shall be removed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. All plants listed on the Noxious Weed List, Section 5B-57.007, Florida Administrative Code, shall be removed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Native vegetation shall be retained and/or installed in order to protect wetland and surface water environmental features. 
Figure IX-1. Minimum 50-foot buffer
 
Figure IX-2. Buffer encroachment with contiguous increase
 
Figure IX-3. Buffer encroachment with contiguous increases
 
Figure IX-4. Buffer encroachment with non-contiguous increase
 
F.  Outstanding Florida Waters, as listed in Section 62-302.700, Florida Administrative Code, shall have a minimum buffer of 200 feet. 
G.  For development activity between 35 and 150 feet from the break in slope at the top of the bank of any regulated creek, it is a rebuttable presumption that the development activity is detrimental to the regulated creek and is therefore prohibited unless approval is granted as set forth below. 
H.  Development plans for lots within 150 feet of any regulated creek shall demonstrate compliance with the following standards (standards (2) and (3) shall not be applied to residential single-family lots): 
1.  The development will not introduce erosion and sediment pollution to the creek both during and after construction; 
2.  The first one inch of runoff or appropriate water management district standards, whichever is greater, will either be retained or detained through filtration on the project site; 
3.  There will be no net increase in the rate of runoff from the site; 
4.  There is no threat to the stability of the creek bank; and 
5.  There will be no placement of buildings, structures, impervious surfaces, or sod that would require the removal of vegetation integral to the creek's ecological value. All invasive, non-native plant species listed in section 30-8.3 shall be removed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. All plants listed on the Noxious Weed List, Section 5B-57.007, Florida Administrative Code shall be removed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Native vegetation shall be installed and/or retained to protect surface water or wetland environmental features. 
I.  The development will not modify groundwater levels so as to have an adverse impact on the hydrological regime of a surface water or wetland. For the purposes of this provision, adverse impact is defined as a change that prevents the surface water or wetland from maintaining a structure and function equivalent to pre-development levels. 
J.  If a proposed development requires development plan review pursuant to article III, the showing of compliance with the requirements of the surface waters and wetlands sections of article VIII shall be made in development plan review. The petition for development plan review shall provide both a hydrological report and construction plans prepared by a qualified engineer registered in the state. 
K.  If a proposed development does not require development plan review, a showing of compliance shall be certified by the city manager's designee prior to issuance of any building permit. To demonstrate compliance with the requirements concerning quality and control of erosion and sediment pollution, the development plan may employ the city's "General Criteria for Controlling Erosion and Sediment," in the design manual, or equivalent practices, rather than employing the more elaborate hydrological and soil reports used in development plan review. Compliance with the measures required by "General Criteria for Controlling Erosion and Sediment" shall be presumed sufficient to meet the standards in subsections 30-8.20.H.1., 2. and 3. The development plan shall provide enough information to demonstrate compliance with the remaining standards, but need not ordinarily be prepared by a registered engineer. A professional land surveyor certified by the state shall provide the lot boundaries survey and topographical information. 
L.  On-site transfer of development intensity and density. In order to protect surface water features of a site, development intensity and density for building areas may be transferred from a lower to a higher elevation within the same property or adjacent property under the same ownership and zoning category. Intensity and density may be apportioned over the property by reserving the surface water and its buffer area as common open space. If all of the intensity and density is transferred to the adjacent property, the owner shall record a restriction in the chain of title of the transferor property, prior to issuance of a final development order, to restrict the use of the land in perpetuity to non-development uses, with such restrictions being expressly enforceable by the city. 
M.  The installation of new septic tanks is prohibited within 150 feet of the landward extent of a regulated lake or wetland, or within 150 feet from the break in slope at the top of the bank of a regulated creek.  
Sec. 30-8.21. - Avoiding loss or degradation of wetlands. 
Wetlands within and around the City of Gainesville provide environmental benefits such as water quality improvement, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge and wildlife habitat, especially for species listed as endangered, threatened or of special concern by state and federal agencies, plus recreational, aesthetic and educational opportunities for people. These functions may be provided regardless of wetland size. Wetlands damaged or degraded shall either be restored to their function and condition prior to such damage, or mitigated pursuant to the mitigation requirements in the Comprehensive Plan, this Code, and in accordance with appropriate water management district standards. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to avoid loss or degradation of wetland functions, to minimize unavoidable degradation or loss of wetland functions and to require mitigation that fully offsets any unavoidable loss or degradation of wetland functions. In addition, it is the purpose of this section to ensure that development activities that cause the unavoidable degradation or loss of wetland function are clearly in the public interest and fully offset any degradation or loss of wetland functions through sustainable mitigation. This section should contribute to the restoration of wetlands functions in the city. 
B.  Applicability. Except as provided below this section shall be applicable to all wetlands within the City of Gainesville. This section shall not apply to the maintenance of permitted stormwater systems. 
C.  Delineation. Wetlands shall be delineated pursuant to Rule 62-340.300, Florida Administrative Code. Delineations performed by the State of Florida pursuant to Rule 62-340.300, Florida Administrative Code, shall be binding on the city for the purposes of this section. 
D.  Avoidance through minimization. Avoidance of loss of wetland function and wetland habitat is of the highest priority. The owner shall avoid loss of wetland function and wetland habitat by implementing practicable design alternatives to minimize adverse impacts to wetlands, except as permitted in this section. 
The adverse impacts remaining after practicable design modifications have been made shall be offset by mitigation as provided herein. A development activity cannot cause a net adverse impact on wetland functions, wetland habitat, or surface water functions, if such activity is not offset by mitigation. 
Avoidance through practicable design modifications is not required when the ecological value of the function provided by the area of wetland is low and the proposed mitigation will provide greater long-term ecological value than the area of wetland to be affected. 
E.  Conditions for the issuance of a development permit for property upon which wetlands are located. The city manager or designee or appropriate reviewing board shall review all permit applications based on the conditions set forth below. No development of property containing wetlands shall be permitted unless the owner provides reasonable assurance that the activity: 
1.  Will not adversely impact the value of wetland functions provided to fish and wildlife and listed species; 
2.  Will not cause adverse secondary or cumulative impacts to water and wetland resources; 
3.  Will be capable, based on generally accepted engineering and scientific principles, of being performed and of functioning as proposed; 
4.  Will be conducted by an entity with the sufficient financial, legal and administrative capability to ensure that the activity will be undertaken in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit, if issued; 
5.  Will comply with criteria for buffer zones set forth herein; 
6.  Is consistent with the owner's stormwater management permit, if required; and 
7.  Is clearly in the public interest based on a balancing of the following criteria: 
a.  Whether the development activity requires location in, on, or over wetlands or surface waters in order to fulfill its basic function; 
b.  The effect of the development activity on the public health, safety, or welfare or the property of others; 
c.  The effect of the development activity on fish, wildlife and native plant communities; 
d.  The effect of the development activity on recreation, open space and aesthetic values; 
e.  The effect of the development activity on significant historical and archaeological resources; 
f.  Whether the development activity will be of a temporary or permanent nature; 
g.  The current condition and relative value of wetland functions being performed by areas affected by the proposed activity; 
h.  The type, extent, and geographic location of any mitigation proposed; 
i.  The extent to which the development furthers the goals of the Comprehensive Plan, and the proximity of the development to existing infrastructure. 
F.  Mitigation. This section applies to development activities in wetlands, which cannot be avoided or minimized, as determined by the criteria stated herein. Mitigation means an action or series of actions to offset the adverse impacts that would otherwise cause a regulated activity to fail to meet the criteria set forth herein. 
1.  Types of mitigation; mitigation ratios. Mitigation consists of creation, preservation, enhancement, restoration, or a combination thereof in accordance with the ratios and preferences set forth in Chapter 62-345, Florida Administrative Code (Uniform Mitigation Assessment Method). 
a.  Preservation means the protection of wetlands, other surface waters or uplands from adverse impacts by placing a conservation easement or other comparable land use restriction over the property, in favor of the governmental entity with the appropriate jurisdiction. 
b.  Enhancement is an improvement in wetland function. 
c.  Restoration means converting existing wetlands, surface waters or uplands from a disturbed or altered condition to a previously existing natural condition to the maximum extent possible. 
d.  Creation means the establishment of new wetlands or surface waters by conversion of other landforms. Wetland creation is the least acceptable mitigation alternative and shall be considered only when preservation, restoration or enhancement within the sub-basin, basin or adjacent basin are infeasible at the ratios provided and when the owner can demonstrate that the proper hydrology and geology exist to make a created wetland sustainable. 
2.  Location of mitigation. Any mitigation required pursuant to this section shall be performed within the basins and sub-basins described below, and may be performed on-site. These basins and sub-basins shall be specifically delineated on a map in the data and analysis section of the conservation, open space and groundwater recharge element of the Comprehensive Plan. Sub-basins include but are not limited to those drainage units within basins described below and as determined by the city manager or designee. 
a.  Newnans Lake Basin. This basin generally includes the areas east of the Hogtown Creek watershed and the Blues Creek watershed and north and east of the Paynes Prairie watershed. It includes Hatchet Creek, Little Hatchet Creek, Gum Root Swamp, Sunnyland Creek, Lake Forest Creek and the Newnans Lake watershed. 
b.  Paynes Prairie Basin. The Paynes Prairie Basin generally consists of the area west and south of the Newnans Lake Basin and south of the Hogtown Creek watershed flowing to Paynes Prairie and Alachua Sink. The Paynes Prairie Basin includes Sweetwater Branch, Rosewood Lateral, Tumblin Creek, Bivans Arm, Extension Ditch, Calf Pond Creek, Alachua Sink and the Paynes Prairie watershed. 
c.  Hogtown Creek Basin. The Hogtown Creek basin generally includes the watershed for Hogtown Creek and Haile Sink and includes the depression basins that are adjacent to the west side of the watershed and within the Gainesville Community Basin. This Basin includes Hogtown Creek, Rattle Snake Creek, Springstead Creek, Pine Forest Creek, Ridge View Creek, Glenn Springs Creek, Possum Creek, Three Lakes Creek, Millhopper Creek, Monterey Creek, Royal Park Creek, Beville Creek, and the Lake Alice watershed, Lake Kanapaha, Rutledge Drain, Liberty Drain, Unnamed Branch and Unnamed Drain. 
d.  Blues Creek Basin. The Blues Creek Basin generally includes the area northwest of the Hogtown Creek Basin. The basin includes Blues Creek, Alachua Slough and Sanchez Prairie. 
e.  Sub-basins may be delineated for each basin. 
G.  Order of mitigation preference. The order of preference for the location of the mitigation area in relation to the impacted area is as follows: 
1.  In the same sub-basin; 
2.  In the same basin; 
3.  In another listed basin. 
The appropriate reviewing board or city manager or designee, in writing, may approve a deviation from this order of preference if greater ecological benefits would be achieved with another order. 
H.  Mitigation plan. Owners shall submit to the city manager or designee detailed plans describing proposed construction, establishment, and management of mitigation areas. These plans shall include the following information, as appropriate for the type of mitigation proposed by the owner: 
1.  A soils map of the mitigation area and other soils information pertinent to the specific mitigation actions proposed; 
2.  A topographic map of the mitigation area and adjacent hydrologic contributing and receiving areas; 
3.  A hydrologic features map of the mitigation area and adjacent hydrologic contributing and receiving areas; 
4.  A description of current hydrologic conditions affecting the mitigation area; 
5.  A map of plant communities in and around the mitigation area, including buffer areas; 
6.  Construction drawings detailing proposed topographic alterations and all structural components associated with proposed activities; 
7.  Proposed construction activities, including a detailed schedule for implementation; 
8.  Vegetation planting scheme and schedule for implementation, if planting is proposed; 
9.  Sources of plants and soils used in wetland creation; 
10.  Measures to be implemented during and after construction to avoid adverse impacts related to proposed activities; 
11.  A management plan comprising all aspects of operation and maintenance, including water management practices, plant establishment, exotic and nuisance species control, fire management, and control of access; 
12.  A proposed monitoring plan to demonstrate mitigation success; 
13.  A description of the activities proposed to control exotic and nuisance species should these become established in the mitigation area. The mitigation proposal shall include reasonable measures to assure that these species do not invade the mitigation area in such numbers as to affect the likelihood of success of the project; 
14.  A description of anticipated site conditions in and around the mitigation area after the mitigation plan is successfully implemented; 
15.  A comparison of current fish and wildlife habitat to expected habitat after the mitigation plan is successfully implemented; and 
16.  An itemized estimate of the cost of implementing mitigation, if applicable, as set forth herein. 
I.  Monitoring requirements for mitigation areas. The owner shall monitor the progress of mitigation areas until success can be demonstrated as provided herein. Monitoring parameters, methods, schedules, and reporting requirements shall be specified as conditions within the appropriate permit. At a minimum, the owner shall transmit to the city manager or designee monitoring reports certified by an environmental scientist, biologist, registered engineer or registered landscape architect. These reports shall be submitted no less frequently than every 12 months for at least three years, except as provided herein. At a minimum, the monitoring reports shall include the following: 
1.  An executive summary; 
2.  A table of contents; 
3.  A map of the site; 
4.  Color photographs of the site and its important features; 
5.  A description and analysis of water levels; 
6.  A description and analysis of water quality; 
7.  A description and analysis of the amount and types of nuisance and exotic plants; 
8.  A description and analysis of the amount and types of intended and native plants; 
9.  The survival rates of installed plants; 
10.  Wildlife observations; and 
11.  A description of mitigating activities by owner or agent. 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, regulatory fees for mitigation plan review and mitigation plan implementation shall be borne by the owner. Similar reporting to and review by the water management district shall be acceptable in lieu of this review. 
J.  Protection of mitigation areas. The owner shall propose and be responsible for implementing methods to assure that mitigation areas will not be adversely impacted by incidental encroachment or secondary activities which might compromise mitigation success. 
K.  Mitigation success. After three years of monitoring, the owner shall provide to the city manager or designee a written certification by an environmental scientist, biologist or registered engineer or registered landscape architect that the mitigation meets applicable success criteria as described below. If certification of success is not submitted or is not approved by the city manager or designee, then monitoring shall continue and monitoring reports shall be submitted until the city manager or designee deems the mitigation successful. 
1.  Mitigation success criteria. Mitigation success will be measured in terms of whether the objectives of the mitigation are realized. The success criteria to be included in permit conditions will specify the minimum requirements necessary to attain a determination of success. The city manager or designee shall deem the mitigation successful when all applicable water quality standards are met, the mitigation area has achieved viable and sustainable ecological and hydrological functions, and the specific success criteria contained in the permit are met. If success is not achieved within the time frame specified within the permit, remedial measures shall be required. Monitoring and maintenance requirements shall remain in effect until success is achieved. 
L.  Financial assurances. As part of compliance with this section, the owner shall provide proof of financial assurance when: 1) conducting the mitigation activities; 2) conducting any necessary management of the mitigation site; 3) conducting monitoring of the mitigation; and 4) conducting any necessary corrective action indicated by the monitoring. 
1.  Cost estimates. The amount of financial assurance provided by the owner shall be an amount equal to 120 percent of the cost estimate for each phase of the mitigation plan. For the purposes of determining the amount of financial assurance that is required by this subsection, the owner shall submit a detailed written estimate, in current dollars, of the total cost of conducting the mitigation, including any maintenance and monitoring activities, and the owner shall comply with the following: 
a.  The cost estimate for conducting the mitigation and monitoring shall include all associated costs for each phase thereof, including earthmoving, planting, structure installation, maintaining and operating any structures, controlling nuisance or exotic species, fire management, consultant fees, monitoring activities and reports. 
b.  The owner shall submit the estimates, together with comprehensive and verifiable documentation, to the city manager or designee along with the draft of the financial assurance. 
c.  The costs shall be estimated based upon a qualified third party performing the work and supplying services and materials at fair market value. All cost estimates shall be supported by comprehensive and verifiable documentation. 
2.  Financial responsibility assurances. Financial responsibility for the mitigation, monitoring, and corrective action for each phase of the project may be established by any of the following methods, at the discretion of the owner: 
a.  Bond. A performance bond shall be filed with the city manager or designee which is executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state with a rating of not lower or less than A-XII as rated by A.M. Best Company, Inc., an independent national rating service for performance companies, which bond shall be conditioned to secure the required mitigation, monitoring, and corrective action in a satisfactory manner within 12 months from final plat approval and any extension of such period approved by the city commission, or, in the case of development (site) plan review, prior to final development plan approval. The bond shall be enforceable by and payable to the city in a sum at least equal to 120 percent of the total cost of the required mitigation, monitoring, and corrective action as estimated by the project engineer and verified and approved by the city manager or designee. The bond shall be first approved by the city attorney as to form and legality prior to its submission with the proposed final plat to the city commission for approval and shall be executed by both the owner and the party or parties with whom the owner has contracted to perform the required mitigation, monitoring, and corrective action. In the case of development (site) plan review, the bond shall be first approved by the city attorney as to form and legality prior to submission of the proposed final development plan to the appropriate reviewing entity (board or city manager or designee) and shall be executed by the developer and the party or parties with whom the developer has contracted to perform the required mitigation, monitoring, and corrective action; or 
b.  Irrevocable letter of credit. Deposit with the city manager or designee an irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit by a Florida bank that has authority to issue letters of credit and whose letter of credit operations are regulated and examined by a federal or state agency. The letter of credit shall be for an amount equal to 120 percent of the estimated costs of the required mitigation, monitoring, and corrective action. The letter of credit shall remain with the city as a valid letter of credit until the city is satisfied that all of the required mitigation, monitoring, and corrective action has been completed in accordance with plans and specifications, that mitigation success as provided herein has been achieved, and that all other provisions of this chapter relating thereto have been fully complied with; or 
c.  Insurance certificate. An insurance certificate from a company authorized to do business in the state and which has a rating of not lower or less than A-XII as rated by A.M. Best Company, Inc. The insurance certificate and its associated insurance policy shall be reviewed and approved by the city manager or designee before the city can accept the certificate as a financial responsibility assurance to secure the mitigation, monitoring and corrective action. The insurance certificate shall name the city named as an additional insured and shall provide not less than 30 calendar days' notice to the city of cancellation; or 
d.  Cash deposit. A cash deposit in an amount equal to 120 percent of the estimated costs of the required mitigation, monitoring, and corrective action. The cash deposit shall remain with the city until the city is satisfied that all of the required mitigation, monitoring, and corrective action has been completed in accordance with plans and specifications, that mitigation success as provided herein has been achieved, and that all other provisions of this chapter relating thereto have been fully complied with. 
3.  Owners not subject to financial assurance requirements. Owners whose mitigation is deemed successful pursuant to the mitigation success criteria provided herein prior to undertaking the construction activities authorized under their permit, or owners who purchase credits in a mitigation bank to offset the adverse impacts as required herein, are not subject to the financial assurance requirements of this section. 
4.  General terms for financial assurances. In addition to the specific provisions regarding financial assurances set forth herein, the following shall be complied with: 
a.  The city attorney shall approve the form and content of all financial assurances prior to the commencement date of the activity authorized by the permit. 
b.  The financial assurance(s) shall name the city as sole beneficiary or shall be payable solely to the city. If the financial assurance is of a type that is retained by the beneficiary according to industry standards, the city shall retain the original financial assurance. For mitigation projects required both by the city and the water management district, the financial assurance(s) shall name the city and the water management district as joint beneficiaries or shall be payable to the city and the water management district jointly, unless the city and the water management district establish an alternative arrangement in writing with respect to the designated beneficiary or payee. 
c.  The financial assurances shall be effective on or prior to the date that the activity authorized by the permit commences and shall continue to be effective through the date of notification of final release by the city, which shall occur within 30 calendar days of the determination that the mitigation is successful. 
d.  The financial assurances cannot be revoked, terminated, or canceled without the owner first providing an alternative financial assurance that meets the requirements of this Code. Once the owner receives actual or constructive notice of revocation, termination, or cancellation of a financial assurance or other actual or constructive notice of cancellation, the owner shall provide such an alternate financial assurance prior to expiration of the financial assurance. 
5.  Financial assurance conditions. For owners subject to the financial assurance requirements of this section, the city manager or designee will include the following conditions in the permit: 
a.  An owner shall notify the city attorney by certified mail of the commencement of a voluntary or involuntary proceeding under Title XI (Bankruptcy), U.S. Code naming the permittee as debtor within ten business days of the owner filing of the petition. 
b.  An owner who fulfills the requirements of this section by obtaining a letter of credit or bond will be deemed to be without the required financial assurance in the event of bankruptcy, insolvency or suspension or revocation of the license or charter of the issuing institution. The owner shall reestablish a financial assurance in accordance with this section within 60 calendar days after such event. 
c.  When transferring a permit, the new owner or person with legal control shall submit documentation to satisfy the financial assurance requirements of this section. The prior owner or person with legal control of the project shall continue financial assurance until the city manager or designee has approved the permit transfer and substitute financial assurance. 
6.  Releases. 
a.  Partial releases. The owner may request the city attorney to release portions of the financial assurance as phases of the mitigation plan, such as earth moving or other construction activities for which cost estimates were submitted in accordance with this section, are successfully completed. The request shall be in writing and include documentation that the phase or phases have been completed and have been paid for, or will be paid for, upon release of the applicable portion of the financial assurance. The city attorney shall authorize the release of the portion requested upon verification that the construction or activities has been completed in accordance with the mitigation plan. 
b.  Final release. Within 30 calendar days of successful mitigation, as determined by the city manager or designee and based on the criteria stated herein, the city shall notify the owner and shall authorize the return and release of all funds held or give written authorization to the appropriate party of the cancellation or termination of the financial assurance. 
M.  Application procedure. An owner seeking a permit for a development activity in an area containing wetlands shall adhere to the application procedure set forth in the development review process provisions of the Land Development Code. 
N.  Density transfers. The Land Development Code provisions relevant to onsite transfer of development intensity and density shall apply to the transfer of intensity and density of developments within or in an area containing wetlands. 
O.  Exemptions. The wetlands protection regulations do not apply to owners and applications exempted pursuant to section 30-8.18.  
Sec. 30-8.22. - Single-family lots. 
A.  Applicability of standards. All development of single-family lots shall comply with the surface waters and wetlands sections of this article. If a subdivision plat has satisfied the requirements of these sections, the city may issue a certification of compliance for some or all of the lots in the subdivision at one time. In that case the lots are subject to further compliance review at the time of issuance of a building permit, only for compliance with the construction measures required by general criteria for controlling erosion and sediment. 
B.  Special permits. In order to allow the reasonable development of a single-family dwelling and customary accessory structures and driveways on platted lots regulated by the surface waters and wetlands sections of this article, the development review board may grant a modification from compliance with the minimum buffer requirements of these sections only to the extent necessary to accommodate such reasonable development. As part of the same proceedings, the board may also grant variances to the yard setbacks required by this chapter in order to facilitate compliance with these sections subject to a finding that such special permits will neither be injurious to adjacent property owners or the neighborhood nor detrimental to the public welfare. 
1.  Minimum requirement for special permits. Special permits may be granted by the Development Review Board for single-family lots located within the 75-foot required minimum buffer for regulated lakes, or within the required average minimum buffer distance of 50 feet from the landward extent of any wetland or surface water, or within 150 feet of the break in slope at the top of bank of a regulated creek for lots which are lawfully created before April 12, 2004. 
2.  Criteria for granting of special permits. The following criteria shall be used in deciding whether and to what extent a special permit should be granted: 
a.  The development review board shall determine what is reasonable development of a single-family lot, accessory structures and drives and shall consider the following factors: 
i.  The size of existing single-family dwellings in the immediate vicinity should serve as a guide to what is customary and reasonable for the property under review. 
ii.  No special permit shall be granted for the purpose of accommodating a swimming pool, tennis court, racquetball court or similar recreational structure, or to accommodate accessory uses that are not customary on single-family lots or exceed the customary size. 
b.  The Development Review Board shall consider features of the site, including its topography, the width of the creek bed, and the presence or absence of vegetation natural to the creek, lake or wetland, which indicate that a special permit would or would not further the goals of these sections. 
c.  The development review board shall consider building code requirements, including building orientation requirements to meet energy efficiency standards that affect the design and/or orientation of structures on the lot. 
d.  The development review board shall consider presence of trees eight inches or greater in diameter at a point four and one-half feet above the ground level that can only be preserved if a special permit is granted. 
3.  The development review board shall consider staff reports as needed in reaching its decision. In granting a special permit the board shall establish measures to ensure that the goals of these sections are substantially met, in particular maintaining natural vegetation where feasible, preventing sedimentation loading to the creek, lake or wetland, maintaining the stability of the creek or lake bank, and preventing the degradation of the water quality of the creek, lake or wetland. To achieve these aims, the Development Review Board shall attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, such as construction control techniques and other mitigative measures, as it deems necessary. 
C.  Special permit procedures. Applications shall be processed in accordance with the requirements in this chapter relating to variances, established for the development review board.  
DIVISION 5. - FLOODPLAINS 
 
Sec. 30-8.23. - Administration. 
A.  Title. These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City of Gainesville, hereinafter referred to as "this subdivision." 
B.  Scope. The provisions of this subdivision shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
C.  Intent. The purposes of this subdivision and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
1.  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
2.  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
3.  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
4.  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
5.  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
7.  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
8.  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the 44 CFR 59.22. 
D.  Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This subdivision is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
E.  Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this subdivision and the Florida Building Code, as amended by the City of Gainesville, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This subdivision does not express or imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of 44 CFR 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring the city to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this subdivision. 
F.  Disclaimer of liability. This subdivision shall not create liability on the part of the City of Gainesville or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that occurs, notwithstanding compliance with this subdivision or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.  
Sec. 30-8.24. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this subdivision, have the meanings stated in this section. Where terms are not defined in this subdivision and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this subdivision or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
Alteration of a watercourse means a dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification that may alter, impede, retard or change the direction or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this subdivision or a request for a variance. 
ASCE 24 means a standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
Base flood means a flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1% annual chance flood." 
Base flood elevation means the elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
Basement means the portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Design flood means the flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: 
1.  Area with a floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
2.  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Design flood elevation means the elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
Encroachment means the placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
Existing building and existing structure mean any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before October 1, 1971. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before October 1, 1971. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood damage-resistant materials means any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. 
Flood hazard area means the greater of the following two areas: 
1.  The area within a floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
2.  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. 
Floodplain administrator means the office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this subdivision (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
Floodplain development permit or approval means an official document or certificate issued by the city, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this subdivision. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that shall be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floodway encroachment analysis means an engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
Florida Building Code means the family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11, Historic Buildings. 
Letter of map change (LOMC) means an official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
1.  Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
2.  Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
3.  Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill shall have been permitted and placed in accordance with the city's floodplain management regulations. 
4.  Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
Light-duty truck means, as defined in 40 CFR 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
1.  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle; 
2.  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
3.  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value means the price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this subdivision, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
New construction means, for the purposes of administration of this subdivision and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after October 1, 1971, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after October 3, 1971. 
Park trailer means a transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Special flood hazard area means an area in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. 
Start of construction means the date of development permit issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 calendar days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, or the construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this subdivision, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this subdivision or the Florida Building Code. 
Watercourse means a river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically.  
Sec. 30-8.25. - Applicability. 
A.  General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
B.  Areas to which this subdivision applies. This subdivision shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Gainesville, as established in subsection C. below. 
C.  Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The Flood Insurance Study for Alachua County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated June 16, 2006, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this subdivision and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the: 
City of Gainesville Public Works 
405 NW 39th Avenue 
Gainesville, FL 32609 
Alachua County Public Library 
Downtown Headquarters 
401 East University Avenue 
Gainesville, FL 32601 
D.  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to section 30-8.28 of this subdivision, the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. 
1.  Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the city indicates that ground elevations are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this subdivision and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
2.  Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the city indicates that ground elevations are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
E.  Other laws. The provisions of this subdivision shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
F.  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This subdivision supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this subdivision and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. 
G.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this subdivision, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.  
Sec. 30-8.26. - Duties and powers of the floodplain administrator. 
A.  Designation. The city manager or designee is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
B.  General. The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this subdivision. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this subdivision consistent with the intent and purpose of this subdivision and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this subdivision without the granting of a variance pursuant to section 30-8.30 of this subdivision. 
C.  Applications and permits. The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the city, shall: 
1.  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
2.  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this subdivision; 
3.  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
4.  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
5.  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
6.  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
7.  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this subdivision is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
8.  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this subdivision. 
D.  Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
1.  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
2.  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
3.  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
4.  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this subdivision is required. 
E.  Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to section 30-8.30 of this subdivision. 
F.  Notices and orders. The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to promote compliance with this subdivision. 
G.  Inspections. The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in section 30-8.29 of this subdivision for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
H.  Other duties of the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
1.  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to subsection D. above; 
2.  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
3.  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
4.  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this subdivision and the Florida Building Code and this subdivision to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and 
5.  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the City of Gainesville are modified. 
I.  Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection records that are necessary for the administration of this subdivision and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which shall include: flood insurance rate maps; letters of map change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this subdivision; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this subdivision and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at: 
City of Gainesville Public Works 
405 NW 39th Avenue 
Gainesville, FL 32609  
Sec. 30-8.27. - Permits. 
A.  Permits required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to undertake any development within the scope of this subdivision, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly or partially within any flood hazard area shall first apply to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this subdivision and all other applicable codes and regulations of the City of Gainesville has been satisfied. 
B.  Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this subdivision for any development not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
C.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code: 
1.  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
2.  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
3.  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
4.  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
5.  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
6.  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
7.  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
8.  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
9.  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
D.  Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the city. The information provided shall: 
1.  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
2.  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
3.  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
4.  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in section 30-8.28 of this subdivision. 
5.  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
6.  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
7.  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
E.  Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this subdivision shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this subdivision, the Florida Building Code, or any other subdivision of the city. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
F.  Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 calendar days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 calendar days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 calendar days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
G.  Suspension or revocation. The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this subdivision or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of the city. 
H.  Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  The St. Johns River Water Management District (SJRWMD), or Suwannee River Water Management District (SRWMD), whichever is applicable; F.S. § 373.036. 
2.  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065, and Chapter 64E-6, Florida Administrative Code 
3.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
4.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
5.  Federal permits and approvals.  
Sec. 30-8.28. - Site plans and construction documents. 
A.  Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this subdivision shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
1.  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
2.  Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance with subsection 30-8.28.B.2. or 3. of this subdivision. 
3.  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with subsection 30-8.28.B.1. of this subdivision. 
4.  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures. 
5.  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
6.  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
7.  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this subdivision but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this subdivision. 
B.  Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
1.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
2.  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source; or 
3.  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet. 
C.  Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
1.  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection 30-8.28.D. of this subdivision and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
2.  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the city. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as zone AO or Zone AH. 
3.  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection 30-8.28.D. of this subdivision. 
D.  Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.  
Sec. 30-8.29. - Inspections. 
A.  General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
B.  Development other than buildings and structures. The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this subdivision and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
C.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this subdivision and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
D.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
1.  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
2.  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with subsection 30-8.28.B.3.b. of this subdivision, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
E.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in subsection 30-8.29.D. of this subdivision. 
F.  Manufactured homes. The building official shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this subdivision and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the building official. 
(Ord. No. 170974 , § 15, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-8.30. - Variances and appeals. 
A.  General. The appropriate reviewing authority shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this subdivision and, pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
B.  Appeals. The appropriate reviewing authority shall hear and decide appeals, as provided in this chapter, when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this subdivision. 
C.  Limitations on authority to grant variances. The appropriate reviewing board shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in subsection 30-8.30.G. of this subdivision, the conditions of issuance set forth in subsection 30-8.30.H. of this subdivision, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The appropriate reviewing board has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this subdivision. 
D.  Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in subsection 30-8.28.C. of this subdivision. 
E.  Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11, Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
F.  Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the variance meets the requirements of subsection 30-8.30.D., is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
G.  Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the appropriate reviewing board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this subdivision, and the following: 
1.  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
2.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
5.  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
6.  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
7.  The relationship of the proposed development to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
8.  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
9.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
10.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
H.  Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
1.  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this subdivision or the required elevation standards; 
2.  Determination by the appropriate reviewing board that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
3.  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
4.  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation, and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property.  
Sec. 30-8.31. - Violations. 
A.  Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this subdivision that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this subdivision, shall be deemed a violation of this subdivision. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this subdivision or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
B.  Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this subdivision and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
C.  Unlawful continuance. No person shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition.  
Sec. 30-8.32. - Buildings and structures. 
A.  Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to subsection 30-8.27.C. of this subdivision, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of section 30-8.38 of this subdivision.  
Sec. 30-8.33. - Subdivisions. 
A.  Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
1.  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
B.  Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
1.  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats and final plats; 
2.  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with subsection 30-8.28.B.1. of this subdivision; and 
3.  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of section 30-8.34 of this subdivision.  
Sec. 30-8.34. - Site improvements, utilities, and limitations. 
A.  Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
1.  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
B.  Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, Florida Administrative Code and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
C.  Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, Florida Administrative Code and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
D.  Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in subsection 30-8.28.C.1. of this subdivision demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
E.  Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this subdivision, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code.  
Sec. 30-8.35. - Manufactured homes. 
A.  General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, Florida Administrative Code and the requirements of this subdivision. 
B.  Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 and this subdivision. 
C.  Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
D.  Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with subsection 30-8.35.E. or 30-8.35.F. of this subdivision, as applicable. 
E.  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of subsection 30-8.35.F. of this subdivision, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A). 
F.  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to subsection 30-8.35.E. of this subdivision, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
1.  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A); or 
2.  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
G.  Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322 for such enclosed areas. 
H.  Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.  
Sec. 30-8.36. - Recreational vehicles and park trailers. 
A.  Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
B.  Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in subsection 30-8.36.A. of this subdivision for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of section 30-8.35 of this subdivision for manufactured homes.  
Sec. 30-8.37. - Tanks. 
A.  Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
B.  Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of subsection 30-8.37.C. of this subdivision shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
C.  Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
D.  Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
1.  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
2.  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood.  
Sec. 30-8.38. - Other development. 
A.  General requirements for other development. All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this subdivision or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
1.  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
2.  Meet the limitations of subsection 30-8.34.D. of this subdivision if located in a regulated floodway; 
3.  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
4.  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
5.  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
B.  Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of subsection 30-8.34.D. of this subdivision. 
C.  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection 30-8.34.D. of this subdivision. 
D.  Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection 30-8.34.D. of this subdivision. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of subsection 30-8.28.C.3. of this subdivision.  
DIVISION 6. - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AREAS 
 
Sec. 30-8.39. - Applicability and effect. 
A.  Effect of classification. The wellfield, nature park and public conservation/preservation areas, and greenway districts are overlay district classifications. They are intended to operate in conjunction with the underlying zoning district for the area. The regulations of the underlying zoning district remain in effect except to the extent that they are modified by the provisions of the applicable overlay district(s). 
B.  Administration. The wellfield, nature park and public conservation/preservation areas, and greenway districts shall be applied and enforced like any other zoning district regulation. 
C.  Extension of district boundaries. Property owners may apply for inclusion in the environmental overlay districts, regardless of contiguity. Such an extension or inclusion shall be subject to review and consideration according to the applicable terms of this article and shall be processed as a rezoning in accordance with this chapter. The city commission may extend or expand districts from time to time in accordance with the same standards and procedures as for the original district as determined by the Comprehensive Plan. 
D.  Exclusion from district boundaries. It is a rebuttable presumption that a property qualifies for inclusion within the wellfield district. Qualified properties are those that are within the zone of contribution to the wellfield, as defined by the applicable water management district. Property owners whose land is within the district may apply for exclusion from the district. Such an exclusion shall be based on a determination made by a qualified engineer registered in the State of Florida that the property is not part of the zone of contribution. This determination is subject to review and consideration by the city public works department and the county office of environmental protection and the public utility according to the applicable terms of this article and shall be processed as a rezoning in accordance with this chapter.  
Sec. 30-8.40. - Wellfield district. 
A.  Adoption of wellfield district. The wellfield district is delineated on the map entitled, "Map Displaying Community Wellfields of Gainesville, Florida," on file with the city. 
B.  Requirements and procedures. 
1.  All new and existing developments shall comply with the county Murphree Well Field Management, Storage Tank Systems, and Hazardous Materials Management Codes, except that such development shall also comply with subsection B.2. of this section. 
2.  In the Murphree wellfield management primary and secondary zone, the installation of new septic tanks in commercial, institutional and industrial districts is prohibited.  
Sec. 30-8.41. - Nature park and public conservation/preservation areas district. 
A.  Adoption of nature park and public conservation/preservation areas district. The nature park and public conservation/preservation areas district is delineated on the map entitled "Nature Parks and Public Conservation/Preservation Areas District Map" on file with the city. 
B.  Applicability. Property that lies within 400 feet of the boundary of a designated nature park and public conservation/preservation area is regulated as set forth in this section. 
C.  Requirements and procedures. 
1.  Development plan requirements. Refer to article III, pertaining to development plan review process. 
2.  Height limits. 
a.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
b.  Maximum lighting height: 45 feet. 
c.  Maximum transmitter tower height: 80 feet. 
3.  Exterior lighting control. All exterior lighting shall be shielded or directed away from the park. No exterior lighting shall cause illumination in excess of four-tenths footcandle measured at the park boundary. Buildings shall not be externally illuminated on the faces fronting the park, except that exterior lighting of building entrances, exits or loading docks is permitted. Downlights shall be used for area lighting instead of full globe lights or any similar type of light which illuminates in all directions. 
4.  On-site transfer of development intensity and density. In order to protect nature parks and public conservation/preservation areas, development intensity and density for building areas may be transferred from areas near the park to areas remote from the park within the same property or adjacent property under same ownership and zoning category. 
5.  Buffer/fencing. In order to avoid encroachment by invasive exotic plants, pets, livestock and fowl, and yard or trash debris, new development on parcels larger than two acres or new subdivisions shall leave a buffer at least 25 feet in width extending from the boundary of the nature park and public conservation/preservation area to be left in a generally undisturbed native plant condition. Buffers shall remain common open space or within the boundaries of a single lot or parcel. As an alternative to the buffer requirement, where sufficient justification is presented (such as, but not limited to, hardship due to configuration of the property, the extensive presence of invasive exotic plants or a need to confine pets) and approved at the time of development review, new development adjacent to a nature park and public conservation/preservation area may be allowed to install and maintain a fence along the property boundary between the nature park and public conservation/preservation area and the development area. 
D.  Expansion or alteration of existing uses. 
1.  Whenever expansion of an existing structure, independently or cumulatively, accomplished after June 10, 1992, totals 2,000 square feet or more than 20 percent of the gross square footage of the existing structure, whichever is less, the entire site shall be brought into compliance with this section. For the purposes of this subsection, repeated expansions or alterations of property, including the construction or erection of separate buildings or accessory structures, constructed over a period of time commencing after November 21, 1983, which meet the above threshold, shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
2.  Any new use of property that alters the use of existing structures from a residential use to a nonresidential use, or any use of property that alters the use of property from one use to any other use, shall be required to meet all applicable requirements of this section. The city manager's designee shall determine the applicable requirements based on the character and orientation of the proposed mixed-use development. For purposes of this subsection, nonresidential use shall mean any office, commercial, public, semipublic, institutional or industrial use, including motels and hotels.  
Sec. 30-8.42. - Greenway district. 
A.  Adoption of greenway district. All designated greenways will be delineated on the map entitled, "Map Displaying Greenways of Gainesville, Florida" on file with the city. This map is for use only as a general reference for determining the location of the district. Actual affected properties will be identified by a list of parcels generated from the computerized GIS inventory maintained by the city. 
B.  Requirements and procedures. 
1.  Subdivisions. In addition to compliance with subsection B.3. of this section, subdivisions shall comply with article III. For cluster subdivisions, refer also to section 30-6.7. 
2.  Developments other than subdivisions. For developments requiring development plan review other than subdivisions, where the designated greenway corridors lie inside a floodplain or required surface water or wetlands setback, whichever is more landward, the appropriate review board shall determine if there is a rough proportionality between the projected impact of the development on traffic and recreational needs and the nature and amount of property in the development encompassing the greenway. In making this determination, the board shall consider the factors listed in section 30-6.6. If the board finds the necessary proportionality, the applicant shall dedicate, to the city or a qualified agency designated by the city, a greenway right-of-way which encompasses the designated greenway. 
3.  Greenway width and location. The minimum width of the greenway corridor shall be 15 feet. For properties containing a creek, the corridor shall be at least ten feet landward of the top of bank of the creek. For properties containing a lake or wetland, the corridor shall be at least ten feet landward of the landward extent of the lake or wetland. For creeks, lakes and wetlands, the city manager or designee may require a distance greater than ten feet when necessary to avoid significant harm to creek vegetation, water quality or creek bank soils. Top of bank and landward extent shall be determined by the city manager or designee. Reduced widths may be approved by the city manager or designee when necessitated by environmental or infrastructure constraints. The corridor shall be located so as to correspond with the entire length of the designated greenway as it passes through the subject property, and shall be aligned to connect with existing or potential greenways and other bicycle/pedestrian circulation systems on the parcel and on adjacent parcels. 
4.  On-site transfer of development intensity and density. In order to promote or preserve the integrity of designated greenways, development intensity and density for building areas may be transferred from areas near the greenway to areas remote from the greenway within the same property or adjacent property under the same ownership and zoning category. 
C.  Credit awarded for provision of greenway. 
1.  Increased development intensity points. Refer to the density bonus points manual as adopted by resolution of the city commission. 
2.  Landscape credit. Developments dedicating a greenway corridor as specified by the density bonus points manual are awarded a 30 percent reduction in the amount of tree and vegetation landscaping required by this chapter. 
3.  Setback and lot coverage credit. Developments dedicating a greenway corridor may include the dedicated corridor as part of its setback, if the corridor would have otherwise been part of the setback. The area of the corridor may also be considered as open space in calculations of lot coverage. 
D.  Demonstration of compliance for developments requiring development plan review. If a proposed development requires development plan review pursuant to this chapter, the showing of compliance with the requirements of this section shall be made in development plan review. The petition for development plan review shall provide both a hydrological report prepared by a qualified engineer registered in the State of Florida, as well as a map showing the location of the greenway corridor as it passes through the subject property.  
DIVISION 7. - RELIEF AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 30-8.43. - Relief for reasonable or beneficial use. 
A.  Landscape and tree management. The preservation of any existing regulated tree identified on the Gainesville tree list as being a high quality shade species may be considered as a basis for the granting of a variance pursuant to the procedures established in this chapter. 
B.  Surface waters and wetlands. As regards the provisions of surface waters and wetlands sections of this article, the following standards and measures of relief shall apply: 
1.  An applicant may be entitled to relief in the form of a minimum beneficial use if he/she demonstrates that private property rights are vested in accordance with the procedures and provisions set forth in article X. The relief which the applicant may receive shall be as follows: 
a.  The city may purchase the land from the owner for an amount based upon an appraisal completed by an M.A.I. appraiser to be selected and paid by the city. If the owner desires a review of this M.A.I. appraisal, the owner may select a reviewer and the city will provide and pay for such a review. The appraised value of the land shall not be affected by consideration of the provisions of this article; or 
b.  The development review board may grant a variance from the provisions of this article to the minimum extent necessary to allow reasonable development in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Emergency procedure for surface waters and wetlands. The owner of any real property affected by this article may file written application with the city manager or designee in order to undertake emergency measures to prevent damage to any of the regulated creeks, lakes or wetlands. The enforcing official may grant authorization to the property owner that will expedite the city's effort to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The authorization for emergency action is temporary only and shall expire within 60 calendar days or upon the next regularly scheduled meeting of the development review board, whichever is sooner. Upon receipt of temporary emergency authorization, the recipient shall apply to the development review board for authorization for any permanent measures. The authorization by the city will not relieve the property owner from securing any necessary state permits prior to commencement of work. 
C.  Floodplain management. As regards to floodplain management provisions of this article, the development review board may issue a variance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the following provisions: 
1.  Criteria for relief. In addition to the relief provisions of this chapter, the following criteria for relief shall apply: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
g.  The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program of that area; 
h.  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use; 
i.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
2.  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection C.1. of this section, and the purpose of the floodplain management sections of this article, the development review board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these sections. 
3.  The city manager or designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the federal insurance administrator (Federal Emergency Management Administration), upon request. 
4.  Variances shall not be issued within any regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels would result during a base flood discharge. Conditions for variances are as follows: 
a.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot one-half acre or less in size contiguous to, and surrounded by, lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the factors of subsection C.1. of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
b.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of these sections upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
c.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
d.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
i.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
ii.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with the local government's Comprehensive Plan or with other existing local laws or ordinances. 
e.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
5.  Special use permit. The city plan board may grant a special use permit in accordance with the procedures provided in article III to allow any of the permitted use listed in section 30-8.30 regardless of the zoning district in which the parcel is located, provided the board makes the following findings: 
a.  A showing that no use permitted within the applicable zoning district can reasonably be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
b.  A showing that the parcel cannot be combined with a contiguous parcel under the same ownership and thereby used in conformity with the applicable zoning regulations; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a special use permit will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with other existing laws and ordinances. 
The city plan board shall also consider all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
d.  The size of the parcel, and whether it was platted as a lot suitable for development or otherwise established and recognized by the city as an individual lot suitable for development; 
e.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands causing injury to others; 
f.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program of that area; 
i.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for private and emergency vehicles; 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the potential floodwaters and the potential effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as power, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges; and 
l.  The compatibility of the proposed use with nearby properties and uses. 
Upon consideration of the factors in this section and the purposes of this chapter, the city plan board may attach such conditions and restrictions upon the special use permit, including a limitation of the extent or type of uses permitted, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.  
Sec. 30-8.44. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Stormwater management. As regards the provisions of the stormwater management sections of this chapter: 
1.  Stormwater facilities shall function as per the approved final development plan/final plat. Failure to comply with this provision shall be a violation of this Code. 
2.  During construction if the city manager or designee observes that the stormwater facilities are not functioning in accordance with the permitted site plan or subdivision construction design plan, in addition to other remedies provided for in this section, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until such time as the facilities are corrected and are functioning properly. 
3.  Any stormwater facility that is found by the city manager or designee to be contributing to mosquito control problems is in violation of this article and the property owner shall immediately correct the problem at the owner's expense. 
4.  Prior to construction of a stormwater facility, a pollution prevention plan shall be submitted to the city manager or designee for approval. The pollution prevention plan shall detail specific best management practices for installation on a construction site and that when installed have the net effect of preventing a deposit, obstruction, damage or process problem to any of the city's stormwater management facilities or to the surface waters of the state. If such deposit, obstruction, damage or process problem occurs this occurrence shall be a violation of this article and the property owner shall cause the deposit or obstruction to be immediately removed or cause the damage or process problem to be immediately repaired. 
Discharge from any facility that causes a deposit, obstruction, damage or process problem to any of the city's stormwater management facilities or to the surface waters of the state is a violation of this article and the property owner shall cause the deposit or obstruction to be immediately removed or cause the damage or process problem to be immediately repaired. 
5.  Any temporary or permanent erosion or sedimentation control device that is unable to perform continuous effective control shall be a violation of this article and the property owner shall immediately correct the control device so that it performs continuous effective control. Such correction or repair shall be taken at the owner's expense. 
6.  If an approved maintenance plan is not being adhered to, the property owner shall be in violation of this article and shall immediately resume adherence to the approved maintenance plan. 
7.  Should any person violate the provisions of this section, the city manager or designee shall require the violator to take corrective measures. In the event the violator does not immediately correct the violation, the city may, depending upon the severity of the violation, take the following actions: 
a.  If the city manager or designee finds a violation of this article or a violation of any provision of a property owner's pollution prevention plan, which has been provided to the city, is not immediately rectified, the city manager or designee shall notify the property owner of the violation within five calendar days of inspection and shall give the property owner a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the city manager or designee shall issue a notice of violation to the alleged violator and shall notify the code enforcement board to request a hearing. The board, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be hand delivered or mailed to the property owner as provided in section 2-390 of the Code of Ordinances. In the case of notice provided under subsection 2-390(a), notice shall be given at least seven calendar days in advance of the hearing, not counting the day of the hearing. If the violation is corrected and then recurs or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the inspector, the case may be presented to the board even if the violation has been corrected prior to the board hearing. 
b.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if the city manager or designee finds a violation of this article in relation to a city-issued permit or finds a violation of the pollution prevention plan has occurred that presents an imminent risk to the environment, the city manager or designee may issue a cease and desist order for any and all development on the site related to the permit. Any person receiving such an order for cessation of operations shall immediately comply with the requirements thereof. It shall be a violation of this Code for any person to fail to or refuse to comply with a cease and desist order issued once written notice of the cease and desist order is delivered by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person to whom the permit is issued. 
If the city manager or designee issues a cease and desist order pursuant to this Code, the property owner shall immediately cease all work on the site until the violation is corrected or mitigated. The property owner shall have the right to appeal to the appropriate reviewing authority the administrative decision of the city manager or designee to issue a cease and desist order and shall show cause why the cease and desist order should be lifted. Any appeal shall not stay the cease and desist order. 
8.  The city manager or designee may enter into consent agreements, assurances or voluntary compliance documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within the time period as specified in the document. Such documents may provide for judicial enforcement. 
9.  In addition to all remedies provided above, in the event of failure to comply with any requirement of this section or in the event a violation of this section is occurring in the absence of a city-issued permit, the city manager may request the city attorney's office seek injunctive relief in a court of equitable jurisdiction so that the property owner will cease any and all activity on the site. 
10.  The remedies provided in this section shall not be exclusive, and are in addition to any other remedies available to the county, state or federal government; and the city may seek whatever remedies are authorized in Code against any person or user for violating the provisions of this section. 
B.  Landscape and tree management. As regards the provisions of the landscape and tree management sections, the enforcing official shall regularly inspect properties within the city to determine whether the areas devoted to landscape materials are in accordance with the provisions of these sections. Whenever the enforcing official finds any violation of the provisions of the landscape and tree management sections, he/she shall institute enforcement proceedings as follows: 
1.  Notice. The enforcing official shall issue a code violation to the owner of the property which shall be given either by personal delivery or by deposit in the United States mail in an envelope marked certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner as listed on the current tax assessor's tax roll. The notice of code violation shall include: 
a.  A location of the property either by street address or legal description. 
b.  A statement indicating the nature of the violation and the reason or reasons why the notice of violation is issued. 
c.  A specification of the subsection or subsections of the landscape and tree management sections upon which the notice of violation is based. 
d.  If corrective action will bring the areas devoted to landscape materials into compliance with these sections, a statement of the nature and extent of such action, repairs or alterations necessary to remedy the violation in accordance with the performance standards provided in subsection B.4. of this section. 
e.  If corrective action is necessary for compliance, the city shall specify the time for performing such action, such time not to be less than ten nor more than 90 calendar days. 
f.  The name or names of persons upon whom the notice of violation is served. 
g.  A statement advising that the city may institute legal proceedings as provided herein. 
h.  A statement advising of the procedures available for review of the action of the enforcing official as set out in article III and section 30-8.11. 
2.  Appeals and variances. An appeal to the appropriate reviewing authority of the decision of the enforcing official or a petition for variance as provided in this chapter, if applicable, shall operate to stay further proceedings by the enforcing official until final disposition. 
3.  Failure to comply. If corrective action is not taken within the time specified in the notice of violation, or if an appeal is taken and corrective action is not taken in accordance with the decision of the appropriate reviewing authority, then the enforcing official may institute further proceedings as provided by the enforcement provisions of this chapter. 
4.  Performance standards. Performance standards for regulated trees shall be as follows: 
a.  Purpose. In order to assist the enforcing official, the code enforcement board and/or appropriate judicial forum in remedying a violation of the landscape and tree management sections of this article and ordering appropriate corrective action against any violation of these sections, there are adopted the following performance standards which meet the objectives of these sections. 
b.  Minimum requirements. 
i.  A tree that was established in compliance with a development order but which has been removed from the site or has died shall be replaced with a tree that meets the requirements of this article. The species should be the same as specified on the approved landscaping plan. If a different species is desired, it shall fill the required function - for example, a small flowering tree cannot replace a high quality shade tree. Whenever required street trees are removed to allow for infrastructure improvement projects along a street, they shall be replaced by the entity responsible for the improvement project. 
ii.  High quality heritage trees shall be used as mitigation trees for any trees that were removed without a permit. Mitigation trees should be planted on site in all the locations that would be required by code to bring the landscaping into compliance with current standards have been filled. The remainder of the mitigation trees may, as determined by the city manager or designee, be established on other appropriate sites within the city limits or may be given to the city tree-planting program. 
iii.  All replacement or mitigation trees shall be nursery-grown trees. They may be balled and burlapped, tree spaded or containerized. 
iv.  Replacement or mitigation trees shall be located in approximately the same location as the regulated tree that has died or has been removed from the site, unless such location does not meet utility separation requirements or would conflict with other requirements in the chapter in which event the location shall be determined by the city manager or designee. 
v.  Replacement or mitigation trees may only be planted during the months of November through March, unless the trees are containerized or the site is served by an automatic irrigation system. 
vi.  The total sum of the caliper inches of replacement or mitigation trees shall equal, at a minimum, to the total sum of the caliper inches of the regulated trees which were removed without a permit. If a tree removed without a permit was a high-quality heritage tree, then the required mitigation shall be double what is required as in mitigation in this article. It shall be assumed that the tree removed without a permit was in fair or better condition. 
5.  Reinspection. The enforcing official shall inspect the property upon completion of all corrective action or order issued pursuant to the landscape and tree management sections of this article to determine compliance. The enforcing official shall then reinspect the property approximately one month thereafter and then at four-month intervals to ensure compliance. If at any time the enforcing official determines that the corrective action is not successful, he/she shall notify the owner and/or resident of the property as provided in subsection B.1. of this section. 
C.  Surface waters and wetlands; natural and archaeological resources. The city manager or designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of these regulations. Should any person violate the provisions of the surface waters and wetlands or the natural and archaeological resources sections of this chapter, in addition to the provisions, requirements, and penalties stated at article I, division 2 of this chapter, the city will require appropriate corrective measures be taken by the violator. In the event the violation is not corrected by the violator, the city may, depending upon the severity of the violation, take the following actions: 
1.  For a violation of any condition imposed pursuant to a permit or for a violation of the provisions of the surface waters and wetlands or the natural and archaeological resources sections of this chapter, the city manager or designee may revoke, in whole or in part, any permit issued pursuant to this Code. In the event the city manager or designee chooses to revoke a permit, written notice of the intent of the city manager or designee to revoke such permit shall be provided to the property owner, setting forth the specific reasons for the revocation. The property owner shall have the right to appear before the city manager at a time and date specified in such notice to show cause why the permit issued to the owner should not be immediately revoked. 
2.  If the city manager or designee determines to revoke a permit issued pursuant to this Code, after the notice and appearance procedure as provided in subparagraph a., above, the property owner shall immediately cease all work on the site until the violation is corrected or mitigated. The property owner shall have the right to appeal the administrative decision of the city manager to the appropriate reviewing authority and shall show cause why the permit issued to the owner should be reinstated. 
3.  If the city manager or designee determines an imminent risk to the environment or natural and archaeological resources exists due to a violation of conditions imposed pursuant to the permit or due to a violation of the provisions of the surface waters and wetlands or the natural and archaeological resources sections of this chapter, the city manager or designee may issue a cease and desist order for any and all development on the site. Any person receiving such an order for cessation of operations shall immediately comply with the requirements thereof. It shall be a violation of this Code for any person to fail to or refuse to comply with a cease and desist order issued once written notice of the cease and desist order is delivered by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person to whom the permit is issued or, in the absence of a permit, to the owner of the property. 
4.  For any site where work has commenced and a permit has not been obtained but is required pursuant to this Code, the city manager or designee may issue a cease and desist order for any and all development on the site. Any person receiving such an order for cessation of operations shall immediately comply with the requirements thereof. It shall be a violation of this Code for any person to fail to or refuse to comply with a cease and desist order issued once written notice of the cease and desist order is delivered by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person to whom the permit is issued or, in the absence of a permit, to the owner of the property. 
5.  In the event of failure to comply with the revocation of a permit or a cease and desist order or in the event of failure to comply with the surface waters and wetlands or the natural and archaeological resources sections of this chapter or in the event a violation of these sections is occurring in the absence of a city-issued permit, the city manager may request the city attorney's office seek injunctive or declaratory relief in a court of equitable jurisdiction so that the property owner will cease any and all activity on the site. 
6.  The city manager or designee may enter into consent agreements, assurances or voluntary compliance documents establishing an agreement with any property owner responsible for noncompliance, subject to approval by the city attorney as to form and legality. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the property owner to correct the noncompliance within the time period as specified in the document. Such documents may provide for judicial enforcement. 
7.  The remedies provided in this section are not exclusive and the city may seek whatever remedies are authorized in this code or available in law against any person or entity for violating the surface waters and wetlands or the natural and archaeological resources sections of this chapter. These remedies are also in addition to any remedies available to other local, state or federal regulatory authorities. 
D.  Floodplain management. As regards the floodplain management provisions of this article, and in addition to the provisions stated in article VIII: 
1.  Violation of the provisions of this section or failure to comply with its requirements, including violation of conditions and safe guards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, is punishable as provided in section 30-1.9. In addition, the city shall seek all costs and expenses involved in prosecuting the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city manager or designee from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.  
ARTICLE IX. - SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 160485 , § 2, adopted March 1, 2018, repealed the former Art. IX, §§ 30-9.1—30-9.11, and enacted a new Art. IX as set out herein. The former Art. IX pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 30-9.1. - Purpose. 
This article shall be known as the "sign code." The intent of this sign code is to preserve and protect the health, safety, welfare, and general well-being of citizens by promoting public safety, economic vitality, and aesthetic qualities through regulations for the use and maintenance of signs that are: 
A.  Compatible with their surroundings and appropriate within the parameters of the Comprehensive Plan; 
B.  Appropriate to the location to which they pertain; 
C.  Large enough to sufficiently convey a message, yet small enough to preserve and protect the natural beauty of the city and limit distractions to motorists; 
D.  Not concentrated in a manner that results in clutter and unnecessary distraction to motorists; 
E.  Placed in locations that do not result in the unnecessary removal of vegetation; 
F.  Compatible to a pedestrian and motorist scale; and 
G.  Otherwise conducive to the preservation and protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 160485 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 30-9.2. - Applicability. 
This sign code applies to the use and maintenance of all signs within the City of Gainesville, unless otherwise provided for in accordance with federal, state, or local law, or used by a federal, state, or local governmental agency on public property or in a public right-of-way for public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 160485 , § 2, 3-1-18; Ord. No. 170974 , § 16, 2-21-19)  
Sec. 30-9.3. - Prohibited signs. 
Any sign not expressly authorized by this sign code is prohibited. The following signs are expressly prohibited within city limits, except as otherwise provided by this sign code: 
A.  Off-premises signs; 
B.  Trailer signs; 
C.  Vehicle signs that are parked in a location for greater than one hour and are being used as an off-premises sign; 
D.  Roof signs; 
E.  Electronic signs; 
F.  Moving signs; 
G.  Snipe signs; 
H.  Obscene signs; 
I.  Pennants; and 
J.  Balloons, dancing tubes, and other tethered inflatable promotional devices. 
(Ord. No. 160485 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 30-9.4. - General requirements for all signs. 
A.  Substitution of message. Any sign used in conformance with the provisions of this sign code may at the option of the owner contain either a commercial or noncommercial message. 
B.  Location and general regulations. 
1.  Signs shall not be located in such a manner as to obstruct the vision of pedestrians or motorists, including obstructions within the vision triangle. However, signs may be located at least eight feet above the highest crown of any adjacent street when such sign is mounted upon a sign support structure that does not exceed eight inches in diameter. 
2.  Signs shall not be located in such a manner as to obstruct ingress/egress through any door or window required or designed for ingress/egress to any building, and shall not obstruct or be attached to a fire escape. 
3.  Signs shall not be located in or on any public right-of-way. 
4.  Signs shall not use the words "Stop," "Look," "Drive in," "Danger" or any similar word, phrase, symbol or character within ten feet of a public right-of-way or 200 feet of a traffic control device. 
C.  Illumination. 
1.  Only permanent signs may be illuminated. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated. 
2.  Signs may be illuminated with a steady light, but shall not be illuminated to give the effect of blinking, flashing, or moving. 
3.  Sign illumination shall not produce glare or any condition that constitutes a hazard to traffic. 
4.  Sign illumination shall not use bare-bulb illumination, and shall minimize light pollution and meet the light trespass requirements of the Land Development Code. 
5.  Colored lights. Colored lights shall be designed to prevent confusion with traffic control signals. No sign located within ten feet of public right-of-way or within 200 feet of traffic control signals shall contain red or green lights. 
6.  Strip lighting. 
a.  Shall be no greater than one inch in diameter. 
b.  Shall not be directed towards any property located within 200 feet of the strip lighting that is zoned residential district or zoned planned development district with predominantly residential use. 
c.  Shall obtain all necessary electrical permits. 
d.  If not separated from a sign by at least two feet, it shall be included in the calculation of allowable signage area. 
D.  Measurement. 
1.  Sign structure height. The height of a freestanding sign structure shall be measured vertically from the established average grade directly below the sign structure to the elevation of the highest point of the sign structure. 
2.  Distance between signs. The minimum required distance between signs shall be measured from the closest parts of any two sign areas. 
3.  Sign area. The sign area shall be calculated as defined and as illustrated in the following: 
TYPES OF SIGNS
 
PROJECTING SIGNS
  
 
FREESTANDING POLE SIGNS
 
FREESTANDING MONUMENT SIGNS
SIGN FACES
 
CALCULATING SIGN AREA FOR BUILDING MOUNTED SIGNS
 
(Ord. No. 160485 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 30-9.5. - Allowable signs—No permit required. 
The following signs may be used without the need to first obtain a sign permit from the city, provided that such signs meet the applicable regulations in this section and section 30-9.4 and have no electrical parts or usage unless ULI listed. Any signage allowable per this section is in addition to any signage otherwise allowable under this sign code. 
A.  Temporary signs. 
Sign location 	Max. number 	Max. duration 	Max. sign area (sq. ft.) 	Max. sign structure height (feet) 	Setback from side property line (feet) 
Single-family residential property 	— 	180 calendar days 	6 	4 	10 
Multi-family residential property 	6 per property 	180 calendar days 	6 	8 	10 
Nonresidential property 	4 per property 	180 calendar days 	32 	8 	10 
 
1.  Events. Signs pertaining to an event shall be removed no later than 10 calendar days after the event. As used in this section, "event" shall mean an occurrence, happening, activity, or series of activities, specific to an identifiable time and place, if referenced on the sign itself or reasonably determined from all circumstances by the enforcing official. 
B.  Signs necessary to preserve life and prevent serious injury. 
Sign type 	Max. number 	Max. sign area (sq. ft.) 	Max. sign structure height (feet) (freestanding signs) 	Notes 
Address, identification, contact information 	1 per street frontage 	6 	6 	Characters shall not exceed eight inches in height for nonresidential uses. 
Direct/guide traffic and parking (building identification may be included) 	N/A 	6 	6 	Example: Parking, entrance, exit, one-way, service, etc. 
General safety/caution or to prohibit trespassing 	N/A 	4 	6 	Non-illuminated. 
Safety/caution of the location and direction of underground utility lines 	1 per block face or every 200 feet, whichever is less 	0.5 	3 	Non-illuminated. Signs should not be clustered at street corners unless required because of a directional change to the underground line. 
On hospital grounds, directing the public to the emergency room—Wall-mounted 	1 per street frontage 	Lesser of 10% of the wall or 100 sq. ft. 	N/A 	At least one sign shall be located on front face of emergency room entry. May include directional arrows. May only read "EMERGENCY" or similar text. 
On hospital grounds, directing the public to the emergency room—Freestanding 	1 per street frontage or entrance 	24 	10 	
 
C.  Miscellaneous signs. 
Sign type or location 	Max number 	Max sign area (sq. feet) 	Max sign structure height (feet) 	Notes 
Non-illuminated signs, including window signs and excluding flexible banner signs 	1 	12 	N/A 	Signage in excess of this standard shall be counted as part of the building-mounted signage allowance. 
Signs on the body of vending machines, gasoline pumps, ice vending equipment, or similar public-serving amenities 	N/A 	6 	N/A 	
Signs on an umbrella attached to a table at an outdoor eating place or alcoholic beverage establishment 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	
Decorative vertical pole banners 	N/A 	18 	N/A 	Pole must be lawfully permitted and serve a dual purpose such as light poles. 
Signs that are a permanent architectural feature of the building or structure 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	Such as a cornerstone or other identifying letters carved into or embossed on the building, provided such letters are not illuminated apart from the building, are not made of a reflective material and do not contrast in color with the building. 
Pedestrian-oriented sign, under-canopy 	1 	4 	N/A 	Permanently attached. Minimum 9-foot vertical clearance under sign. Not internally illuminated. 
Pedestrian-oriented sign, pedestal 	Either 1 pedestal sign or 1 message board sign 	2.25 	5 	Permanently attached to ground. Outside of right-of-way and any pedestrian walkway. May be internally illuminated. 
Pedestrian-oriented sign, message board 	Either 1 pedestal sign or 1 message board sign 	6 	N/A 	Permanently attached to wall, door, or window. May be mounted in a protective frame up to 6 inches deep. May be internally illuminated. 
 
D.  Flags. 
Sign location 	Max flagpole height (feet) 
Residential districts 	25' 
Nonresidential districts 	30' 
 
1.  The vertical dimension of the flag shall be a maximum of 20 percent of the height of the flagpole. 
2.  A flagpole may be freestanding or building-mounted. Freestanding flagpoles shall be set back at least ten feet from any property line. 
E.  Murals and other works of art. Murals and other works of art, as defined in chapter 5.5 of this Code of Ordinances, shall not require a sign permit provided that they meet any applicable regulations in section 30-9.4 and have no electrical parts or usage unless ULI listed. Any part of a mural or work of art that contains a commercial message shall not be included within the allowance of this subsection and therefore shall comply with any applicable provisions of this sign code. 
(Ord. No. 160485 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 30-9.6. - Interim signs and street banners. 
A.  Interim signs. Prior to or in conjunction with an owner or designated agent submitting an application for a sign permit in accordance with section 30-9.7, the owner or designated agent may apply to the city manager or designee, at no fee, for an interim sign permit to allow for the immediate and temporary use of the signage area allotments provided for in section 30-9.7. Interim sign permits shall expire one year after issuance or when a corresponding sign is permitted and installed in accordance with section 30-9.7, whichever occurs first, and may be extended for good cause. Interim signs shall be removed within three calendar days after expiration of the interim sign permit. 
B.  Street banners. No sign may be erected, constructed, or maintained along or across any public streets, except across-street and vertical pole banners as permitted over or along certain streets designated by the city manager and the general manager for utilities. An application shall be filed with the city manager or designee together with a banner installation fee as prescribed by the general manager for utilities to allow full cost recovery to the city. The following regulations shall apply: 
1.  Banners shall relate to an event that will be open to the general public and that is scheduled to occur within the city or unincorporated Alachua County; 
2.  Banners shall not contain any commercial message, any phone numbers or addresses, or any traffic directions or traffic signage that may cause a traffic or pedestrian hazard; and 
3.  The city will install street banners no more than 14 calendar days prior to the event and will remove them no later than seven calendar days following the event. 
(Ord. No. 160485 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 30-9.7. - Allowable signs—Permit required. 
A.  Permit required. With the exception of the signage provided for in section 30-9.5 and section 30-9.6, it shall be unlawful to use, erect, maintain, alter, or extend any new or existing sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the city in accordance with this section. The owner or designated agent shall apply for a sign permit by submitting an application to the city manager or designee on a form provided by the city, together with the applicable sign permit fee. 
1.  Review period. The city manager or designee shall grant or deny a sign permit application within 30 calendar days from the date a completed application and payment of the permit fee was submitted to the city. If the city manager or designee fails to take action by either granting or denying a sign permit application within this specified period, it shall be deemed approved. 
2.  Review criteria. 
a.  If the city manager or designee determines that the application meets the requirements of this sign code and all building, electrical, and other applicable regulations of the city, the city manager or designee shall approve the application and issue the sign permit contingent on an inspection after installation/alteration. 
b.  If the city manager or designee determines that the application fails to meet one or more requirements of this sign code or building, electrical, or other applicable regulations of the city, the city manager or designee shall deny the application and shall make a written report of the denial and the reasons therefore. A copy of the report shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant. 
c.  If the application is denied, the applicant may submit an amended application within 15 calendar days of the date posted on the notice of denial without additional cost. The city manager or designee shall grant or deny an amended application within 30 calendar days of receipt. If the city manager or designee fails to take action by either granting or denying an amended application within this specified period, it shall be deemed approved. 
B.  Building-mounted, permanent. Building-mounted sign allowance may be used by a combination of wall, window, mansard, parapet, awning, marquee, or canopy signs, and shall not exceed the maximum sign area established below. Except where otherwise specifically provided, permanent building-mounted signs may be permitted as follows: 
Sign location 	Max. number 	Max. sign area (sq. feet) 
Residential districts 	1 - Principal use 
1 - Accessory use (if applicable) 	24 - Principal use 
18 - Accessory use 
Nonresidential districts — development two stories or less 	2 per tenant 	Length of leased space × 1.5, up to 200 max aggregate per tenant 
	1 for each exterior building wall that is part of a tenant's space 	50 - second side 
24 - third side 
24 - fourth side 
	1 directional 	6 
Nonresidential districts — development greater than two stories 	2 (3 if primary frontage greater than 500 linear feet), plus 1 for each exterior wall 	300 max aggregate 
	2 per tenant, within the building sign band 	Length of leased space × 1.5. up to 100 max aggregate per tenant 
	1 directional 	6 
Parking garage 	1 per street frontage 	75 max aggregate 
	2 per tenant 	Length of leased space × 1.5, up to 100 max aggregate per tenant 
	2 directional 	6 
 
1.  Projecting. Signs shall not extend horizontally beyond the edges of the awning, marquee, mansard, or parapet to which they are attached or from which they are suspended and no more than four feet horizontally from the wall. Signs shall not project vertically above the roofline. Such signs under which a pedestrian walkway passes shall have at least a nine-foot vertical clearance. 
2.  Canopy. Any signage on a canopy shall be considered, and included within the allowable allotment of, building-mounted signage. 
3.  Wall. Where a wall supporting a building-mounted sign is less than 12 inches from a public right-of-way, the wall sign may project over the right-of-way, provided it does not project more than 12 inches from the wall. 
C.  Freestanding, permanent. Except where otherwise specifically provided, permanent freestanding signs may be permitted as follows. However, permanent freestanding signs shall not be permitted on single-family residential properties. 
Sign location 	Max. number (may choose either monument or pole) 	Max. sign area (sq. ft.) 	Max. sign structure height (feet) 	Max. sign structure width (feet) 
Residential districts 	1 	Monument: 
• 32 
Pole: 
• 24 	8 	12 
Nonresidential districts 	1 primary frontage 	Monument: 
• 32 if frontage up to 50 ft. 
• 40 if frontage 51—100 ft. 
• Frontage length × 0.5 (up to 120 max) if frontage greater than 100 ft. 
Pole: 
• 24 if frontage up to 50 ft. 
• 32 if frontage 51—100 ft. 
• Frontage length × 0.4 (up to 96 max) if frontage greater than 100 ft. 	10 	15 
	1 additional primary frontage if greater than 500 linear feet 	Monument: 
• 75 
Pole: 
• 50 	10 	15 
	1 secondary frontage 	Monument: 
• 30 
Pole: 
• 24 	8 	12 
	1 outparcel 	Monument: 
• 38 if frontage 151—200 ft. 
• 58 if frontage greater than 200 ft. 
Pole: 
• 32 if frontage 151—200 ft. 
• 48 if frontage greater than 200 ft. 	8 	12 
	Unlimited directional for developments with greater than 300,000 square feet of floor area; shall be located at least 100 feet from any public right-of-way 	50 
• single-occupancy developments shall be limited to two square feet per individual sign face 	6 	12 
Identification 	1 per entrance; may be one double-sided sign or two single-faced signs on either side of an entrance 	Residential development: 
• 16 for primary entrance if less than 6 units 
• 24 for primary entrance if 6 or more units 
• 16 for each additional entrance 	8 	12 
		Minor subdivision: 
• 18 		
		Nonresidential subdivision: 
• 6 per lot (up to 115 max for monument signs or 96 max for pole signs) 		
 
1.  Spacing and setback. Shall be located at least 50 feet from any other permanent freestanding sign, and shall have a minimum setback of ten feet from any front or side property line. 
D.  I-75 corridor signs. 
1.  For purposes of this subsection, I-75 corridor signage shall be restricted to permitted uses in nonresidential districts that are located within ¼ mile of the centroid of an I-75 interchange with any arterial roadway. 
2.  In addition to signage otherwise allowable per this sign code, an additional freestanding sign with a maximum sign structure height of 18 feet shall be allowed on a development (including outparcels), provided that the sign area of such sign in combination with other permitted signs on the development does not exceed a maximum sign area of 300 square feet. Such sign shall be readily visible from I-75. The location of this sign shall not be limited to properties actually abutting I-75; however, no I-75 corridor sign shall be located on any frontage where the adjacent or facing properties are designated single-family on the future land use map. 
3.  Height extension. An owner or designated agent may apply for a height extension to allow for an I-75 corridor sign with a maximum sign structure height greater than 18 feet. However, under no circumstances may a sign structure exceed a height of 90 feet. Applications for a height extension shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established for a variance as set forth in Appendix A. The city plan board shall review height extension applications and shall approve or deny the application based upon the following special considerations. The city plan board shall approve an application for a height extension only when the applicant proves each of the following requirements: 
a.  A registered engineer certifies or other reliable documentary evidence proves that, due to special conditions and circumstances relative to topography, vegetation or the built environment, a sign structure with a height of 18 feet or less cannot be seen by motorists on I-75 at a distance of one-fourth mile from the nearest exit ramp; 
b.  The height extension requested is the minimum necessary to achieve such visibility; 
c.  The circumstances and/or special conditions do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
d.  The height extension will have general compatibility and harmony with the uses and structures on adjacent and nearby properties; and 
e.  The sign otherwise complies with all applicable regulations of this sign code. 
The city plan board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards to ensure the structural integrity and safety of the sign and to landscape and buffer the sign structure to ensure compatibility and harmony with the uses and structures on adjacent and nearby properties. 
E.  Gainesville Regional Airport. 
Sign Type 	Max number 	Max sign area (sq. feet) 	Max sign structure height (feet) 	Notes 
Freestanding, permanent 	4 	360 max aggregate for all freestanding signs 	10 	
Building-mounted, permanent 				As approved by the Gainesville Alachua County Regional Airport Authority (GACRAA); no city approval required 
Directional 				As approved by the Gainesville Alachua County Regional Airport Authority (GACRAA); no city approval required 
 
(Ord. No. 160485 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 30-9.8. - Sign maintenance. 
A.  All signs and sign structures regulated by this chapter, including any supports, braces, guys and anchors, electrical parts, lighting fixtures, and all painted and display areas shall be maintained to present a neat, clean appearance and maintained in a safe condition. Painted areas and sign surfaces shall be kept in good condition, and illumination, if provided, shall be maintained in safe and good working order. 
B.  Weeds and grass shall be kept cut in front of, behind, underneath, and around the base of freestanding signs for a distance of ten feet, and no rubbish or debris shall be permitted under or near such signs. 
C.  Any sign that becomes dilapidated, run down, or a safety hazard shall be repaired or removed by the owner or designated agent. 
(Ord. No. 160485 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 30-9.9. - Nonconforming signs. 
Any sign that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, but for which a permit has previously been issued by either the city or Alachua County, shall be deemed legally nonconforming. The owner of any legally nonconforming sign or the owner of any property upon which such sign is located shall bear the burden of proving that such sign is a legally nonconforming sign. All other signs that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter and that are not legally nonconforming shall immediately be removed or brought into compliance with this chapter. 
A.  All legally nonconforming signs shall be allowed to remain as originally permitted. 
B.  Reasonable repair and maintenance necessary to keep a legally nonconforming sign in a good state of repair is allowed, and may include but is not limited to: 
1.  Changing light bulbs, neon, or other light source; 
2.  Changing the face of a cabinet sign, or other modification that only involves a change of copy; 
3.  Replacing cladding or other components that hold a sign face in place; 
4.  Painting, cleaning, and other maintenance activities that do not affect the type, height, or size of the sign structure; and 
5.  Repairing electrical components. 
C.  Reasonable repair and maintenance does not include, by way of example and not limitation: 
1.  Any modification that changes the structure or type of structure, such as conversion of a wooden sign structure to a metal sign structure, or otherwise prolongs the life of the sign structure; 
2.  Any modification, including the addition of embellishments, that changes the sign area or the height above ground level: and 
3.  Any modification that adds internal or external illumination, or increases the existing illumination. 
D.  A legally nonconforming sign shall be removed or brought into compliance with this sign code if any of the following conditions apply: 
1.  The sign becomes damaged, destroyed or deteriorated by any means to the extent that it requires more than reasonable repair and maintenance, as described above, or if the cost of renovation or repair exceeds 50% of the replacement cost of the sign; 
2.  The principal structure on the parcel or parcels is demolished or requires renovations the costs of which exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the structure; or 
3.  The nonconforming sign is moved for any reason. 
E.  Historic signs. A sign that has been added to the local historic register shall not be considered a nonconforming sign and shall be exempt from the limitations of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 160485 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
Sec. 30-9.10. - Enforcement. 
A.  Duties of enforcing official. The city manager or designee shall be the enforcing official. The enforcing official is charged with the duty of administering and securing compliance with the provisions of this sign code. In furtherance of this responsibility, the enforcing official shall: 
1.  Make such inspections as may be necessary to bring about the purpose and intent of this sign code and initiate appropriate action to bring about compliance if such inspection discloses any instance of noncompliance; 
2.  Investigate thoroughly any complaints of alleged violations of this sign code, and indicate clearly in writing as a public record in his/her office the disposition made of such complaints; 
3.  Order in writing as set out below the remedy of all conditions or all violations of the sign code found to exist in or on any premises; 
4.  State in the violation order a time limit for compliance; and 
5.  Request the assistance of the city attorney in taking appropriate legal action upon the failure of the responsible party to comply with such violation order by the time specified therein. 
B.  Right of entry. The enforcing official or his/her agent is authorized and directed to lawfully enter in and upon all premises at reasonable times to determine their condition insofar as the provisions of this sign code are applicable. 
C.  Contents of notice of violation. Whenever the enforcing official determines that a violation of this sign code exists, the official is authorized to issue a citation pursuant to section 2-337. Time for compliance shall be as follows: 
1.  Temporary and prohibited signs. For all signs that are either temporary or prohibited as specified in this sign code, the time may not be less than one hour nor more than 24 hours from the time of such written notice. However, any condition found to exist in violation of this sign code that constitutes a hazard to the public safety shall be required to be abated immediately. 
2.  All other signs. For all other signs, the time may not be less than ten calendar days nor more than 90 calendar days from the date of such written notice. However, any condition found to exist in violation of this sign code that constitutes a hazard to the public safety shall be required to be abated immediately. 
D.  Unauthorized signs in right-of-way. Any sign placed in the public right-of-way in violation of this sign code shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be removed immediately by an enforcing official or agent. Any sign so removed may be disposed of by the city without notice or compensation. This removal shall not preclude prosecution or imposition of penalties for violation of this sign code. 
E.  The enforcing official or agent may cause any sign that is a hazard or poses immediate peril to persons or property to be removed immediately at the expense of the owner, lessee or other person having beneficial use of the sign, or the owner or lessee of the land upon which the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 160485 , § 2, 3-1-18)  
ARTICLE X. - NONCONFORMITIES AND VESTED RIGHTS  
DIVISION 1. - NONCONFORMITIES 
 
Sec. 30-10.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide regulations for the continuation and elimination of lots, structures, and uses that are deemed legal nonconformities, subject to the restrictions set forth herein.  
Sec. 30-10.2. - Generally. 
A.  Legal nonconformity status. A legal nonconformity means an existing lot, structure or use that was in compliance with the Land Development Code requirements that were in effect when the lot, structure or use was established, but which no longer conforms to one or more requirements of the Land Development Code or amendments thereto in effect. Legal nonconformity status shall be determined by the city manager or designee and the burden shall be on the property owner/developer to establish such status. 
B.  Right to continue legal nonconformity. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter and subject to the restrictions set forth herein, legal nonconformities existing on the effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto may be continued. 
C.  Nonconformities other than legal nonconformities. All nonconformities that are not deemed legal nonconformities shall be brought into compliance with this chapter and may be enforced as a violation of this chapter. 
D.  Nonconformities created by eminent domain proceedings. A lot, structure or site improvement that has or will be rendered nonconforming because of a taking through eminent domain proceedings or by the voluntary conveyance of a portion of land under the threat of eminent domain proceedings by a governmental authority shall be deemed conforming.  
Sec. 30-10.3. - Nonconforming lots. 
A.  Certain lots deemed conforming. A legally nonconforming lot that meets the following criteria shall be deemed conforming: 
1.  The lot is not a substandard lot; and 
2.  The lot is located within 500 feet of two or more lots that: 
a.  Are developed with a principal structure, and 
b.  Share a substantially similar degree of the same nonconformity (lot area, lot depth, or lot width). 
B.  Combining lots. If a nonconforming lot abuts one or more other lots in the same ownership, such lots shall be legally combined to eliminate the nonconformity before the city may approve any development permits for the lots. 
C.  Dwellings on nonconforming lots. A legally nonconforming lot that is not a substandard lot and that does not abut another lot in the same ownership may be used for a single-family dwelling in zoning districts that allow the use, provided that all other applicable regulations of the zoning district can be met. No multiple-family dwellings shall be allowed on nonconforming lots in any district that allows single-family dwellings. 
D.  Buildings on nonconforming lots. Provided that all other applicable regulations of the zoning district can be met, the city manager or designee may authorize the issuance of a building permit for a building to be located on a legally nonconforming or substandard lot if the applicant can demonstrate both: 
1.  That the impacts of the nonconforming lot are minimal upon the surrounding land uses and are not detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare; and 
2.  That the impacts of the nonconforming lot may be substantially mitigated through measures including but not limited to: buffering; screening; landscaping; architectural treatment; additional setbacks; access limitations; limitations on use; sufficient parking designed to provide safe internal traffic circulation and off-site access; and site plan design to minimize off-site impacts of service and delivery areas, refuse and recycling collection areas, and outdoor storage and work areas.  
Sec. 30-10.4. - Nonconforming structures and site improvements. 
A.  Applicability. This section applies to all nonconforming structures and site improvements within the city. However, when another section of this chapter imposes more specific provisions for a particular nonconforming structure or site improvement, such as nonconforming signs, the provisions of that section shall govern. 
B.  Repair, maintenance, reconstruction, remodel. Any structure or site improvement legally nonconforming as to dimensional requirements, site improvement requirements, or development standards may receive the following work without being made to conform to this chapter, provided such work neither contributes to nor increases the specific legal nonconformity and provided it is otherwise in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. With the exception of single-family buildings or structures which have no such limitation, the cost of the work shall not exceed 50 percent of the structural value (the present cost of replacing the structure or site improvement); otherwise, the structure or site improvement shall be made to fully comply with this chapter. 
1.  Repair and maintenance, meaning any actions that correct defects in, extend the useful life of, or bring the structure or site improvement into conformance with applicable building, electrical, mechanical, fire, health, safety or related regulations; 
2.  Reconstruction, meaning the rebuilding of a structure or site improvement that has been damaged or destroyed; and 
3.  Remodel, meaning any change to or modification of the physical appearance of a structure or site improvement. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening of or restoring to a safe condition any structure or site improvement or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an order of a city or state official charged with protecting the public health or safety.  
Sec. 30-10.5. - Nonconforming uses. 
A.  Limitation on enlarging, increasing or extending use. A legally nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, extended or intensified, including to cover more area of the land or building or structure than was occupied by that use when it became legally nonconforming, except a legally nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building or structure that were manifestly arranged or intended for such use at the time the nonconformity status was established. 
B.  Alterations to structures and site improvements associated with legally nonconforming uses. A structure associated with a legally nonconforming use may receive the following alterations, provided such work otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Ordinary repair and maintenance, meaning any actions that correct defects in, extend the useful life of, or bring the structure or site improvement into conformance with applicable building, electrical, mechanical, fire, health, safety or related regulations; 
2.  Site improvements to the premises of structures associated with legally nonconforming uses, including landscaping, drainage, lighting, and the provision of buffering and screening along property boundaries; and 
3.  Alterations made to comply with the requirements of law, including making a nonconforming structure or site improvement conforming to the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Change of use. A legally nonconforming use shall not be changed to another use unless such use is permitted by and complies with all applicable requirements of this chapter. If a legally nonconforming use is changed to any other use, said use shall lose its legally nonconforming status and any subsequent use shall conform to all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
D.  Abandonment. If a legally nonconforming use is deemed abandoned in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section, said use shall lose its legally nonconforming status and any subsequent use shall conform to all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
1.  Review criteria. Abandoned means to cease the use for a continuous period equaling or exceeding nine months. Evidence, including public records, utility records, property records, verified personal records, or other general research and documentation, shall demonstrate that a use or activity has not been abandoned. The intent of the owner or user shall not be relevant in determining whether the use has been abandoned. The time period of any legal proceedings related to change of ownership, including foreclosures or bankruptcies, shall not be used in any calculation of the time period for abandonment. 
2.  Review procedure. 
a.  The burden shall be on the property owner/developer to establish that a use has not been abandoned. 
b.  At such time as city staff or the city plan board determines that reasons exist for a property to lose its legal nonconformity status, notice of such determination shall be given to the property owner by the city. The notice shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested, shall clearly state the reasons for the determination, and shall advise the property owner that a hearing to consider the determination shall be held by the city plan board on a date not less than 30 calendar days following the date of the notice. The time and place of the hearing shall be specified in the notice. 
c.  A quasi-judicial public hearing shall be conducted by the city plan board with respect to all proceedings regarding loss of legal nonconformity status. A staff report shall be prepared and shall contain a recommendation as to the appropriate course of action. Where such proceedings have been instituted against a group of similarly situated nonconformities, such proceedings may be consolidated for hearing purposes. 
d.  Following the close of the public hearing, the city plan board shall render its decision no later than 30 calendar days after the date of the hearing. The decision shall be supported by written findings and a record of the proceeding shall be kept. 
e.  Appeals. The determination of the city plan board shall be final, subject to such remedies as may be provided in this chapter or at law. 
E.  Reinstatement of abandoned legally nonconforming use. A legally nonconforming use that was deemed abandoned in accordance with subsection D. above, and thereby lost its status as a legally nonconforming use, may be reinstated as a legally nonconforming use in accordance with the terms of this subsection E. The process set forth herein shall be applicable only to the status of legally nonconforming uses of land and shall not apply to any other development criteria or regulation in this chapter. 
1.  Review criteria. The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating each of the following: 
a.  That the use requested to be reinstated is the same as the former legally nonconforming use that was deemed abandoned, and is therefore not a change in use; 
b.  That the impacts of the nonconforming use are minimal upon the surrounding land uses and are not detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare; and 
c.  That the impacts of the nonconforming use may be substantially mitigated through measures including but not limited to: buffering; screening; landscaping; architectural treatment; additional setbacks; access limitations; limitations on use; sufficient parking designed to provide safe internal traffic circulation and off-site access; and site plan design to minimize off-site impacts of service and delivery areas, refuse and recycling collection areas, and outdoor storage and work areas. 
2.  Review procedure. 
a.  Upon application of the property owner, a staff report shall be prepared and shall contain a recommendation as to the appropriate course of action. The city plan board shall conduct a quasi-judicial public hearing and shall apply the criteria set forth above to grant, grant with conditions, or deny an application for reinstatement. The notice and hearing procedure shall be the same as for rezonings. 
b.  Following the close of the public hearing, the city plan board shall render its decision no later than 30 calendar days after the date of the hearing. The decision shall be supported by written findings and a record of the proceeding shall be kept. 
c.  Appeals. The determination of the city plan board shall be final, subject to such remedies as may be provided in this chapter or at law.  
DIVISION 2. - VESTED RIGHTS 
 
Sec. 30-10.6. - Purpose. 
This division establishes the administrative procedures and standards by which a property owner may demonstrate that private property rights have vested against the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan or this chapter, and therefore development on said private property may continue notwithstanding that the development does not conform to the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan or this chapter.  
Sec. 30-10.7. - Vested rights criteria. 
A.  Presumptive vested rights. The following categories shall be presumptively vested: 
1.  All active and valid final development orders issued by the city prior to the effective date of the Comprehensive Plan or this chapter or any applicable amendments thereto, provided all material requirements, conditions, limitations and regulations of the development order have been met. 
2.  All complete building permit applications that are approvable in their submitted form, and received by the building official prior to the effective date of this chapter or any applicable amendments thereto. This provision shall not be used to find any presumptive vested rights against the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan or amendments thereto. 
3.  All lots within a subdivision that has been recorded prior to the effective date of the Comprehensive Plan or this chapter or any applicable amendments thereto, or lots in approved unrecorded subdivisions for which streets, stormwater management facilities, utilities and other infrastructure required for the development have been completed prior to the effective date of the Comprehensive Plan or this chapter or any applicable amendments thereto. 
4.  Lots of record not located within a subdivision, but only to the extent of one single-family residence per lot. Such lots of record shall: 1) conform to the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and this chapter that are currently in effect; 2) have legally conformed under previously effective provisions of the Comprehensive Plan or this chapter; or 3) have existed prior to any applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan or this chapter. Certified copies of deeds and subdivision plats recorded in the office of the clerk of circuit court, or records of lot splits maintained by the city, will prove the time of a lot's existence. 
5.  Any structure for which construction has been completed and a certificate of occupancy has been issued, if a certificate of occupancy was required at the time of permitting. 
B.  Nonpresumptive vested rights. The appropriate reviewing authority shall consider all of the following factors, as well as any other relevant factors, to determine whether an applicant has nonpresumptive vested rights: 
1.  Whether there was a valid and unexpired act or omission of the city. 
a.  An "act" of the city may include but is not limited to an issued permit or authorization to commence development. An "omission" of the city means more than government silence or inaction, but rather a negligent or culpable omission where the party failing to act was under a lawful duty to act. 
2.  Whether the applicant, in reasonable and good faith reliance on the above act or omission, has made a substantial change in position or incurred extensive obligations and expenses. 
a.  An applicant does not act in good faith when the applicant made a substantial change in position or incurred extensive obligations and expenses in a situation where the applicant knew or reasonably should have known that changes to applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan or this chapter were pending, whereby "pending" means: 1) there were active and documented efforts in the normal course of municipal action that would culminate in the change of applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan or this chapter, and 2) the city commission or the city plan board knew of such efforts. 
b.  The appropriate reviewing authority shall not consider the following as development expenditures or obligations: 
i.  Expenditures for legal and other professional services that are not related to the design or construction of improvements. 
ii.  Expenditures related to a rezoning action. 
iii.  Taxes paid. 
iv.  Expenditures for initial acquisition of the land. 
3.  Whether, because of the above substantial change in position or extensive obligations and expenses incurred, it would be highly inequitable and unjust to deny the applicant's right to develop or to continue the development of the property. In making this determination, the appropriate reviewing authority shall consider the following as well as any other relevant factors: 
a.  Whether the development activity has commenced and is continuing in good faith. 
b.  Whether the expense or obligations already incurred can be substantially used, including use and application of any plans, materials, studies, permits, approvals and services acquired, for a development that is allowable and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Limitations. 
1.  If vested rights were determined based on the possession of a final development order or other unexpired city action, vested rights shall expire with expiration of that final development order or action. 
2.  Any vested rights determination shall not create vested rights for additional phases or additional development not expressly authorized by the final development order. This section does not apply to any other subsequent final development order that may also be required for project completion, provided the densities and intensities allowed under the initial final development order are not increased and the specific development plan approved under the initial final development order remains substantially unchanged. 
3.  All development subject to a vested rights determination shall not deviate from the terms of the development orders or actions upon which the vested rights determination was based. 
4.  A vested rights determination shall run with the land and is therefore transferable to subsequent owners of the subject property.  
Sec. 30-10.8. - Vested rights determination process. 
A.  Application for vested rights determination. Any person claiming vested rights to develop property shall submit to the city a sworn application for a vested rights determination. The application shall be on a form provided by the city, and shall include the following information: 
1.  The name, signature and address of all owners of the property; 
2.  The name and address of the applicant(s), who shall be the owner(s) or an agent authorized by affidavit to apply on behalf of the owner(s); 
3.  A legal description and survey of the subject property; 
4.  A copy of any approved and unexpired final development orders, which may include a final site plan, final subdivision plat or building plan; 
5.  Identification by specific reference to any ordinance, resolution or other action of the city, or failure by the city to act, upon which the applicant relied and which the applicant believes supports the vested rights claim; 
6.  A statement of facts that the applicant intends to prove in support of the application; and 
7.  Such other relevant information that the city may request. 
B.  Staff determination. 
1.  Complete applications. No later than ten calendar days following the date of receiving an application, the city manager or designee shall make a written determination as to whether the application is complete in accordance with this division. 
2.  Staff decision. No later than 30 calendar days following the date of the city manager or designee's determination that an application is complete, the city manager or designee shall review the application and make a written determination whether the application clearly and unequivocally has vested rights in accordance with the criteria for presumptive or nonpresumptive vesting. No later than seven calendar days following the date of the city manager or designee's written determination of vested rights, the city manager or designee shall provide the applicant written notification of the determination. The applicant shall have the right to rely upon such written notification that the proposed development is vested; such determination that the development is vested shall be final and not subject to administrative appeal, revocation or modification. 
C.  Appeals. 
1.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide an administrative process for appealing a written decision of the city manager or designee that denies vested rights. In particular, it is intended that such administrative relief be provided in the most professional, objective, and equitable manner possible through the adjudication of matters as provided herein by the land use hearing officer (hearing officer) provided by this chapter. No party shall be deemed to have exhausted his or her administrative remedies for the purpose of seeking judicial review unless the party first obtains review by a hearing officer as provided herein. 
2.  Standard of review. The hearing officer's review shall be de novo, meaning the review is not limited to the record that was before the city manager or designee or limited to the first-tier certiorari standard of review. However, if the record that was before the city manager or designee is full and complete, the hearing officer may determine that the record is the only evidence that is necessary. The hearing officer may also determine that additional evidence and oral or written testimony, including cross examination, is necessary to properly evaluate the city manager or designee's decision. 
3.  Appeal process. The applicant may appeal to a hearing officer a decision of the city manager or designee that denies vested rights. The appeal process shall be as follows: 
a.  No later than 30 calendar days following the date of the city manager or designee's written determination of vested rights, the applicant may appeal to a hearing officer by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager or designee together with a nonrefundable filing fee of $500.00. The notice of appeal shall set forth in detail the basis of the appeal. 
b.  All expenses associated with the hearing officer appeal process, except attorney fees, shall be the responsibility of the nonprevailing party. 
c.  The city shall accurately and completely preserve all testimony in the proceeding, and, at the request of any party, it shall make a full or partial transcript or existing hearing record available at no more than actual cost. 
d.  In any case where a notice of appeal has been filed, the decision of the city manager or designee shall be stayed pending the final determination of the case. 
4.  Hearing process. The hearing before the hearing officer shall be conducted as follows: 
a.  The hearing officer shall set forth at the outset of the hearing the order of the proceedings and the rules under which the hearing will be conducted. 
b.  The order of presentation at the hearing shall be as follows: 
i.  Receipt of any exhibits or records of the city manager or designee. 
ii.  Opening statements by the parties. 
iii.  Appellant's case. 
iv.  Respondent's case. 
v.  Rebuttal by appellant. 
vi.  Summation by respondent. 
vii.  Summation by appellant. 
viii.  Conclusion of the hearing by the hearing officer. 
c.  The city manager or designee's records, including all exhibits, shall be received and constitute a part of the record. 
d.  The hearing officer shall have the authority to determine the applicability and relevance of all materials, exhibits, and testimony and to exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or repetitious matter. 
e.  The hearing officer shall administer oaths to witnesses. 
f.  The cross examination of witnesses shall be permitted, in a reasonable amount as determined by the hearing officer. 
g.  The time for presentation of a case shall be determined by the hearing officer. 
h.  The hearing officer may allow the parties to submit written findings of fact and conclusions of law following the hearing, and shall advise the parties to the timetable for so doing if allowed. 
5.  Hearing officer decision. No later than 30 calendar days following the date of the appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall file with the city manager or designee, with a copy to the applicant and the clerk of the commission, a written determination that includes appropriate findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decisions in the matter of the appeal. The decision of the hearing officer, which may affirm, affirm with conditions, or reverse the decision of the city manager or designee, shall be based upon the criteria for presumptive or nonpresumptive vesting as established in this division, and shall be guided by the Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, and established case law. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, subject to judicial review. 
6.  Judicial review. Judicial review of the hearing officer's decision is available to the property owner and the city and shall be by common-law certiorari to the Eighth Judicial Circuit Court. In any case where judicial review is sought, the decision of the hearing officer shall be stayed pending the final determination of the case.  
APPENDIX A - SCHEDULE OF FEES, RATES AND CHARGES[1] 
ADULT PERFORMANCE ESTABLISHMENT, ESCORT SERVICES, AND ESCORT LICENSES: 
(1)  Application fee (escort service or adult performance establishment) (§ 14.5-63) (nonrefundable fee) ..... $281.50 
(2)  Annual license fee (§ 14.5-67): 
a.  Adult performance establishment license ..... $703.75 
b.  Escort service license ..... $281.50 
(3)  Name change, adult performance establishment or escort service (§ 14.5-69) ..... $4.75 
(4)  Application fee, escort license (per escort) (§ 14.5-93) ..... $70.25 
(5)  Escort license, annual license fee (per escort) (§ 14.5-96) ..... $140.75 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: 
Bottle club license (§ 4-36) ..... $108.00 
Alcohol event permit (§ 4-4) ..... $422.00 
CEMETERY: 
Cemetery Rates 	Rate 	Rate with 
Surcharge**** 
Grave Space Sales Include Perpetual Care Fee 
Adult 	$1,471.00 	$1,618.00 
Infant 	259.25 	285.25 
Cremains 	407.25 	448.00 
Interments Weekday * 
Adults 	443.00 	487.25 
Infants 	147.25 	162.50 
Cremains 	147.75 	162.50 
* Monday - Thursday 7:00 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 		
Interments Overtime ** 
Adults 	591.00 	650.00 
Infant 	221.75 	244.00 
Cremains 	221.75 	244.00 
** Overtime rates charged on Fridays, Saturdays (no services on Sundays) and after 4:30 p.m. weekdays 		
Dis-Interments Weekday * 
Adults 	665.00 	731.50 
Infant 	147.75 	162.50 
Cremains 	147.75 	162.50 
* Monday - Thursday 7:00 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 		
Dis-Interments Overtime ** 
Adults 	830.25 	913.25 
Infant 	221.75 	244.00 
Cremains 	221.75 	244.00 
** Overtime rates charged on Fridays, Saturdays (no services on Sundays) and after 4:30 p.m. weekdays 		
Re-Interments Weekday * 
Adults 	443.00 	487.25 
Infants 	147.75 	162.50 
Cremains 	147.75 	162.50 
* Monday - Thursday 7:00 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 		
Re-Interments Overtime ** 
Adults 	591.00 	650.00 
Infants 	147.75 	162.50 
Cremains 	147.75 	162.50 
** Overtime rates charged on Fridays, Saturdays (no services on Sundays) and after 4:30 p.m. weekdays 		
Annual Care (Billed Annually) 
Full Lot 32 × 32 	443.00 	487.25 
Partial Lot 32 × 20 	282.75 	311.00 
Half Lot 	221.75 	244.00 
Quarter Lot 	110.75 	121.75 
Single Grave 	44.75 	49.25 
Infant Grave 	29.75 	32.75 
Perpetual Care (One Time Charge) *** 
now included with space purchase 
*** These prices are for converting from annual care 		
Full Lot 	886.50 	975.25 
Partial Lot 	554.50 	610.00 
Half Lot 	443.00 	487.25 
Quarter Lot 	369.50 	406.50 
Single Grave 	369.50 	406.50 
Infant Grave 	177.75 	195.50 
Transfers of Interment Rights 
Exchange of interment rights 	22.00 	24.25 
Plus quit claim deed 	7.25 	8.25 
Foundations 
8" × 16" 	38.25 	42.00 
24" × 12" 	38.25 	42.00 
34" × 12" 	38.25 	42.00 
36" × 12" 	44.75 	49.25 
36" × 16" 	44.75 	49.25 
42" × 12" 	44.75 	49.25 
42" × 16" 	44.75 	49.25 
48" × 12" 	56.25 	62.00 
48" × 16" 	56.25 	62.00 
60" × 12" 	58.75 	64.75 
60" × 16" 	58.75 	64.75 
66" × 12" 	58.75 	64.75 
66" × 16" 	58.75 	64.75 
72" × 12" 	71.50 	78.75 
72" × 16" 	71.50 	78.75 
78" × 12" 	74.00 	81.50 
78" × 16" 	74.00 	81.50 
78" × 32" 	88.25 	97.00 
78" × 36" 	93.25 	102.50 
84" × 36" 	93.25 	102.50 
Tacachale Interments 	192.25 	192.25 
Alachua County Indigent Interments 	192.25 	192.25 
**** All surcharges are mandatory and may not be waived. 
 
CONTROLLED VEHICULAR PARKING AREA DECALS/PERMITS (Chapter 26, Article III, Division 4): 
(1)  Residential decal/permit: 
a.  Homestead properties (Annual) ..... $22.00 
b.  Homestead properties (Three year) ..... $66.25 
c.  Non-homestead properties (Zones 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, and 12) ..... $55.25 
d.  Non-homestead properties (Zones 1, 2, 5, and 10) ..... $110.25 
e.  Replacement ..... $22.00 
(2)  Temporary decal/permit ..... no charge 
(3)  Commercial permit ..... $22.50 
(4)  Visitor permit ..... no charge 
(5)  Fraternity/sorority meal decal: 
a.  Zones 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, and 12 ..... $55.25 
b.  Zones 1, 2, 5, and 10 ..... $110.25 
(6)  Service permit ..... $22.50 
(7)  Fee to appeal revocation ..... $147.75 
(8)  Fee for reinstatement after revocation ..... $147.75 
FIRE/RESCUE: 
(1)  Fire alarm operators: 
Application for fire alarm or annual renewal application ..... $19.00 
Application for fire alarm or annual renewal for integrated fire and burglar alarm system ..... $0.00 
(Note: proportionately adjusted for initial periods exceeding one year (§ 10-32). 
(2)  False alarms: 
First with valid permit ..... $0.00 
First without valid permit, or second with valid permit, each ..... $157.50 
Third and fourth, each ..... $210.00 
Fifth, sixth and seventh, each ..... $420.00 
Eighth and above, each ..... $840.00 
(Note: Reduced to $12.00 if false fire alarm caused by system malfunction and proof of timely service/repair is submitted to the False Alarm Reduction Unit (§ 10-33(d)). 
Non-permitted system, additional fee ..... $268.00 
(Note: Reduced to $64.00 if application filed within ten days (§ 10-33)). 
Fire alarm permit reinstatement fee after revocation (§ 10-34) ..... $67.25 
Failure to respond when requested by the fire department (§ 10-36) ..... $67.25 
Resetting of an activated fire alarm prior to receiving approval from the fire department ..... $167.50 
Failure to deactivate fire alarm within 15 minutes (§ 10-37) ..... $167.50 
(3)  Prohibited devices: 
Automatic dialing device (§ 10-41 (a)) ..... $167.50 
Auxiliary power supply less than four-hour minimum (§ 10-42) ..... $167.50 
(4)  Fire alarm monitoring companies: 
Annual registration fee (§ 10-38) ..... $134.00 
Failure to register or to maintain records for two years (§ 10-38(d)) ..... $167.50 
Failure to monitor in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code (§ 10-38) ..... $167.50 
Failure to verify alarm (§ 10-39) ..... $167.50 
(5)  Fire alarm system contractors: 
Annual registration fee (§ 10-40(a)) ..... $134.00 
Failure to register annually (§ 10-40(a)); failure to meet UL or NFPA 72 standards (§ 10-40(d)); activation of unpermitted fire alarm (§ 10-40(e)) ..... $167.50 
Causing false fire alarm during servicing or inspection - Each violation (§ 10-40(f)) ..... $167.50 
Installation, maintenance, repair, alteration or servicing by unregistered contractor, each violation (§ 10-40(b)) ..... $167.50 
Failure to furnish agents with identification cards, each violation (§ 10-40(c)) ..... $67.25 
(6)  Fire inspection (Chapter 10 and F.S. § 633.216) 
(a)  After hour inspections will include an additional fee of $189.00. 
(b)  Initial inspection fee: 
1.  Findings - No violations and in compliance ..... $0.00 
2.  Findings - Not in compliance will be charged the standard fee based on the fee schedule for the size of the building, as set forth in subsection (6)(d) below. 
(c)  Re-Inspection: 
1.  Findings - All violation correct ..... $0.00 
2.  Findings - Not in compliance will be charged an inspection fee equal to twice the standard fee for the size of the building, as set forth in subsection (6)(d) below. 
(d)  Square footage of inspected structure: 
0—3,000 ..... $73.00 
Over 3,000—5,000 ..... $84.50 
Over 5,000—10,000 ..... $96.00 
Over 10,000—25,000 ..... $107.75 
Over 25,000—50,000 ..... $119.25 
Over 50,000—75,000 ..... $130.75 
Over 75,000—100,000 ..... $142.25 
Over 100,000—125,000 ..... $153.75 
Over 125,000—150,000 ..... $165.50 
Over 150,000—175,000 ..... $177.00 
Over 175,000—200,000 ..... $188.50 
Over 200,000 ..... $188.50 
plus $11.50 for each incremental 
addition of 25,000 square feet 
(7)  Burning leaves, brush, clean wood or other vegetative debris (§ 10-70): 
Residential, per event ..... $61.00 
Commercial, per event ..... $121.50 
(8)  Annual burning permit for each burn barrel and/or outdoor wood-fired boiler § 10-70 ..... $61.00 
(9)  Pyrotechnic display § 10-70 ..... $121.50 
(10)  Crowd manager training fee (§ 10-51), per person ..... $31.50 
(11)  Special events fire inspection fee (F.S. § 633.216), per event ..... $157.50 
(12)  Temporary assembly occupancy inspection fee based on occupant load (F.S. § 633.216): 
50—500 ..... $78.75 
501—1,000 ..... $157.50 
1,001+ ..... $262.50 
(13)  Fire inspection for tents (F.S. § 633.216) ..... $78.75 
HEALTH AND SANITATION (Chapter 11.5, Article III) 
Basic air monitoring fee for hazardous materials response when detected levels are identified while monitoring for: pH levels, radiation, fluorine, oxidizers, flammability, oxygen, carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide, volatile organic compounds and inorganic substances; excluding residential responses to carbon monoxide alarms ..... $115.75 
HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT: 
An application for a permit shall be submitted for each home occupation (§ 30-5.37). 
(1)  Initial filing fee, per application submitted, per application ..... $80.50 
(2)  Permit processing fee, annually per permit ..... $13.25 
(3)  Reinspection fee, per permit (required every three years) ..... $67.25 
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE: 
(1)  Historic preservation/conservation: 
a.  Petitions for rezoning and zoning text amendments ..... $703.75 
b.  Certificate of appropriateness (if historic preservation board review is required): 
i.  Single family structure or its accessory structure ..... $121.50 
ii.  All other structures ..... $607.75 
c.  Certificate of appropriateness penalty, if work begun prior to application being filed, in addition to fee in b. above ..... $450.75 
(2)  Planning: 
Land use and zoning changes: 
a.  Petitions for an amendment to the land use element of the comprehensive plan: 
1.  Small scale map amendment ..... $1,823.25 
2.  Large scale map amendment ..... $3,646.75 
b.  Comprehensive plan or Land Development Code text change ..... $703.75 
c.  Zoning map change ..... $3,391.25 
d.  Petitions for development plan review and an amendment to a development plan, which may be authorized by the appropriate reviewing board, must be accompanied by fees according to this schedule: 
1.  Concept review (of any plan) ..... $1,407.25 
Fee shall be credited toward the plan review fee if a subsequent petition for development plan review is filed within six months of its concept review. 
2.  Rapid plan review ..... $1,823.25 
3.  Intermediate plan review ..... $4,254.25 
4.  Major plan review ..... $4,855.00 
5.  For any plan review that requires submittal of a traffic study, the following additional fees shall apply: 
(a)  "Minor" traffic study (as defined in the City of Gainesville Traffic Study Guidelines) review fee ..... $1,215.75 
(b)  "Major" traffic study (as defined in the City of Gainesville Traffic Study Guidelines) review fee ..... $2,431.00 
These traffic study review fees include up to three reviews per development plan. Additional reviews require payment of an additional fee at the full amount stated above for which petitioner will receive an additional three reviews, if necessary. 
A resubmittal/revision fee of 25 percent of the original fee amount will be applied to all fee areas. 
If a continuance is requested, the fee for the continuance will be the actual cost of advertising. 
All development plan review which are for a non-one- or two-family residential project certified under the Gainesville Green Building Program (Article 1.5) shall be reduced by 50 percent. 
e.  Petitions for rezoning to the planned development category (in addition to any other applicable development plan fees ..... $5,469.75 
f.  Concept review of planned development rezoning fee ..... $1,407.25 
Shall be credited toward the rezoning fee if a subsequent petition is filed within six months for rezoning to planned development. 
g.  Petitions for amendments to a planned development ordinance ..... $1,548.00 
In the event the primary purpose of the amendment is to protect trees and/or other natural features, then the fee may be refunded to the petitioner in the sole discretion of the city manager. 
Other petitions: 
h.  Reserved. 
i.  Petitions seeking special exceptions or variances ..... $317.00 
j.  Petitions seeking street or alley closings or abandonment of any public way ..... $921.75 
k.  Code compliance letter ..... $56.50 
l.  Petitions for special use permits, per petition (in addition to any other applicable development plan review fees) (§§ 30-3.27 and 30-3.25) ..... $1,140.25 
m.  Petitions for commercial tree removal permits (§ 30-8.7): 
1.  Where the parcel is five acres or less ..... $70.50 
2.  Where the parcel is more than five acres ..... $105.50 
n.  Petition to appeal administrative decisions or a decision of the city planning board, development review board, or historic preservation board to a hearing officer (§ 30-3.56) ..... $703.75 
The petitioner is entitled to a refund of the fee in the event the petitioner is the prevailing party. The hearing officer may decide who is the prevailing party in case of doubt or uncertainty. 
o.  Alcoholic beverage license review ..... $49.50 
p.  Verification of signatures on a petition, as defined in section 30-56.1, on a petition requesting imposition of a Residential Parking Overlay District, per each signature ..... $1.05 
(3)  Subdivisions: 
a.  Design plat application ..... $562.75 
Plus, for each lot on plat ..... $12.50 
b.  Final plat application ..... $387.25 
Plus, for each lot on plat ..... $10.25 
c.  Roadway inspection fee (§ 30-6.6) ..... $703.75 
Plus, per linear roadway center line foot ..... $5.00 
d.  Minor subdivisions ..... $562.75 
e.  Lot splits ..... $281.50 
f.  Single lot replat ..... $703.75 
(4)  Zoning: 
a.  Landlord permit: 
1.  Initial applications: 
a.  Application and payment received within first half of permit year (on or before January 31) and by due date specified on application/notice ..... $147.00 
b.  Application and payment received within second half of permit year (between February 1 and July 31) and by due date specified on application/notice ..... $73.50 
2.  Renewals: Application and payment received on or before August 31 ..... $147.00 
3.  Transfers of permit to new owner(s) ..... $25.00 
4.  Multiple dwelling units: Where two or more dwelling units requiring a landlord permit are located on a single parcel of property and are owned by the same owner(s), one unit shall be subject to the full permit fee and each additional unit shall receive a 50% discount. 
5.  Late fee: A late fee of 25% of the permit fee shall be assessed when an application and full payment is not received by the due dates specified herein. 
b.  Permit for family day care home, filing fee to be submitted with application ..... $47.00 
c.  Permit for personal care group home, filing fee ..... $47.00 
d.  Permit for foster family home for children and adults, filing fee ..... $47.00 
e.  Permit for across-street banner ..... $33.50 
f.  Permit for vertical pole banner ..... $35.50 
g.  Reserved. 
h.  Permit for special events (§ 30-4.19, § 30-5.49, § 30-5.35, Ch. 19) ..... $61.00 
i.  Sidewalk café in city right-of-way, annual license agreement administrative fee (§ 30-5.44) ..... $63.00 
j.  Sidewalk café in state right-of-way, annual license agreement administrative fee (§ 30-5.44), per square foot of right-of-way ..... $2.00 
k.  Permit for patrons' dogs within outdoor portions of eating places (§ 30-5.41) ..... $275.75 
l.  Permit for parking for special event (§ 30-4.16) ..... $58.00 
m.  Permit for seasonal use of portable storage unit by commercial parcel delivery services (§ 30-5.42) ..... $262.50 
(5)  All land development fees herein required which are applicable to land development occurring in the area designated as the enterprise zone by Resolution R050296, shall be reduced by 50 percent. 
(6)  Review of surface waters and wetlands (§ 30-300) and review of regulated natural and archaeological resources (§ 30-310). Note: Only one fee will be charged for reviewing both surface waters and wetlands and regulated natural and archaeological resources: 
a.  Basic review ..... no fee 
b.  Level 1 review ..... $551.25 
c.  Level 2 review ..... $2,315.25 
d.  Optional binding resource determination of regulated natural and archaeological resources ..... $551.25 
e.  Optional binding resource determination update for regulated sinkholes and listed species ..... $137.75 
f.  Optional binding resource determination update for changes that could alter the presence and location of resources ..... $275.75 
(7)  Heritage overlay districts (§ 30-80.1 and § 30-80.2): 
a.  Petition for rezoning ..... $3,391.25 
b.  Petition for text change ..... $703.75 
c.  Petition for review of regulated work items ..... $121.50 
d.  Penalty if regulated work begun prior to approval in addition to fee in c. above ..... $450.75 
e.  Verification of signatures on petition per signature ..... $1.05 
PARKS, RECREATION, AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS (Chapter 18, Article II): 
	City 
Rate 	Non-City 
Rate 	City 
Rate with 
Surcharge* 	Non-City 
with 
Surcharge* 
Parks, Recreation & Cultural Affairs 
Recreation Fees w/o Youth Programs except Swim Lessons: 
Sports Fees: 
Adult Co-Ed Softball 	$185.00 	$277.00 	$203.50 	$304.75 
Adult Men's Softball 	185.00 	277.00 	203.50 	304.75 
Football/Soccer Scratch Lining 
(Field Preparation) 	446.75 	446.75 	491.50 	491.50 
Football/Soccer Trace Lining 
(Field Preparation) 	159.50 	159.50 	175.50 	175.50 
Baseball/Softball Game Prep for Outside Groups 	95.75 	95.75 	105.25 	105.25 
Field Lighting Fee Per 2 Hours 	23.00 	23.00 	25.25 	25.25 

MLK Fitness Center: 
MLK Fitness (Adult 6 Mo. Pass) 	50.00 	50.00 	55.00 	55.00 
MLK Fitness (Adult 12 Mo. Pass) 	84.25 	84.25 	92.75 	92.75 
MLK Fitness (Senior 6 Mo. Pass) 	21.50 	21.50 	23.75 	23.75 
MLK Fitness (Senior 12 Mo. Pass) 	42.50 	42.50 	46.75 	46.75 

Center Rental Cost: 
Long Term Center Rentals/ per hour 	46.00 	46.00 	50.50 	50.50 
Dance Floor Fee (Thelma Boltin Center & Eastside Recreation Center Dance Room) 	37.00 	37.00 	40.75 	40.75 
Class I - 4 hr. Center Rental 	466.25 	466.25 	513.00 	513.00 
Class I - each additional hour 	116.00 	116.00 	127.50 	127.50 
Class II - 4 hr. Center Rental 	311.50 	311.50 	342.75 	342.75 
Class II - each additional hour 	79.00 	79.00 	87.00 	87.00 
Class III - 4 hr. Center Rental 	233.25 	233.25 	256.50 	256.50 
Class III - each additional hour 	38.25 	38.25 	42.00 	42.00 
Nonrefundable Reservation Fee 	38.25 	38.25 	42.00 	42.00 
Damage Deposit 	300.00 	300.00 	300.00 	300.00 
Co-sponsored Rental 	55.25 	55.25 	60.75 	60.75 
Kitchen Fee 	79.00 	79.00 	87.00 	87.00 
Staffing/Personnel Per Hour Fee Per Staff 	23.00 	23.00 	25.25 	25.25 

MLK Rental Cost: 
Class I - 4 hr. Rental 	1,087.25 	1,087.25 	1,196.00 	1196.00 
Class I - each additional hour 	155.75 	155.75 	171.25 	171.25 
Class II - 4 hr. Rental 	466.25 	466.25 	513.00 	513.00 
Class II - each additional hour 	116.00 	116.00 	127.50 	127.50 
Class III - 4 hr. Rental 	311.50 	311.50 	342.75 	342.75 
Class III - each additional hour 	79.00 	79.00 	87.00 	87.00 
Rental Damage Deposit 	300.00 	300.00 	300.00 	300.00 
Nonrefundable Reservation Fee 	38.25 	38.25 	42.00 	42.00 
Meeting Room Hourly Rate 	38.25 	38.25 	42.00 	42.00 
Kitchen Fee 	87.00 	87.00 	95.75 	95.75 
Staffing/Personnel Per Hour Fee Per Staff 	23.00 	23.00 	25.25 	25.25 

Aquatic Camp Fees: 
Swim Lessons: 
Swimming and Diving Lessons 	44.75 	67.75 	49.25 	74.50 
Water Aerobics (per class) 	2.75 	2.75 	3.00 	3.00 
Biathlon: 
Early Bird Registration Fee 	17.25 	23.00 	19.00 	25.50 
Onsite Registration Fee 	23.00 	34.75 	25.55 	38.00 
Pool Passes: 
Adults (18—49) 	121.25 	181.25 	133.50 	199.50 
Children (3—17) - Exempt from Surcharge 	59.75 	90.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Seniors (50+ Older) 	59.75 	90.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Special Populations 	59.75 	90.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Family of 4 or less 	247.75 	375.50 	272.50 	413.00 
Each additional Family Member for Family pool pass 	10.50 	15.00 	11.50 	16.50 
Pool Entrance Fees: 
Westside Pool: 
Adults 	3.75 	3.75 	4.25 	4.25 
Children and Non-swimmer - Exempt from Surcharge 	2.25 	2.25 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Lap Swim 	2.25 	2.25 	2.50 	2.50 
Seniors (50+) 	2.25 	2.25 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Special Populations 	2.25 	2.25 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Infants under 3 years 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Pool Pavilion Hourly Rental Fee 	12.50 	12.50 	14.00 	14.00 
Birthday Party Package (1st 8 children) 	67.50 	67.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Birthday Party Package (each additional child) 	2.75 	2.75 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Northeast Pool: 
Adults 	3.75 	3.75 	4.25 	4.25 
Children and Non-swimmer - Exempt from Surcharge 	2.25 	2.25 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Lap Swim 	2.25 	2.25 	2.50 	2.50 
Seniors (50+) 	2.25 	2.25 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Special Populations 	2.25 	2.25 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Infants under 3 years 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Mickle Pool: 
Adults 	2.75 	2.75 	3.00 	3.00 
Children and Non-swimmer - Exempt from Surcharge 	1.50 	1.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Lap Swim 	1.50 	1.50 	1.75 	1.75 
Seniors (50+) 	1.50 	1.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Special Populations 	1.50 	1.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Infants under 3 years 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Pool Rental Fees: 
Reservation Fee 	53.50 	53.50 	58.75 	58.75 
Staffing/Personnel Fee (per hour/per guard) 	13.25 	13.25 	14.50 	14.50 
Clean-Up Fee 	26.75 	26.75 	29.50 	29.50 
*Lane Line Rentals (per hour/per lane) 	5.75 	5.75 	6.25 	6.25 
*Dive Well Rental (per hour) 	12.00 	12.00 	13.25 	13.25 
WS Group Rate - per child (8 min.) 	2.00 	2.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
WS Group Rate - per adult 	4.25 	4.25 	4.75 	4.75 
NE Group Rate - per child & Birthday Party rate (8 min.) 	2.00 	2.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
NE Group Rate - per adult 	3.50 	3.50 	3.75 	3.75 
NE Pool Pavilion Hourly Rental Fee 	12.50 	12.50 	14.00 	14.00 
MK Group Rate - per child (8 min.) 	1.25 	1.25 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
MK Group Rate - per adult 	2.50 	2.50 	2.75 	2.75 
MK Pavilion Hourly Rental Fee 	12.50 	12.50 	14.00 	14.00 

Environmental Science and Cultural History Programs, Adult Access (18 & older) 
Animal Homes 	3.75 	3.75 	4.25 	4.25 
Aquatic Encounters 	5.00 	5.00 	5.50 	5.50 
Critter Connections 	5.00 	5.00 	5.50 	5.50 
Exploring Florida's Ecosystems 	5.00 	5.00 	5.50 	5.50 
Farm Adventure 	3.75 	3.75 	4.25 	4.25 
Farm Life in the 19th Century 	6.25 	6.25 	7.00 	7.00 
Feathered Friends 	5.00 	5.00 	5.50 	5.50 
Florida As It Was 	5.00 	5.00 	5.50 	5.50 
Green Treasure 	5.00 	5.00 	5.50 	5.50 
Makin' a Livin' 	5.00 	5.00 	5.50 	5.50 
Native American Life in Early Florida 	6.25 	6.25 	7.00 	7.00 
Sensing Nature 	5.00 	5.00 	5.50 	5.50 
Stream Scene, The 	5.00 	5.00 	5.50 	5.50 
Outreach Programs 0—15 miles away 	76.75 	76.75 	84.50 	84.50 
Outreach Programs 16—30 miles away 	89.25 	89.25 	98.25 	98.25 
Outreach Programs 31—45 miles away 	102.50 	102.50 	112.75 	112.75 
Outreach Programs 45—60 miles away 	115.00 	115.00 	126.50 	126.50 
Additional Outreach Program at Same Location 	32.00 	32.00 	35.25 	35.25 
Living History Saturdays 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Barnyard Buddies 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Wildflower Walks 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Feed-a-Frog Friday 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 

Environmental Science and Cultural History Programs,
Youth Access (under 18) - Exempt from surcharge 
Animal Homes 	3.75 	3.75 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Aquatic Encounters 	5.00 	5.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Critter Connections 	5.00 	5.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Exploring Florida's Ecosystems 	5.00 	5.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Farm Adventure 	3.75 	3.75 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Farm Life in the 19th Century 	6.25 	6.25 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Feathered Friends 	5.00 	5.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Florida As It Was 	5.00 	5.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Green Treasure 	5.00 	5.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Makin' a Livin' 	5.00 	5.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Native American Life in Early Florida 	6.25 	6.25 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Sensing Nature 	5.00 	5.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Stream Scene, The 	5.00 	5.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Outreach Programs 0—15 miles away 	76.75 	76.75 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Outreach Programs 16—30 miles away 	89.25 	89.25 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Outreach Programs 31-45 miles away 	102.50 	102.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Outreach Programs 45—60 miles away 	115.00 	115.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Additional Outreach Program At Same Location 	32.00 	32.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Living History Saturdays 	0.00 	0.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Barnyard Buddies 	0.00 	0.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Wildflower Walks 	0.00 	0.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Feed-a-Frog Friday 	0.00 	0.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Special Events - Adult Access (18 & older) 
Ghost Walk 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Fall Native Plant Sale 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Spring Native Plant Sale 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Cane Boil and Fiddle Fest Admission Adult 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Great Invader Raider Rally 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Special Events - Youth Access (under 18) - Exempt from surcharge 
Ghost Walk 	0.00 	0.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Fall Native Plant Sale 	0.00 	0.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Spring Native Plant Sale 	0.00 	0.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Cane Boil and Fiddle Fest Admission Child 	0.00 	0.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Great Invader Raider Rally 	0.00 	0.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Additional Youth Fees Exempted from surcharge 
Pop Warner Cheerleading 	52.50 	77.75 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Pop Warner Football 	105.75 	158.25 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Youth Basketball Ages 5—6 	71.50 	105.75 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Youth Basketball 	90.50 	136.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Holiday Camp Session 	52.50 	78.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Spring Break Camp 	52.50 	78.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Summer Camp Weekly Session 	52.50 	78.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
After-School Fee (Weekly Rate) 	18.50 	27.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Kidz Out of School Daily Program 	6.00 	9.25 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Junior Lifeguard Camp Session 	87.00 	130.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Earth Academy Camp Session 	127.50 	191.75 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 

Cultural Affairs Fees 
Thomas Center Rental Rates 
Commercial Film Shoot Fees - Daily Rate 	374.75 	374.75 	412.25 	412.25 
Commercial Film Shoot Fees - Prep Rate 	187.50 	187.50 	206.25 	206.25 
Staffing/Personnel Per Hour Fee Per Staff 	20.00 	20.00 	25.50 	25.50 
Co-sponsored Rental Events Equipment Fee Youth Programs 	16.50 	16.50 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Co-sponsored Rentals Nonrefundable Reservation Deposit 	55.25 	55.25 	60.75 	60.75 
Overnight Storage Fee 	52.50 	52.50 	57.75 	57.75 
Excessive Clean Up Fee 	52.50 	52.50 	57.75 	57.75 
Spanish Court Weekday 8-5 Social, Per Hour 	30.00 	30.00 	33.00 	33.00 
Long Gallery 	25.50 	25.50 	28.00 	28.00 
Spanish Court and Long Gallery 	47.50 	47.50 	52.25 	52.25 
Meeting Room #102 	14.75 	14.75 	16.25 	16.25 
Meeting Room #105 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Kitchen 	21.00 	21.00 	23.00 	23.00 
Thomas Center West Gardens 	39.50 	39.50 	43.50 	43.50 
Theatre or Turtle Court 	19.75 	19.75 	21.75 	21.75 
Porches All Times 	12.50 	12.50 	13.75 	13.75 
Period Room All Times 	39.50 	39.50 	43.50 	43.50 
Wedding Rehearsals All Times 	21.00 	21.00 	23.00 	23.00 
Spanish Court Evening/Weekend Social,
Per Hour 	54.25 	54.25 	59.75 	59.75 
Long Gallery 	40.50 	40.50 	44.50 	44.50 
Spanish Court and Long Gallery 	91.50 	91.50 	100.75 	100.75 
Meeting Room #102 	25.50 	25.50 	28.00 	28.00 
Meeting Room #105 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Kitchen 	33.50 	33.50 	36.75 	36.75 
Thomas Center West Gardens 	40.50 	40.50 	44.50 	44.50 
Theatre or Turtle Court 	33.50 	33.50 	36.75 	36.75 
Spanish Court Weekday Meeting, Per Hour 	23.00 	23.00 	25.25 	25.25 
Long Gallery 	16.75 	16.75 	18.50 	18.50 
Spanish Court and Long Gallery 	31.25 	31.25 	34.50 	34.50 
Meeting Room #102 	12.50 	12.50 	13.75 	13.75 
Meeting Room #105 	15.75 	15.75 	17.25 	17.25 
Kitchen 	8.25 	8.25 	9.00 	9.00 
Thomas Center West Gardens 	40.50 	40.50 	44.50 	44.50 
Theatre or Turtle Court 	33.50 	33.50 	36.75 	36.75 
Spanish Court Evening/Weekend Meeting,
Per Hour 	40.50 	40.50 	44.50 	44.50 
Long Gallery 	31.25 	31.25 	34.50 	34.50 
Spanish Court and Long Gallery 	61.50 	61.50 	67.75 	67.75 
Meeting Room #102 	22.00 	22.00 	24.25 	24.25 
Meeting Room #105 	26.75 	26.75 	29.50 	29.50 
Kitchen 	9.25 	9.25 	10.25 	10.25 
Thomas Center West Gardens 	40.50 	40.50 	44.50 	44.50 
Theatre or Turtle Court 	33.50 	33.50 	36.75 	36.75 
Spanish Court Non-Profit Weekday Meeting,
Per Hour 	15.75 	15.75 	17.25 	17.25 
Long Gallery 	10.50 	10.50 	11.50 	11.50 
Spanish Court and Long Gallery 	19.75 	19.75 	21.75 	21.75 
Meeting Room #102 	11.50 	11.50 	12.75 	12.75 
Meeting Room #105 	14.75 	14.75 	16.25 	16.25 
Kitchen 	6.75 	6.75 	7.50 	7.50 
Thomas Center West Gardens 	40.50 	40.50 	44.50 	44.50 
Theatre or Turtle Court 	33.50 	33.50 	36.75 	36.75 
Spanish Court Non-Profit Weekend Meeting,
Per Hour 	23.75 	23.75 	26.25 	26.25 
Long Gallery 	16.75 	16.75 	18.50 	18.50 
Spanish Court and Long Gallery 	31.25 	31.25 	34.50 	34.50 
Meeting Room #102 	14.75 	14.75 	16.25 	16.25 
Meeting Room #105 	15.75 	15.75 	17.25 	17.25 
Kitchen 	8.25 	8.25 	9.00 	9.00 
Thomas Center West Gardens 	40.50 	40.50 	44.50 	44.50 
Theatre or Turtle Court 	33.50 	33.50 	36.75 	36.75 

Downtown Festival and Art Show 
Application Fee 	23.00 	23.00 	34.00 	34.00 
Competitive Booth 	272.00 	272.00 	299.25 	299.25 
Non-Competitive Booth 	248.75 	248.75 	273.75 	273.75 
Community Booth 	46.25 	46.25 	51.00 	51.00 
Food Booth 	405.25 	405.25 	445.75 	445.75 
T-Shirt Sales 	14.00 	14.00 	15.00 	15.00 
Poster Sales 	14.00 	14.00 	15.00 	15.00 

Hoggetowne Medieval Faire 
Ticket Sales 
Senior/Military 	15.00 	15.00 	15.00 	15.00 
Adult 	16.25 	16.25 	18.00 	18.00 
Youth (Exempt from Surcharge) 	8.00 	8.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
School Day 
General Admission Adult 	8.25 	8.25 	9.00 	9.00 
General Admission Youth (Exempt from Surcharge) 	4.00 	4.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
Pre-Registered Adult 	5.00 	5.00 	6.00 	6.00 
Pre-Registered Youth (Exempt from Surcharge) 	2.00 	2.00 	Exempt from Surcharge 	Exempt from Surcharge 
T-Shirt Sales 	14.00 	14.00 	15.00 	15.00 
Booth Fees (Sales and Demos) 
12 × 12 	208.50 	208.50 	229.25 	229.25 
15 × 15 	237.25 	237.25 	261.00 	261.00 
20 × 20 	289.50 	289.50 	318.50 	318.50 
25 × 25 	335.75 	335.75 	369.25 	369.25 
25 × 30 	393.50 	393.50 	432.75 	432.75 
Artisan Made Sales Only 
12 × 12 	243.00 	243.50 	267.25 	267.25 
15 × 15 	277.75 	277.75 	305.50 	305.50 
20 × 20 	324.25 	324.25 	356.75 	356.75 
25 × 25 	370.50 	370.50 	407.50 	407.50 
25 × 30 	428.50 	428.50 	471.25 	471.25 
Non-Artisan Made Vendors 
12 × 12 	376.25 	376.25 	414.00 	414.00 
15 × 15 	393.50 	393.50 	432.75 	432.75 
20 × 20 	440.00 	440.00 	484.00 	484.00 
25 × 25 	486.25 	486.25 	535.00 	535.00 
25 × 30 	544.25 	544.25 	598.75 	598.75 
Games 
15 × 15 	289.50 	289.50 	318.50 	318.50 
20 × 20 	347.25 	347.25 	382.00 	382.00 
25 × 25 	405.25 	405.25 	445.75 	445.75 
25 × 30 	463.00 	463.00 	509.25 	509.25 
Rides 
15 × 15 	335.75 	335.75 	369.25 	369.25 
20 × 20 	393.50 	393.50 	432.75 	432.75 
25 × 25 	451.50 	451.50 	496.75 	496.75 
25 × 30 	509.25 	509.25 	560.25 	560.25 
Food 
15 × 15 	538.50 	538.50 	592.25 	592.25 
20 × 20 	584.50 	584.50 	643.00 	643.00 
25 × 25 	630.75 	630.75 	693.75 	693.75 
25 × 30 	677.25 	677.25 	745.00 	745.00 
Sweetwater Wetlands Park 
Car 	5.00 	5.00 	5.00 	5.00 
Bicyclist and Pedestrians 	2.00 	2.00 	2.00 	2.00 
Annual Pass 	71.00 	71.00 	78.00 	78.00 
* The surcharge on fees, except where identified in Appendix A as "Exempt," is a mandatory addition to each fee and may not be waived. 
 
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS: 
Annual Spring Arts Festival (§ 19-1): 
a.  Permit application fee (nonrefundable) ..... $7.25 
b.  Permit to authorize exhibition in the designated competitive area ..... $29.75 
c.  Permit to authorize exhibition in the designated noncompetitive area ..... $15.00 
Vending booth permit (§ 19-92) ..... $78.00 
POLICE: 
Burglar alarm operators: 
Application for alarm or annual renewal application ..... $22.50 
Note: Proportionately adjusted for initial periods exceeding one year (§ 21-52). 
First false alarm with valid permit ..... $0.00 
First false alarm without valid permit or second false alarm, each ..... $73.00 
Third and fourth false alarms, each ..... $73.00 
Fifth and sixth false alarms, each ..... $140.75 
Seventh and eighth false alarms, each ..... $281.50 
Ninth and above false alarms, each ..... $562.75 
False alarm from non-permitted system, additional fee* ..... $281.50 
* Note: Reduced to $67.25 if application filed within ten days and issued within ten days thereafter (§ 21-53). 
Alarm permit reinstatement fee after revocation (§ 21-54) ..... $70.50 
Failure to respond when requested by police (§ 21-56) ..... $70.50 
Failure to deactivate alarm within 15 minutes (§ 21-57) ..... $176.00 
Prohibited devices: 
Automatic dialing device (§ 21-61(a)) ..... $176.00 
"One Plus Panic Alarm" or single-action switch (§ 21-61(b) and (c)) ..... $70.50 
Auxiliary power supply less than four-hour minimum (§ 21-62) ..... $176.00 
Burglar alarm monitoring companies: 
Annual registration fee (§ 21-58) ..... $140.75 
Failure to register or to maintain records for one year (§ 21-58) ..... $176.00 
Failure to verify alarm (§ 21-59) ..... $176.00 
Burglar alarm system contractors: 
Annual registration fee (§ 21-60(a)) ..... $140.75 
Failure to register annually (§ 21-60(a)) ..... $176.00 
Failure to meet UL or ANSI standards (§ 21-60(d)) ..... $176.00 
Activation of unpermitted alarm (§ 21-60(e)) ..... $176.00 
Causing false alarm during servicing or inspection, each violation (§ 21-60(f)) ..... $176.00 
Installation, maintenance, repair, alteration or servicing by unregistered contractor, each violation (§ 21-60(b)) ..... $176.00 
Failure to furnish agents with identification cards (§ 21-60(c)) ..... $70.50 
Failure to provide operators with permit application - each violation (§ 21-60(g)) ..... $70.50 
Burglar alarm systems: 
Assessment fee per false alarm ..... $15.00 
Trespass towing: 
Trespass towing application process fee (§ 14.5-29): 
a.  Properties 1—5, each ..... $62.75 
b.  Properties 6—10, each ..... $47.00 
c.  Properties 11—15, each ..... $40.25 
d.  Properties 16—20, each ..... $33.50 
e.  Properties 20 or more, each ..... $20.00 
Registration—Owners, operators and vehicles: 
a.  Trespass towing service permit ..... $351.25 
Late penalty, payment not timely filed, per month ..... $32.00 
b.  Trespass towing operators permit ..... $51.00 
c.  Replacement permits ..... ½ permit fee 
d.  Trespass towing vehicle registration, annually per vehicle ..... $32.00 
Immobilization: 
a.  Annual permit fee ..... $351.25 
b.  Late penalty, annual payment not timely filed, per month ..... $32.00 
c.  Operator permit, per year ..... $12.50 
d.  Replacement permit ..... ½ permit fee 
e.  Vehicle (Medallion) permit, annually per vehicle ..... $32.00 
f.  Removal ..... $73.00 
REGISTERED DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS: 
Filing fee for declaration of registered domestic partnership: 
City residents ..... $12.50 
Noncity residents ..... $25.50 
Fee for amending or terminating the declaration of registered domestic partnership: 
City residents ..... $12.50 
Noncity residents ..... $25.50 
SECONDHAND GOODS: 
Secondhand dealers—Jewelry, metal, coins: 
a.  Permit (§ 22-18): 
1.  Initial issuance ..... $74.00 
2.  Renewal ..... $37.25 
b.  Change of location (§ 22-19) ..... $15.00 
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES: 
(1)  Permit for congregating on streets and sidewalks (§ 26-189) ..... $37.25 
(2)  Permit to remove, construct, alter curb, driveway, gutter, etc. (excluding new residential construction) (§ 23-89(b)): 
a.  First driveway ..... $37.25 
b.  Each additional driveway ..... $7.25 
TAXATION: 
(1)  Business tax receipt transfer to new owner. See § 25-45(a) 
(2)  Business tax receipt transfer to new location (§ 25-45(b)) ..... $4.50 
TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES: 
(1)  Parking violations (§ 26-46(d)): 
a.  Parking in a metered space, the meter for which is expired ..... $20.75 
b.  Unlawfully parking on private property ..... $30.00 
c.  Unlawfully parking in any tow-away zone, except as otherwise herein stated ..... $30.00 
d.  Unlawfully parking in a space, including the access area, provided for the disabled, either by governmental or nongovernmental entities $250.00 (per F.S. § 316.008(4)). 
e.  Unlawfully parking in a fire hydrant or fire station safety zone $30.00, plus a $3.00 surcharge to fund firefighter training programs (per F.S. § 316.008(5)). 
f.  All other violations, including parking in a space for a time longer than lawfully permitted in the parking space ..... $30.00 
(2)  Parking in fire lanes (§ 26-47.1) $30.00, plus a $3.00 surcharge to fund firefighter training programs (per F.S. § 316.008(5)). 
(3)  In addition to any other fee or charge required under subsections (1) and (2) above, a $3.75 surcharge shall be assessed for each violation to fund the school crossing guard program. 
(4)  Parking in the Central City District in violation of § 26-50.1 ..... $30.00 
(5)  In addition to any other fee, charge or cost required under subsections (1), (2), (3) and (4) above, $2.00 shall be assessed as court costs for each court contested infraction to fund criminal justice education degree programs and training courses, including basic recruit training as authorized by F.S. § 318.18(11) and § 938.15. 
(6)  Delinquent administrative fees (§ 26-46(d)): 
Administrative fees not paid within: 
a.  Thirty calendar days of citation being issued or, within four days, excluding weekends and holidays, of denial of an affidavit of explanation, whichever is later ..... $16.00 
UTILITIES: 
(1)  Electricity: 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  Reserved. 
d.  General Service, Time-of-Demand meter installation (§ 27-21) ..... $200.00 
e.  Breaking of meter-pan seal (§ 27-26.2(e)) ..... $10.00 
f.  Residential service rates (§ 27-27): 
1.  Base rate. The rates to be charged and collected for electric energy furnished by the city to consumers for residential service are hereby fixed as follows: 
Non-time-differentiated rate. All residential customers may elect service at this rate: 
(A)  Customer charge, per month ..... $14.25 
(B)  First 850 kilowatt hours per month, per kWh: 
Generation, taxable fuel ..... $0.0065 
Generation, non-fuel ..... $0.025894 
Transmission ..... $0.002134 
Distribution ..... $0.035672 
Total, per kWh ..... $0.0702 
(C)  All kilowatt hours per month over 850, per kWh: 
Generation charge, taxable fuel ..... $0.0065 
Generation, non-fuel ..... $0.035162 
Transmission charge ..... $0.002898 
Distribution charge ..... $0.048440 
Total charge, per kWh ..... $0.0930 
2.  Fuel and purchased power adjustment. (See section 27-28.) 
3.  Minimum monthly bill. The minimum monthly bill shall be equal to the customer charge. 
4.  All bills rendered will express charges in terms of total charge per kWh. 
g.  General service rates (§ 27-27): 
1.  Base rate. 
(i)  Non-demand. The rates to be charged and collected for electric energy furnished by the city to consumers for general service, non-demand are hereby fixed as follows: 
(A)  Customer charge, per month ..... $29.50 
(B)  First 1,500 kilowatt hours per month, per kWh: 
Generation charge, taxable fuel ..... $0.0065 
Generation charge, non-fuel ..... $0.033501 
Transmission charge ..... $0.002850 
Distribution charge ..... $0.049749 
Total charge, per kWh ..... $0.0926 
(C)  All kilowatt hours per month over 1,500, per kWh: 
Generation charge, taxable fuel ..... $0.0065 
Generation charge, non-fuel ..... $0.045408 
Transmission charge ..... $0.003863 
Distribution charge ..... $0.067429 
Total charge, per kWh ..... $0.1232 
(D)  Minimum monthly bill. The minimum monthly bill shall be equal to the customer charge. 
(E)  All bills rendered will express charges in terms of total charge per kWh. 
(ii)  Time-of-use-rate. All general service non-demand customers may elect service at this rate, except that the city may, at its option, limit the number of customers and type of business, which will be served at this rate. 
(A)  Customer charge, per month ..... $40.00 
(B)  Energy charge: 
All energy used on-peak, per kWh ..... $0.2464 
All energy used off-peak, per kWh ..... $0.0463 
Note: To calculate the true ratio of on-peak to off-peak energy costs, the fuel Adjustment per kWh should be added to the above-stated energy charges. On-peak Period shall be as follows: Weekdays, 6:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m., excluding holidays. Off-peak periods shall be all periods not included in on-peak periods. 
(C)  Transfer to non-time-of-use rate. Customers who elect to take service under the time-of-use rate shall have the option to transfer to the non-time-of-use rate any time during the initial term of service; however, such customer who subsequently elects to take service under the time-of-use rate at the same service location shall be required to remain on the time-of-use-rate for a minimum term of twelve (12) consecutive months. 
(iii)  Demand. The rates to be charged and collected for electric energy furnished by the city to consumers for general service demand for all monthly bills which are for the first time rendered and postmarked as indicated are hereby fixed as follows: 
(A)  Customer charge, per month ..... $100.00 
(B)  Demand charge, per kW, per month: 
Generation charge ..... $3.64 
Transmission charge ..... $0.77 
Distribution charge ..... $5.09 
Total charge, per kW ..... $9.50 
Note: The billing demand is the highest demand established during the month. 
The demand shall be integrated over a thirty (30) minute period. 
(C)  Energy charge, all kWh, per month: 
Generation charge, taxable fuel ..... $0.0065 
Generation charge, non-fuel ..... $0.0446 
Transmission charge ..... $0.0029 
Distribution charge ..... $0.0077 
Total charge, per kWh ..... $0.0617 
(D)  Fuel and purchased power adjustment. (See section 27-28.) 
(E)  Minimum monthly bill. The minimum monthly bill shall be equal to the monthly customer charge plus thirty-five (35) times the demand charge. For those customers with an established demand of less than 50 kilowatts who have entered into an agreement for service under this schedule, the minimum monthly bill shall be equal to the monthly customer charge plus 35 times the demand charge. 
(F)  All bills rendered will express charges in terms of total charges per kWh or kW. 
(iv)  Time-of-use rate. All general service demand customers may elect service at this rate, except that the city may, at its option, limit the number of customers and type of businesses which will be served at this rate. 
(A)  Customer charge, per month ..... $100.00 
(B)  Demand charge, per kW, per month ..... $9.50 
(C)  Energy charge: 
All energy used on-peak per kWh ..... $0.1234 
All energy used off-peak, per kWh ..... $0.0309 
Note: To calculate the true ratio of on-peak to off-peak energy costs, the fuel and purchased power adjustment per kWh should be added to the above-stated energy charges. On-peak period shall be as follows: Weekdays, 6:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m., excluding holidays. Off-peak periods shall be all periods not included in on-peak periods. 
(D)  Transfer to non-time-of-use rate. Customers who elect to take service under the time-of- use rate shall have the option to transfer to the non-time-of-use rate any time during the initial term of service; however, any such customer who subsequently elects to take service under the time-of -use rate at the same service location shall be required to remain on the time-of-use rate for a minimum term of twelve (12) consecutive months. 
2.  Primary service discount. All general service customers whose demand has been estimated to be four hundred (400) kilowatts or more, by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, who are metered at primary voltage (twelve (12) kilovolts), and who own or lease all transformation and distribution facilities on the customer side of the metering point, shall receive credit of fifteen cents ($0.15) per kW applied to the monthly demand charge. 
3.  Primary metering discount. All general service customers who are metered at primary voltage (twelve (12) kilovolts) shall receive a credit of two (2) percent of the monthly base rate energy and demand charges. Metering voltage will be determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
4.  Facilities leasing adjustment. All general service demand customers who desire the benefits of a single-point-of-service metering, but do not wish to make the required investment in transformation and distribution facilities beyond the metering point, and whose demand has been established to be four hundred (400) kilowatts or more by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee, may request the city to make such investment in these facilities. The city shall provide, install, operate, and maintain the desired facilities and lease them to the qualified customer for a monthly consideration of one and one-half (1.5) percent of the installed cost of the facilities. 
h.  Large power service rates (§ 27-27): 
1.  Base rate. The rates to be charged and collected for energy furnished by the city to consumers for large power service are hereby fixed as follows: 
(A)  Customer charge, per month: ..... $350.00 
(B)  Demand charge, per kW, per month: 
Generation charge ..... $3.96 
Transmission charge ..... $0.77 
Distribution charge ..... $5.02 
Total charge, per kW ..... $9.75 
Note: The billing demand is the highest demand established during the month. 
The demand shall be integrated over a thirty (30) minute period. 
(C)  Energy charge, all kWh, per month: 
Generation charge, taxable fuel ..... $0.0065 
Generation charge, non-fuel ..... $0.0343 
Transmission charge ..... $0.0065 
Distribution charge ..... $0.0104 
Total charge, per kWh ..... $0.0577 
(D)  Fuel and purchased power adjustment. (See Section 27-28). 
2.  Time-of-use rate. All large power customers may elect service at this rate, except that the city may, at its option, limit the number of customers and type of businesses which will be served at this rate. 
(A)  Customer charge, per month ..... $350.00 
(B)  Demand charge, per kW, per month ..... $9.75 
(C)  Energy charge: 
All energy used on-peak, per kWh ..... $0.1154 
All energy used off-peak, per kWh ..... $0.0289 
Note: To calculate the true ratio of on-peak to off-peak energy costs, the fuel adjustment per kWh should be added to the above-stated energy charges. On-peak period shall be as follows: Weekdays, 6:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m., excluding holidays. Off-peak periods shall be all periods not included in on-peak periods. 
(D)  Transfer to non-time-of-use rate. Customers who elect to take service under the time-of-use rate shall have the option to transfer to the non-time-of-use rate any time during the initial term of service; however, any such customer who subsequently elects to take service under the time-of-use rate at the same service location shall be required to remain on the time-of-use rate for a minimum term of twelve (12) consecutive months. 
(E)  Fuel and purchased power adjustment. (See section 27-28). 
(F)  Minimum monthly bill. The minimum monthly bill shall be equal to the monthly customer charge plus seven hundred (700) times the demand charge. 
(G)  All bills rendered will express charges in terms of total charges per kWh or kW. 
3.  Primary service discount. All large power service customers who are metered at primary voltage (twelve (12) kilovolts), and who own or lease all transformation and distribution facilities on the customer side of the metering point, shall receive credit of fifteen cents ($0.15) per kW applied to the monthly demand charge. 
4.  Primary metering discount. All large power service customers who are metered at primary voltage (twelve (12) kilovolts) shall receive a credit of two (2) percent of the monthly base rate energy and demand charges. Metering voltage will be determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
5.  Facilities leasing adjustment. All large power service demand customers who desire the benefits of a single-point-of-service metering, but do not wish to make the required investment in transformation and distribution facilities beyond the metering point, may request the city to make such investment in these facilities. The city shall provide, install, operate, and maintain the desired facilities and lease them to the qualified customer for a monthly consideration of one and one-half (1½) percent of the installed cost of the facilities. 
i.  Distributed Resources Rates (§ 27-27): 
1.  General Provision. 
(A)  Net Metering administrative fees: 
Customer-owned generation shall be charged the following administrative fees for review and inspection: 
(i)  Tier 1 - 10 kW or less: no fees 
(ii)  Tier 2 - greater than 10 kW and less than or equal to 100 kW: $400.00 
(iii)  Tier 3 - greater than 100 kW and less than or equal to 2 MW: $1,000.00 
(iv)  In the event that the city decides that an interconnection study is necessary, the customer may be charged additional fees and/or appropriate cost recovery. 
(B)  Distributed Resources approved for interconnection by GRU shall be credited at a rate based upon the utility's avoided cost. 
(C)  Solar Energy Purchase Agreement/Solar Feed In-Tariff (SEPA): This rate shall be applicable to all classes of electric customers and non-customers located within the utility electric distribution service area. 
(i)  Energy generated from a qualified SPDR shall be purchased at non-negotiated rates as set forth in the SEPA. 
(ii)  Each SPDR system requires a separate SEPA, which will be in effect for a term no longer than the balance of the calendar year in which the contract is executed plus 20 calendar years, unless sooner terminated under the terms of the SEPA. 
(iii)  To become and remain "qualified," the SPDR shall adhere to all conditions and terms of applicable utility interconnection agreements promulgated by the general manager or his/her designee and applicable federal, state and local safety, building and other applicable codes. 
(iv)  The general manager, or his/her designee, may cease to commit to additional capacity, or offer new contracts after a total of 4 MW (DC) of solar photovoltaic distributed generation capacity per year has been committed by the utility system, or as safety and reliability of the utility system require. 
(v)  The general manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to establish the administrative guidelines and procedures governing the application process, the design review and interconnection process, the form of contract, and any policies related to the status of applications in excess of 4 MW (DC) capacity in a given calendar year, subject to City Commission policy review. 
(vi)  All Renewable Energy Credits (RECs) and other environmental attributes, including, but not limited to carbon offset credits that accrue as a result of operation of the SPDR under a SEPA or receiving payment under the Feed-In - Tariff shall be the property of the utility. 
(vii)  The solar Feed-in-Tariff class determination is defined here within and the rate is established in accordance with the following schedule which is subject to periodic review and subsequent revision to the rates as recommended by the general manager, or his/her designee, and adopted by the City Commission in the exercise of its sole discretion: 
Class 1: Building or pavement-mounted systems less than or equal to 10 kW DC or freestanding ground-mounted systems (non-building or non-pavement-mounted) less than or equal to 10 kW DC. 
Class 2: Building or pavement-mounted systems greater than 10 kW DC and less than or equal to 300 kW DC, or freestanding ground-mounted systems (non-building or non-pavement-mounted) greater than 10 kW DC and less than or equal to 25 kW DC. 
Class 3: Freestanding ground-mounted systems (non-building or non-pavement-mounted) greater than 25 kW DC. 
Contract Entered into Under This Policy During Calendar Year 	Fixed Rate per kWh Applied Uniformly From the Date of Installation Through December 31 	Fixed Rate $/kWh Over Life of Contract 
		Class 1 	Class 2 	Class 3 
2009 	2029 	$0.32 	n/a 	$0.26 
2010 	2030 	$0.32 	n/a 	$0.26 
2011 	2031 	$0.32 	$0.29 	$0.24 
2012 	2032 	$0.24 	$0.22 	$0.19 
2013 	2033 	$0.21 	$0.18 	$0.15 
 
(viii)  Each SPDR, will be subject to a monthly charge to cover administrative expenses, including, but not limited to the capital cost of the meter, meter reading, and payment processing. This charge will be determined by the SPDR DC power capacity. The following schedule designates the corresponding monthly electric customer charge to be applied given the SPDR DC power capacity. 
SPDR DC Power Capacity 	Customer Charge Per Month 
10 kilowatts or less DC 	$14.25 
Greater than 10 kilowatts DC 	$29.50 
 
(ix)  Each SPDR applying for capacity space in the solar Feed-In-Tariff program after December 31, 2010, will be subject to a nonrefundable processing fee to recover administrative expenses associated with the SEPA application process. This fee will be due at the time of SEPA application submittal and will be $500.00 for Class 1 systems, and $1,200.00 for Class 2 and Class 3 systems as designated in Section 27-27(C)(vii). 
(x)  Class 2 and Class 3 systems, as designated in Section 27-27(C)(vii), will be subject to a capacity reservation deposit equal to $30.00 per kilowatt based on the SPDR DC power capacity specified in the SEPA submittal application. The reservation deposit will be returned to the applicant upon construction and interconnection of the SPDR to the distribution grid within the timeframe allotted for completion. Failure to construct and interconnect the SPDR within the applicable timeframe will result in forfeiture of the reservation deposit. Class 1 systems are exempt from the capacity reservation deposit. 
(xi)  Each SPDR will be subject to billing for energy consumed, at a rate equivalent to the General Service Non-Demand energy charge plus the prevailing fuel adjustment. The customer charge, energy charge, and fuel adjustment are subject to applicable taxes. These charges will be deducted from the SPDR generation credit. 
j.  Interruptible-Curtailable service rider (§ 27-27): 
1.  General provisions. 
(A)  Customer must make application to the city for service under this Rider and the city must approve such application before service hereunder commences. 
(B)  Conditions pertaining to any application of this Rider shall be stipulated to by contract between the city and the customer receiving service hereunder. Such contract shall be for a minimum term of ten (10) years. 
(C)  All terms and conditions under the applicable Large Power Schedule shall apply to service supplied to the customer except as modified by this Rider. 
(D)  Service under this rider is subject to interruption/curtailment during any time period that electric power capacity and energy delivered hereunder is required from interruptible/curtailable load to a) maintain service to the city's firm power customers and firm power sales commitments, or b) supply emergency Interchange service to another utility for its firm load obligations only, or c) when the price of power available to the city from other sources exceeds 15 cents ($0.15) per kWh. 
(E)  The city reserves the right to interrupt/curtail electric services at least once each calendar year in order to test the availability or operability of interruptible/curtailable capacity, irrespective of city system capacity available or operating conditions. 
(F)  Pursuant to any agreement to provide service hereunder, the city and customers may stipulate for the provision of "Buy-Through" service for customers to replace power during times of interruption or curtailment pursuant to General Provisions (D) subsection c above. For all "Buy-Through" services purchased on behalf of customers, customers shall pay the city three dollars ($3.00) per MWh for such energy as well as reimburse the city for associated energy and transmission costs necessary to affect the delivery of "Buy-Through" energy to the city's system for customers. 
(G)  The city shall make reasonable efforts to provide advance notice to the customer of an impending interruption/curtailment of service sufficient to enable the customer to modify its operations or avail itself to the "Buy-Through" provision in General Provisions "F," above. 
(H)  Any contract for curtailable service hereunder shall specify a Non-Curtailable Demand. The contract Non-Curtailable Demand may be revised, from time to time, on a prospective basis only, by mutual consent of the city and the customer. 
(I)  Upon each curtailment request by the city, it shall be the customer's responsibility to curtail its energy demand fulfilled pursuant to General Provision "F," above. If the customer fails to so curtail its energy demand, the customer shall refund to the city 1.25 times (125% of) the total amount of discounts or demand credits granted to customer, pursuant to this Rider, over the preceding twelve (12) billing periods. 
2.  Application of discount. For service hereunder, a discount of one dollar twenty-five cents ($1.25) shall be applied to the normally applicable Demand (kW) Charge, inclusive of any other applicable discounts. 
k.  Reserved. 
l.  Reserved. 
m.  Public streetlight service rates (§ 27-29.1): 
1.  Monthly rental charges for GRU standard public streetlight fixtures (does not include underground civil infrastructure costs or pole rental fees): 
Fixtures available for new installation 
Fixture description 	Monthly charge per fixture 
Group 1 Flood Lights - General Use 	
Light Type 10 — 400 watt HPS Flood Light 	$17.35 
Light Type 12 — 250 watt HPS Flood Light 	$13.70 
Light Type 22 — 400 watt MH Flood Light 	$20.10 
Group 3 Roadway Lights - General Use 	
Light Type 38 — LED Roadway Cutoff 1, Gray 	$11.85 
Light Type 39 — LED Roadway Cutoff 2, Gray 	$15.10 
Light Type 40 — LED Roadway Cutoff 3, Gray 	$17.25 
Light Type 41 — LED Roadway Cutoff 4, Gray 	$21.15 
Light Type 42 — LED Roadway Cutoff 2, Black 	$16.00 
Light Type 43 — LED Roadway Cutoff 3, Black 	$18.15 
Light Type 44 — LED Roadway Cutoff 4, Black 	$22.05 
Light Type 45 — LED Roadway Cutoff 5, Gray 	$21.70 
Light Type 46 — LED Roadway Cutoff 5, Black 	$22.60 
Group 4 Decorative Roadway Lights - General Use 	
Light Type 51 — LED Round Roadway, Black 	$38.20 
Light Type 53 — LED Teardrop Roadway 2 	$38.45 
Light Type 54 — LED Teardrop Roadway 4 	$39.55 
Light Type 55 — LED Pendant Roadway 	$33.70 
Group 5 Decorative Pedestrian Scale Lights - General Use 	
Light Type 52 — LED Acorn Pedestrian 	$27.50 
Light Type 56 — LED Small Pendant Pedestrian 	$27.45 
Group 6 Roadway - Mass Change Out 	
Light Type 61 — LED Roadway Cutoff 1, Gray 	$5.85 
Light Type 62 — LED Roadway Cutoff 2, Gray 	$8.30 
Light Type 63 — LED Roadway Cutoff 3, Gray 	$10.15 
Light Type 64 — LED Roadway Cutoff 4, Gray 	$14.00 
Light Type 65 — LED Roadway Cutoff 2, Black 	$8.30 
Light Type 66 — LED Roadway Cutoff 3, Black 	$10.15 
Light Type 67 — LED Roadway Cutoff 4, Black 	$14.00 
Group 7 Decorative Lights - Mass Change Out 	
Light Type 68 — LED Round Roadway, Black 	$31.30 
Light Type 69 — LED Acorn Pedestrian 	$21.30 
Light Type 70 — LED Teardrop Roadway 2 	$24.45 
Light Type 71 — LED Teardrop Roadway 4 	$24.45 
Light Type 72 — LED Pendant Roadway 	$19.85 
Light Type 73 — LED Small Pendant Pedestrian 	$18.10 
 
Fixtures Not Available for New Installation 
Fixture Description 	Monthly Charge per Fixture 
Group 2 Area Lights 	
Light Type 13 — 100 watt HPS 	$9.45 
Group 3 Roadway Lights 	
Light Type 11 — 100 watt HPS Cutoff, Gray 	$9.20 
Light Type 14 — 150 watt HPS Cutoff, Gray 	$10.70 
Light Type 16 — 250 watt HPS Cutoff, Gray 	$14.20 
Light Type 23 — 400 watt HPS Cutoff, Gray 	$18.10 
Light Type 24 — 400 watt HPS Cutoff, Black 	$24.35 
Light Type 31 — 250 watt HPS Cutoff, Black 	$20.70 
Light Type 32 — 150 watt HPS Cutoff, Black 	$18.45 
Group 4 Decorative Roadway Lights 	
Light Type 15 — 150 watt HPS, Shoe Box, Bronze 	$13.70 
Light Type 17 — 400 watt MH, Round, Black 	$29.60 
Light Type 27 — 100 watt HPS, Large Domus 	$35.20 
Light Type 33 — 200 watt HPS, Renaissance II (2 ft arm) 	$39.20 
Light Type 34 — 200 watt HPS, Renaissance IV (4 ft arm) 	$39.95 
Group 5 Decorative Pedestrian Lights 	
Light Type 2 — 175 watt MV, Conical 	$16.20 
Light Type 19 — 100 watt HPS, Conical 	$14.95 
Light Type 26 — 100 watt HPS, Granville 	$24.25 
Light Type 28 — 100 watt MV, Coach 	$20.65 
Light Type 29 — 100 watt HPS, Traditional 	$29.95 
Light Type 30 — 100 watt MH, Traditional 	$31.10 
Light Type 36 — 100 watt MH, Acorn 	$31.10 
 
2.  Monthly rental charges for GRU standard public streetlight fixtures for which lights are operated and maintained by the city's utilities department, and for which installation costs were borne by a government agency other than the city's utilities department (does not include underground civil infrastructure costs or pole rental fees): 
Fixtures available for new installation 
Fixture description 	Monthly charge per fixture 
Group 3 Roadway Lights 	
Light Type 38 — LED Roadway Cutoff 1, Gray 	$2.55 
Light Type 39 — LED Roadway Cutoff 2, Gray 	$4.20 
Light Type 40 — LED Roadway Cutoff 3, Gray 	$5.45 
Light Type 41 — LED Roadway Cutoff 4, Gray 	$8.65 
Light Type 42 — LED Roadway Cutoff 2, Black 	$4.20 
Light Type 43 — LED Roadway Cutoff 3, Black 	$5.45 
Light Type 44 — LED Roadway Cutoff 4, Black 	$8.65 
Light Type 45 — LED Roadway Cutoff 5, Gray 	$7.90 
Light Type 46 — LED Roadway Cutoff 5, Black 	$7.90 
Group 4 Decorative Roadway Lights 	
Light Type 51 — LED Road Roadway, Black 	$10.15 
Light Type 53 — LED Teardrop Roadway 2 	$6.40 
Light Type 54 — LED Teardrop Roadway 4 	$6.40 
Light Type 55 — LED Pendant Roadway 	$4.05 
Group 5 Decorative Pedestrian Scale Lights 	
Light Type 52 — LED Acorn Pedestrian 	$4.05 
Light Type 56 — LED Small Pendant Pedestrian 	$3.65 
 
Fixtures Not Available for New Installation 
Fixture Description 	Monthly Charge per Fixture 
Group 3 Roadway Lights 	
Light Type 11 — 100 watt HPS Cutoff, Gray 	$5.45 
Light Type 14 — 150 watt HPS Cutoff, Gray 	$7.95 
Light Type 16 — 250 watt HPS Cutoff, Gray 	$11.95 
Light Type 24 — 400 watt HPS Cutoff, Black 	$17.85 
Light Type 31 — 250 watt HPS Cutoff, Black 	$11.95 
Group 4 Decorative Roadway Lights 	
Light Type 17 — 400 watt MH, Round, Black 	$17.85 
Light Type 27 — 100 watt HPS, Large Domus 	$6.95 
Light Type 33 — 200 watt HPS, Renaissance II (2 ft arm) 	$12.20 
Light Type 34 — 200 watt HPS, Renaissance IV (4 ft arm) 	$12.20 
Group 5 Decorative Pedestrian Lights 	
Light Type 28 — 100 watt MV, Coach 	$8.50 
Light Type 29 — 100 watt HPS, Traditional 	$8.75 
Light Type 30 — 100 watt MH, Traditional 	$9.85 
Light Type 37 — 100 watt HPS, Small Domus 	$9.85 
 
3.  Should a department of the City of Gainesville or Alachua County request to install pole(s) or lighting fixture(s) not contained in subsections m. above or n., or p. below, and not part of the approved Gainesville Regional Utilities Electric Material Standards, the fixture(s), light source(s), and lighting components(s) shall be connected behind a meter. The purchase, installation, operation, maintenance and ownership of the pole(s), fixture(s), light source(s), and lighting component(s) will be the responsibility of the requesting department. The energy charge for the lighting shall be at the general service non-demand rate. 
4.  Electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment. (See section 27-31.) 
n.  Rental outdoor light service rates (§ 27-30.1.): 
1.  Monthly rental charges for approved rental outdoor light fixtures (does not include underground civil infrastructure costs or pole rental charges): 
Fixtures available for new installation 
Fixture description 	Monthly charge per fixture 
Group 1 Flood Lights - General Use 	
Light Type 10 — 400 watt HPS Flood Light 	$19.10 
Light Type 12 — 250 watt HPS Flood Light 	$15.45 
Light Type 22 — 400 watt MH Flood Light 	$20.10 
Group 3 Roadway Lights - General Use 	
Light Type 38 — LED Roadway Cutoff 1, Gray 	$13.35 
Light Type 39 — LED Roadway Cutoff 2, Gray 	$16.80 
Light Type 40 — LED Roadway Cutoff 3, Gray 	$19.10 
Light Type 41 — LED Roadway Cutoff 4, Gray 	$24.70 
Light Type 42 — LED Roadway Cutoff 2, Black 	$17.80 
Light Type 43 — LED Roadway Cutoff 3, Black 	$20.10 
Light Type 44 — LED Roadway Cutoff 4, Black 	$25.70 
Light Type 45 — LED Roadway Cutoff 5, Gray 	$25.40 
Light Type 46 — LED Roadway Cutoff 5, Black 	$26.40 
Group 4 Decorative Roadway Lights - General Use 	
Light Type 51 — LED Round Roadway, Black 	$42.25 
Light Type 53 — LED Teardrop Roadway 2 	$40.75 
Light Type 54 — LED Teardrop Roadway 4 	$41.95 
Light Type 55 — LED Pendant Roadway 	$37.05 
Group 5 Decorative Pedestrian Scale Lights - General Use 	
Light Type 52 — LED Acorn Pedestrian 	$29.55 
Light Type 56 — LED Small Pendant Pedestrian 	$30.55 
Group 6 Roadway - Mass Change Out 	
Light Type 61 — LED Roadway Cutoff 1, Gray 	$6.70 
Light Type 62 — LED Roadway Cutoff 2, Gray 	$9.45 
Light Type 63 — LED Roadway Cutoff 3, Gray 	$11.15 
Light Type 64 — LED Roadway Cutoff 4, Gray 	$15.10 
Light Type 65 — LED Roadway Cutoff 2, Black 	$9.45 
Light Type 66 — LED Roadway Cutoff 3, Black 	$11.15 
Light Type 67 — LED Roadway Cutoff 4, Black 	$15.10 
Group 7 Decorative Lights - Mass Change Out 	
Light Type 68 — LED Round Roadway, Black 	$34.20 
Light Type 69 — LED Acorn Pedestrian 	$25.50 
Light Type 70 — LED Teardrop Roadway 2 	$28.95 
Light Type 71 — LED Teardrop Roadway 4 	$28.95 
Light Type 72 — LED Pendant Roadway 	$24.10 
Light Type 73 — LED Small Pendant Pedestrian 	$22.20 
 
Fixtures Not Available for New Installation 
Fixture Description 	Monthly Charge per Fixture 
Group 1 Flood Lights 	
Light Type 7 — 400 watt MV 	$19.60 
Group 2 Area Lights 	
Light Type 3 — 175 watt MV 	$12.45 
Light Type 13 — 100 watt HPS 	$11.20 
Group 3 Roadway Lights 	
Light Type 4 — 250 watt HPS, Non Cutoff 	$18.95 
Light Type 6 — 400 watt HPS, Non Cutoff 	$21.85 
Light Type 11 — 100 watt HPS Cutoff, Gray 	$10.95 
Light Type 14 — 150 watt HPS Cutoff, Gray 	$12.45 
Light Type 16 — 250 watt HPS Cutoff, Gray 	$15.95 
Light Type 23 — 400 watt HPS Cutoff, Gray 	$21.60 
Light Type 24 — 400 watt HPS Cutoff, Black 	$27.10 
Group 4 Decorative Roadway Lights 	
Light Type 15 — 150 watt HPS, Shoe Box, Bronze 	$15.45 
Light Type 17 — 400 watt MH, Round, Black 	$31.35 
Light Type 27 — 100 watt HPS, Large Domus 	$40.70 
Group 5 Decorative Pedestrian Lights 	
Light Type 2 — 175 watt MV, Conical 	$17.95 
Light Type 19 — 100 watt HPS, Conical 	$16.70 
Light Type 25 — 100 watt HPS, Lantern 	$18.20 
Light Type 26 — 100 watt HPS, Granville 	$26.60 
Light Type 28 — 100 watt MV, Coach 	$22.55 
Light Type 29 — 100 watt HPS, Traditional 	$33.00 
Light Type 30 — 100 watt MH, Traditional 	$34.25 
Light Type 36 — 100 watt MH, Acorn 	$34.25 
 
2.  Monthly rental charges for GRU standard rental outdoor light fixtures for which lights are operated and maintained by the city's utilities department, and for which installation costs were borne by a customer other than the city's utilities department (does not include underground civil infrastructure costs or pole rental fees): 
Fixtures available for new installation 
Fixture description 	Monthly charge per fixture 
Group 3 Roadway Lights 	
Light Type 38 — LED Roadway Cutoff 1, Gray 	$2.70 
Light Type 39 — LED Roadway Cutoff 2, Gray 	$4.30 
Light Type 40 — LED Roadway Cutoff 3, Gray 	$5.60 
Light Type 41 — LED Roadway Cutoff 4, Gray 	$8.80 
Light Type 42 — LED Roadway Cutoff 2, Black 	$4.30 
Light Type 43 — LED Roadway Cutoff 3, Black 	$5.60 
Light Type 44 — LED Roadway Cutoff 4, Black 	$8.80 
Light Type 45 — LED Roadway Cutoff 5, Gray 	$8.10 
Light Type 46 — LED Roadway Cutoff 5, Black 	$8.10 
Group 4 Decorative Roadway Lights 	
Light Type 51 — LED Road Roadway, Black 	$10.45 
Light Type 53 — LED Teardrop Roadway 2 	$6.15 
Light Type 54 — LED Teardrop Roadway 4 	$6.15 
Light Type 55 — LED Pendant Roadway 	$4.15 
Group 5 Decorative Pedestrian Scale Lights 	
Light Type 52 — LED Acorn Pedestrian 	$4.30 
Light Type 56 — LED Small Pendant Pedestrian 	$3.75 
 
Fixtures Not Available for New Installation 
Fixture Description 	Monthly Charge per Fixture 
Group 3 Roadway Lights 	
Light Type 14 — 150 watt HPS Cutoff, Gray 	$7.95 
Group 4 Decorative Roadway Lights 	
Light Type 15 — 150 watt HPS, Shoe Box, Bronze 	$7.95 
Light Type 27 — 100 watt HPS, Large Domus 	$6.95 
Group 5 Decorative Pedestrian Lights 	
Light Type 19 — 100 watt HPS, Conical 	$5.45 
Light Type 26 — 100 watt HPS, Granville 	$8.45 
 
3.  Should a utility customer request to install fixtures and/or poles not contained in this subsection n., or subsection q. below, and not part of the approved Gainesville Regional Utilities Electric Material Standards, the fixture(s), light source(s), and lighting component(s) shall be connected behind a meter. The purchase, installation, operation, maintenance and ownership of the pole(s), fixture(s), light source(s), and lighting component(s) will be the responsibility of the utility customer. The energy charge for the lighting shall be at the General Service Non-demand rate. 
4.  Rental Contract Termination Fee. The rates for rental outdoor lighting service includes a recovery of installation charges over a sixty (60) month period. If a customer elects to terminate the five (5) year contract prior to the end of the sixty month period, an early removal fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per month per light and six dollars ($6.00) per month per pole shall be billed to the account for each month remaining on the contract, which is less than sixty (60) months beyond the first month's billing of the contract. 
5.  Electric system fuel and purchased power adjustment. (See section 27-31.) 
o.  Reserved. 
p.  Public streetlight pole service rates 
1.  Rental charges for poles installed by the city's utilities department for the purpose of supporting public streetlights when required, including poles installed by the city's utilities department to replace poles for which installation costs were borne initially by a customer or by an agency other than the city's utilities department (§§ 27-29.1, 27-30.1): 
Pole Group Pole Description 	Monthly charge per pole 
Pole Group 1 	
P3 — 12 Foot Aluminum Pole for use with Light Type 2 and 19 ..... 	$ 7.50 
P4 — 18 Foot Aluminum Pole for use with Light Type 2 and 19 ..... 	$ 8.50 
P6 — 19 foot Fiberglass Pole Black for use with Light Type 25 ..... 	$ 3.75 
P8 — 30 foot wood pole ..... 	$ 4.50 
P12 — 35 foot wood pole ..... 	$ 4.75 
Pole Group 2 	
P9 — 30 foot concrete pole ..... 	$ 6.50 
P13 — 35 foot concrete pole ..... 	$ 6.75 
P15 — 40 foot wood pole ..... 	$ 5.00 
P18 — 45 foot wood pole ..... 	$ 13.25 
Pole Group 3 	
P1 — 10 foot (direct buried) pole decorative concrete ..... 	$ 12.75 
P2 — 10 foot fiberglass pole black for use with Light Type 28 ..... 	$ 17.25 
P10 — 30 foot fiberglass breakaway pole grey ..... 	$ 15.00 
P14 — 35 foot (direct buried) decorative octagonal concrete pole black ..... 	$ 16.00 
P16 — 40 foot concrete pole ..... 	$ 8.75 
P17 — 40 foot direct buried decorative octagonal concrete pole black ..... 	$ 24.00 
P19 — 45 foot concrete pole ..... 	$ 9.25 
Pole Group 4 	
P5 — 18 foot Domus pole black for use with Light Type 27 ..... 	$ 19.00 
P11 — 30 foot aluminum pole black for use with Light Type 17 ..... 	$ 26.75 
Pole Group 5 	
P7 — 26 foot steel Renaissance pole black ..... 	$ 30.75 
 
q.  Rental charges for poles which are for the purpose of supporting rental light fixtures when required, (does not include underground civil infrastructure costs): 
Pole Group Pole Description 	Monthly charge per pole 
Pole Group 1 	
P3—12 Foot Aluminum Pole for use with Light Type 2 and 19 ..... 	$ 8.75 
P4—18 Foot Aluminum Pole for use with Light Type 2 and 19 ..... 	$ 9.50 
P6—19 foot Fiberglass Pole Black for use with Light Type 25 ..... 	$ 3.75 
P8—30 foot wood pole ..... 	$ 4.50 
P12—35 foot wood pole ..... 	$ 4.75 
Pole Group 2 	
P9 — 30 foot concrete pole ..... 	$ 6.50 
P13 — 35 foot concrete pole ..... 	$ 6.75 
P15 — 40 foot wood pole ..... 	$ 5.00 
P18 — 45 foot wood pole ..... 	$ 15.00 
Pole Group 3 	
P1—10 foot (direct buried) pole decorative concrete ..... 	$ 15.00 
P2—10 foot fiberglass pole black for use with Light Type 28 ..... 	$ 20.00 
P10 — 30 foot fiberglass breakaway pole grey ..... 	$ 15.00 
P14 — 35 foot (direct buried) decorative octagonal concrete pole black ..... 	$ 18.25 
P16 — 40 foot concrete pole ..... 	$ 8.75 
P17 — 40 foot direct buried decorative octagonal concrete pole black ..... 	$ 27.75 
P19 — 45 foot concrete pole ..... 	$ 9.25 
Pole Group 4 	
P5 — 18 foot Domus pole black for use with Light Type 27 ..... 	$ 22.00 
P11 — 30 foot aluminum pole black for use with Light Type 17 ..... 	$ 30.75 
Pole Group 5 	
P7 — 26 foot steel Renaissance pole black ..... 	$ 35.50 
 
(2)  Solid waste and recyclables: 
a.  Residential service (§ 27-76): 
1.  Redemption of impounded containers: 
(i)  First impoundment, per container ..... $5.75 
(ii)  Subsequent impoundments within 12 months from the same place, per container ..... $11.50 
2.  Rates: 
(i)  Uniform curbside service for each single family residence or dwelling unit or living unit, or multifamily unit (any building containing two but not more than four permanent living units) or mobile home unit, per month: 
18 gallon cart ..... $17.50 
35 gallon cart ..... $22.75 
64 gallon cart ..... $28.25 
95 gallon cart ..... $35.25 
(ii)  Other charges: 
Account set up charge ..... $11.50 
Pre-paid approved bag, each, not to exceed ..... $2.75 
Exchange of cart for larger size ..... $13.50 
Exchange of cart for smaller size ..... $0.00 
Fixed cost of service per month (for computing vacation credit) ..... $5.75 
(iii)  Backyard service, per month: 
18 gallon cart ..... $29.75 
35 gallon cart ..... $34.50 
64 gallon cart ..... $42.00 
95 gallon cart ..... $51.50 
b.  Commercial services franchise and construction and demolition debris franchise (§ 27-80): 
1.  Application for container provision only ..... $115.75 
2.  Application for construction and demolition debris collection franchise ..... $289.50 
3.  Application for solid waste collection franchise ..... $289.50 
i.  Commercial franchisee providing commercial service: Ten percent of gross revenues from the providing of containers and the collection of garbage and trash from commercial properties under the franchise. 
ii.  Commercial franchisee providing construction and demolition debris collection service shall pay as compensation to the city an annual fee calculated based on all vehicles owned, leased, or otherwise used in construction and demolition debris collection service as follows: 
a.  $1,736.50 for each vehicle having ten or more wheels; 
b.  $1,157.75 for each vehicle having more than five and fewer than ten wheels; and 
c.  $578.75 for each vehicle having four or five wheels. 
4.  Application for solid waste collection franchise, together with a construction and demolition collection franchise ..... $289.50 
5.  Monthly franchise fee for solid waste collection: Ten percent of gross revenues from the sale or lease of containers, from garbage and trash collection services, from all disposal billed, from late fees, from bad debt recoveries and from other fees collected from customers, with no deductions except for bad debts actually written off. 
Note: For the first month (if less than a full month), this fee shall be prorated based on the gross revenues collected for the number of days the franchise is in place that month. 
6.  Annual franchise fee for construction and demolition debris collection: 
i.  For each vehicle having ten or more wheels ..... $1,736.50 
ii.  For each vehicle having more than five and fewer than ten wheels ..... $1,157.75 
iii.  For each vehicle having four or five wheels ..... $578.75 
Note: For the first year (if less than a full year), this fee shall be prorated based on the number of days the franchise is in place that year. 
c.  Commercial recycling/recovered materials collector registration application or renewal of registration (§ 27-86) ..... $58.00 
(3)  Water: 
a.  Base rates for usage and customer charge (§ 27-128): 
1.  Non-residential water service: 
Rate per 1,000 gallons ..... $3.85 
2.  Non-residential service for irrigation purposes: 
Rate per 1,000 gallons ..... $4.60 
3.  Residential water service: 
Rate per 1,000 gallons, first 4,000 gallons ..... $2.45 
Rate per 1,000 gallons, over 4,000 gallons and less than 17,000 gallons ..... $3.75 
Rate per 1,000 gallons, equal to or greater than 17,000 gallons ..... $6.00 
4.  Residential service for irrigation purposes: 
Rate per 1,000 gallons, first 12,000 gallons ..... $3.75 
Rate per 1,000 gallons, over 12,000 gallons ..... $6.00 
5.  Multiple-family-residential service where more than one dwelling unit is served by a single water meter: 
Rate per 1,000 gallons ..... $3.75 
6.  The customer service charge, per month, per bill rendered, is based on meter size as shown in the table below: 
Water Meter Size 	Monthly Customer Charge 
5/8 " (0.625") 	$ 9.45 
¾" (0.75") 	9.45 
1" 	9.65 
1.5" 	12.50 
2" 	20.00 
3" 	74.00 
4" 	100.00 
6" 	140.00 
8" 	200.00 
10" 	275.00 
 
7.  Fire hydrant service: 
Supported only, per hydrant, per month ..... $12.69 
b.  Water main tapping charges (§ 27-125): 
Tap 
Size 
(inches) 		Charge  
  1½ 	.....	$ 1,040.00 
 2 	.....	1,040.00 
 4 	.....	5,210.00 
 6 	.....	5,610.00 
 8 	.....	6,500.00 
12 	.....	10,350.00 
 
c.  Plan review fee (§ 27.124.1) ..... $780.00 
d.  Inspection service fee amount to be assessed on the amount of developer installed mainline distribution piping, per liner foot ..... $2.53 
e.  Meter installation charges (§ 27-126.1): 
1.  Meter assembly and service lateral: 
Water Meter       Water Meter 
Size (inches)       Installation Charge 
  5/8 × ¾  ..... 	$  697.00 
 ¾  ..... 	697.00 
1    ..... 	803.00 
1½  ..... 	2,268.00 
2    ..... 	2,532.00 
3    ..... 	8,196.00 
4    ..... 	9,240.00 
6    ..... 	16,929.00 
8    ..... 	20,104.00 
 
Note: For meters larger than eight inches, the water meter installation charge shall be established on a site specific basis by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
2.  Meter only: 
Water Meter       Water Meter 
Size (Inches)       Installation Charge 
  5/8 × ¾  ..... 	$  440.00 
 ¾  ..... 	440.00 
1    ..... 	546.00 
1½  ..... 	1,677.00 
2    ..... 	1,910.00 
 
3.  Wastewater customers on private wells: 
Water Meter       Water Meter 
Size (Inches)       Installation Charge 
  5/8 × ¾  ..... 	$  440.00 
 ¾  ..... 	440.00 
1    ..... 	546.00 
1½  ..... 	1,677.00 
2    ..... 	1,910.00 
 
Note: For meters larger than two inches, the meter installation charge shall be established on a site specific basis by the city. 
f.  Backflow testing fee (§ 27-135) ..... $102.00 
g.  Reserved. 
h.  Reserved. 
i.  Water connection charges (§ 27-129): 
	Minimum Connection Charge 
Connection Type 	Transmission and 
Distribution 
Connection Charge 	Water Treatment 
Plant Connection 
Charge 	Total Water 
Connection Charge 
Single family residential connections without fire sprinkler system with three-quarter (¾) inch or smaller meter 	$462.00 	$695.00 	$1,157.00 
Single family residential connections with fire sprinkler system with one (1) inch or smaller water meter 	$462.00 	$695.00 	$1,157.00 
Nonresidential connections with an estimated annual average daily flow (ADF) of less than or equal to 280 gallons per day (gpd) 	$462.00 	$695.00 	$1,157.00 
Single family residential connection for home with a heated and cooled area less than or equal to 1,400 square feet with three-quarter (¾) inch or smaller meter 	$300.00 	$452.00 	$752.00 
 
	Flow Based Connection Charge 
Connection Type 	Transmission and 
Distribution 
Connection Charge 	Water Treatment 
Plant Connection 
Charge 	Total Water 
Connection Charge 
Single family residential connections without fire sprinkler system with water meter larger than three-quarter (¾) inch 	$1.65/gpd ADF * 	$2.48/gpd ADF * 	$4.13/gpd ADF * 
Single family residential connections with fire sprinkler system with water meter larger than one (1) inch 	$1.65/gpd ADF * 	$2.48/gpd ADF * 	$4.13/gpd ADF * 
Nonresidential connections with an estimated annual average daily flow (ADF) of greater than 280 gallons per day (gpd) 	$1.65/gpd ADF * 	$2.48/gpd ADF * 	$4.13/gpd ADF * 
Multi-family connections 	$1.65/gpd ADF * 	$2.48/gpd ADF * 	$4.13/gpd ADF * 
* The flow based connection charge shall be determined based on either the charge per unit flow (in $/gpd ADF) listed in the table above multiplied by the estimated annual ADF, or the minimum connection charge, whichever is greater. 
 
j.  Water connection charge installment (§ 27-103). 
Installment payments for water transmission and distribution connection charges and water treatment plant connection charges made pursuant to § 27-103 as set forth below: 
	Minimum Connection Charge Installment 
Connection Type 	Monthly Charge 
Single family residential connections without fire sprinkler system with three-quarter (¾) inch or smaller water meter 	$14.65 
Single family residential connections with fire sprinkler systems with one (1) inch or smaller water meter 	$14.65 
Nonresidential connections with an estimated annual average daily flow (ADF) of less than or equal to 280 gallons per day (gpd) 	$14.65 
Single family residential connection for home with a heated and cooled area less than or equal to 1,400 square feet with three-quarter (¾) inch or smaller meter 	$9.52 
 
	Flow Based 
Connection Charge 
Installment 
Connection Type 	Monthly Charge 
Single family residential connections without fire sprinkler system with water meter larger than three-quarter (¾) inch 	$0.052/gpd ADF * 
Single family residential connections with fire sprinkler systems with water meter larger than one (1) inch 	$0.052/gpd ADF * 
Nonresidential connections with an estimated annual average daily flow (ADF) of greater than 280 gallons per day (gpd) 	$0.052/gpd ADF * 
Multi-family connections 	$0.052/gpd ADF * 
* The flow based connection charge installment shall be determined based on either the charge per unit flow (in $/gpd ADF) listed in the table above multiplied by the estimated annual ADF, or the minimum connection charge installment, whichever is greater. 
 
k.  Reserved. 
l.  Standby fire sprinkler line charges (§ 27-131): 
1.  Standby fire lines: 
(i)  Each applicant for standby fire line service shall pay to the city, in advance of the construction of the line, the following charges per connection: 
Line Size 	Charge Per 
(inches) 	Connection 
6 ..... 	$7,500.00 
8 ..... 	$10,500.00 
 
Note: For lines larger than eight inches, the charge shall be established on a site specific basis by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
(ii)  If a line of adequate size to the applicant's property does not exist, extension contribution in aid of construction (CIAC) according to section 27-130 is also applicable when the city is required to install a water line in order to provide a standby fire connection. 
m.  Temporary service (§ 27-133): 
1.  Meter installed on existing fire hydrant: 
(i)  Meter installation and removal, nonrefundable ..... $101.00 
(ii)  Deposit ..... $1,240.00 
2.  Monthly base charge for use of temporary fire hydrant meter water service ..... $73.00 
3.  Temporary fire hydrant water meters may be issued for a period of up to six months. If customer requires use of said meter beyond six months, a request must be made to the utility for an extension of use. If no extension is requested and the meter has not been returned, the utility will remove the meter, or keep the deposit if the meter cannot be retrieved. 
4.  Customer may be charged the actual cost to replace or repair meters tampered with or damaged while issued to customer. 
n.  Infrastructure improvement area user fees (§ 27-205) for water in the Innovation District Area shall be calculated based on the following rates: 
1.  Commercial and institutional establishment ..... $1.04/ft 2 gross building area 
2.  Hotel and/or motel establishments ..... $414.21 per room [2] 
3.  Laboratory (wet) establishment ..... $1.24/ft 2 gross building area 
4.  Multi-family residential establishment ..... $289.95 per bedroom 
5.  Office and laboratory (dry) establishment ..... $0.62/ft 2 gross building area 
6.  Parking garage ..... $0.62/ft 2 gross building area 
(4)  Sewerage: 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  Rates for normal strength wastewater (§ 27-169): 
1.  Residential dwellings (including single-family dwellings, mobile homes, and residential customers on metered private wells): 
(i)  Charges for winter months (January and February billing periods): 
Customer service charge per bill rendered, per month ..... $9.10 
Rate per 1,000 gallons of wastewater (wastewater equals city water usage, per 1,000 gallons ..... $6.30 
(ii)  Charges for March through December billing periods (§ 27-169.1): 
Customer service charge per bill rendered, per month ..... $9.10 
Rate per 1,000 gallons of wastewater, (wastewater equals the lesser of (i) city water usage or (ii) the individual customer's winter maximum), per 1,000 gallons ..... $6.30 
2.  Current residential customers who are not connected to the wastewater system, but are subject to rates and charges under section 27-169(c), per month ..... $40.60 
3.  Single-family dwellings on private wells discharging unmetered water to the wastewater system, per month ..... $40.60 
4.  Wastewater collected from multiple-family dwellings, where more than one dwelling unit is served by a single water meter shall be billed as 95% of metered water usage in any such month: 
Customer service charge per bill rendered ..... $9.10 
Rate per 1,000 gallons of wastewater ..... $6.30 
5.  Wastewater collected from nonresidential customers shall be billed as 95% of metered water usage in any such month: 
Customer service charge per bill rendered ..... $9.10 
Rate per 1,000 gallons of wastewater ..... $6.30 
6.  Wastewater collected from residential customers, where a second water meter is used for irrigation purposes, shall be billed as 95% of metered, non-irrigation water usage in any such month: 
Customer service charge per bill rendered ..... $9.10 
Rate per 1,000 gallons of wastewater ..... $6.30 
7.  Where monthly wastewater service charges for nonresidential customers are based on the amount of the monthly water billed from the city, separate meters may be allowed at the expense of the customer and an allowance may be made for measured water not entering the city's wastewater system. 
8.  Where wastewater meters are required by the city or requested by the customer, the customer shall pay to the city a monthly charge based on the cost to the city of all operation and maintenance costs of the meter or meter installation plus depreciation. The initial cost of any and all such installations shall be paid for by the user. Customers with a wastewater meter will be billed for 100 percent of the wastewater flow measured by the wastewater meter. 
9.  The general manager for utilities or his/her designee is authorized to adjust residential monthly wastewater service charges to reflect reduced wastewater discharges from approved individual graywater disposal systems, as determined by procedures and engineering calculations contained in policies approved by the city commission. 
d.  Rates for excess strength wastewater (§ 27-169): 
1.  A customer discharging excess strength wastewater into the city's wastewater system shall be assessed a laboratory charge based on the cost of collecting and analyzing samples used to determine the strength and characteristics of the waste. 
2.  Where automatic sampling equipment is required by the city or requested by the customer and such equipment is owned and/or maintained by the city, a monthly sampling charge shall be assessed based on the cost to the city of operation and maintenance of the equipment plus depreciation. 
3.  A customer discharging excess strength waste into the wastewater system shall be assessed normal strength wastewater charges in addition to excess strength charges calculated according to the following formula: 
[  Y / X  - 1  ]  ×  [  Z  ]  ×  [  0.5 × A  ] 
Y 	= 	Measured concentration of the wastewater constituent. 
X 	= 	Concentration of constituent in normal strength wastewater. 
Z 	= 	Thousands of gallons of excess strength wastewater discharge into 
the city's wastewater system. 
A 	= 	Normal strength wastewater rate per thousand in [subsection] c.5(i) 
above. 
 
Note: Excess strength charges shall be applicable to any parameter for which a normal strength limit has been established by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee. 
e.  Rates for septic tank and portable toilet waste (§ 27-169): Septic tank and portable toilet waste shall not be introduced into the city's wastewater system, except when specifically authorized and only at the time, place and manner prescribed by the city. This wastewater shall be metered and excess strength wastewater charges and industrial user charges shall be assessed. 
f.  Rates for industrial charges (§ 27-169): Any industrial user discharging into the city's wastewater system shall be assessed a permit application fee for each five-year permit of ..... $530.00 
Maximum fine for noncompliance with any requirement of § 27-180 ..... $1,000.00 per day per violation 
Fine for noncompliance with any requirement of the Oil and Grease Management Manual, (§ 27-180.2) ..... $500.00 
g.  Right to assess other fees (§ 27-173): The city reserves the right to assess consumers other fees as necessary to carry out the requirements contained within Article IV of Chapter 27. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by such article, and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
h.  Rates for reclaimed water service (§ 27-169): 
Customer service charge per bill rendered, per month ..... $9.10 
Rate per 1,000 gallons of reclaimed water metered ..... $0.95 
i.  Wastewater connection charges (§ 27-171): 
	Minimum Connection Charge 
Connection Type 	Wastewater 
Collection System 
Connection Charge 	Wastewater Treatment 
Plant Connection 
Charge 	Total Wastewater 
Connection Charge 
Single family residential connections without fire sprinkler system with three-quarter (¾) inch or smaller water meter 	$766.00 	$2,631.00 	$3,397.00 
Single family residential connections with fire sprinkler systems with one (1) inch or smaller water meter 	$766.00 	$2,631.00 	$3,397.00 
Nonresidential connections with an estimated annual average daily flow (ADF) of less than or equal to 280 gallons per day (gpd) 	$766.00 	$2,631.00 	$3,397.00 
Single family residential connection for home with a heated and cooled area less than or equal to 1,400 square feet with three-quarter (¾) inch or smaller meter 	$498.00 	$1,710.00 	$2,208.00 
 
	Flow Based Connection Charge 
Connection Type 	Wastewater 
Collection System 
Connection Charge 	Wastewater 
Treatment 
Plant Connection 
Charge 	Total Wastewater 
Connection Charge 
Single family residential connections without fire sprinkler system with water meter larger than three-quarter (¾) inch 	$2.74/gpd ADF * 	$9.40/gpd ADF * 	$12.14/gpd ADF * 
Single family residential connections with fire sprinkler systems with water meter larger than one (1) inch 	$2.74/gpd ADF * 	$9.40/gpd ADF * 	$12.14/gpd ADF * 
Nonresidential connections with an estimated annual average daily flow (ADF) of greater than 280 gallons per day (gpd) 	$2.74/gpd ADF * 	$9.40/gpd ADF * 	$12.14/gpd ADF * 
Multi-family connections 	$2.74/gpd ADF * 	$9.40/gpd ADF * 	$12.14/gpd ADF * 
* The flow based connection charge shall be determined based on either the charge per unit flow (in $/gpd ADF) listed in the table above multiplied by the estimated annual average daily flow (ADF), or the minimum connection charge, whichever is greater. 
 
1.  Wastewater flow-based connection charge installment (§ 27-103). Installment payments for wastewater connection charges made in accordance with § 27-103 are as follows: 
	Minimum Connection Charge Installment 
Connection Type 	Monthly Charge 
Single family residential connections without fire sprinkler system with three-quarter (¾) inch or smaller meter 	$43.03 
Single family residential connections with fire sprinkler systems with one (1) inch or smaller water meter 	$43.03 
Nonresidential connections with an estimated annual average daily flow (ADF) of less than or equal to 280 gallons per day (gpd) 	$43.03 
Single family residential connection for home with a heated and cooled area less than or equal to 1,400 square feet with three-quarter (¾) inch or smaller meter 	$27.97 
 
	Flow Based 
Connection Charge 
Installment 
Connection Type 	Monthly Charge 
Single family residential connections without fire sprinkler system with meter larger than three-quarter (¾) inch 	$0.154/gpd ADF * 
Single family residential connections with fire sprinkler systems with meter larger than one (1) inch 	$0.154/gpd ADF * 
Nonresidential connections with an estimated annual average daily flow (ADF) of greater than 280 gallons per day (gpd) 	$0.154/gpd ADF * 
Multi-family connections 	$0.154/gpd ADF * 
* The flow based connection charge installment shall be determined based on either the charge per unit flow (in $/gpd ADF) listed in the table above multiplied by the estimated annual ADF, or the minimum connection charge installment, whichever is greater. 
 
2.  For customers discharging excess strength wastewater. In addition to wastewater flow-based connection charges assessed pursuant to subsection (i) or (ii) above, customers discharging excess strength wastewater into the city's wastewater system shall be assessed excess strength flow-based treatment plant connection charges calculated according to the following formula: 
[Y/X-1] × A 
Y 	= 	Measured concentration of wastewater constituent. 
X 	= 	Concentration of constituent in normal strength wastewater. 
A 	= 	Wastewater flow-based treatment plant connection charge assessed 
pursuant to subsection (i) or (ii) above. 
 
j.  Plan review fee (§ 27-172) ..... $1,410.00 
k.  Inspection service fee (§ 27-172) plus, an amount to be assessed on the amount of developer installed mainline collection piping, per linear foot ..... $6.24 
l.  Off-site force main extension (CIAC) (§ 27-174): To be determined by the city. 
m.  Requirement for additional CIAC (§ 27-175): To be determined by the city. 
n.  Permit for construction of private sewerage disposal system (§ 27-183.1) ..... $5.00 
o.  Infrastructure improvement area user fees (§ 27-205) for wastewater in the Innovation District Area shall be calculated based on the following rates: 
1.  Commercial and institutional establishment ..... $1.05/ft 2 heated and cooled area 
2.  Hotel and/or motel establishments ..... $421.11 per room [3] 
3.  Laboratory (wet) establishment ..... $1.27/ft 2 heated and cooled area 
4.  Multi-family residential establishment ..... $294.78 per bedroom 
5.  Office and laboratory (dry) establishment ..... $0.63/ft 2 heated and cooled area 
(5)  Natural gas: 
a.  Appliance service and repair charges (§ 27-279): 
1.  Trip charge ..... $25.00 
2.  Labor charge, per one-half hour ..... $18.50 
Minimum charge of one-half hour; total charge in one-half hour increments\ 
3.  In addition, for other than normal working hours (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., M—F, excluding city holidays), per one-half hour ..... $18.50 
b.  Residential service rates (§ 27-272): 
1.  Base rate. The rates to be charged and collected for natural gas sales furnished by the city to consumers for residential service are hereby fixed as follows: 
(i)  Customer charge, per month, per bill rendered ..... $9.75 
(ii)  Non-fuel charge, per therm ..... $0.6300 
(iii)  Manufactured gas plant cost recovery factor, per therm ..... $0.0556 
2.  Minimum monthly bill. The minimum monthly bill shall be equal to the customer charge. 
3.  Purchased gas adjustment. (See section 27-273.) 
c.  General service rates, small commercial (§ 27-272): 
1.  Base rate. The rates to be charged and collected for natural gas sales furnished by the city to consumers for small commercial businesses are hereby fixed as follows: 
(i)  Customer charge, per month, per bill rendered ..... $20.00 
(ii)  Non-fuel charge, per therm ..... $0.6200 
(iii)  Manufactured gas plant cost recovery factor, per therm ..... $0.0556 
2.  Minimum monthly bill. The minimum monthly bill shall be equal to the customer charge. 
3.  Purchased gas adjustment. (See section 27-273.) 
d.  General service rates (§ 27-272): 
1.  Base rate. The rates to be charged and collected for natural gas sales furnished by the city to consumers for general service are hereby fixed as follows: 
(i)  Customer charge, per month, per bill rendered ..... $45.00 
(ii)  Non-fuel charge, per therm ..... $0.4400 
(iii)  Manufactured gas plant cost recovery factor, per therm ..... $0.0556 
2.  Minimum monthly bill. The minimum monthly bill shall be equal to the customer charge. 
3.  Purchased gas adjustment. (See section 27-273.) 
e.  Large volume service rates (§ 27-272; § 27-277): 
1.  Base rate. The rates to be charged and collected for natural gas sales on an interruptible basis furnished by the city to consumers for large volume service are hereby fixed as follows: 
(i)  Customer charge, per month, per bill rendered ..... $400.00 
(ii)  Non fuel charge, per therm ..... $0.2700 
(iii)  Manufactured gas plant cost recovery factor, per therm ..... $0.0556 
2.  Minimum monthly bill. The minimum monthly bill shall be equal to the customer charge plus the non-fuel charge multiplied by 30,000 therms. 
3.  Purchased gas adjustment. (See section 27-273.) 
4.  Availability. This service is available to consumers in the natural gas service area, both within and outside the corporate limits of the city who meet the requirements as defined in §§ 27-272 and 27-277 and only to the extent that supplies are available for this service under the city's contracts with its suppliers. 
f.  Liquid propane gas service rates (§ 27-288.1): 
1.  Base rate. The rates to be charged and collected for liquid propane gas sales furnished by the city to consumers are hereby fixed as follows: 
(i)  Customer charge, per month, per bill rendered ..... $9.75 
(ii)  Non-fuel charge, per gallon. A contract rate which shall equal the sum of the current non-fuel energy charge for residential natural gas customers and one of the following fixed charges as determined by the general manager for utilities or his/her designee: 
A.  Three-year recovery, per gallon ..... $0.15 
B.  Five-year recovery, per gallon ..... $0.10 
C.  Seven-year recovery, per gallon ..... $0.075 
D.  More than seven-year recovery, per gallon ..... $0.03 
2.  Minimum monthly bill. The minimum monthly bill shall be equal to the customer charge. 
3.  Liquid propane purchased gas adjustment. (See section 27-288.2.) 
g.  Requested interruption non-compliance penalty, per therm (§ 27-277(c)(2)): 
If a consumer fails to discontinue the use of natural gas when requested by the city, the consumer will be billed for all gas sales taken during the interruption period at a price equal to the city's cost of natural gas for the date(s) of the requested interruption, including commodity transportation, risk management fees and other such costs as shall be deemed appropriate times 400 percent. 
(6)  Stormwater management (§ 27-241): 
Monthly fee for each equivalent residential unit (ERU) ..... $9.45 
(7)  In general: 
a.  Residential standard deposits per service provided (§ 27-7): 
1.  Electric service ..... $145.00 
2.  Water service ..... $35.00 
3.  Wastewater service ..... $40.00 
4.  Gas service (without electric service) ..... $50.00 
b.  Service charges: 
1.  Specially arranged visit for meter reader to read meter (§ 27-8c): 
(i)  Electric service ..... $24.00 
(ii)  Water service ..... $24.00 
(iii)  Gas service ..... $24.00 
2.  Installation or turn-on of service (§ 27-15a): 
(i)  Electric service: 
(A)  Residential or general service non-demand ..... $26.00 
(B)  Residential or general service non-demand with water or gas ..... $19.00 
(C)  General service demand ..... $62.00 
(D)  Large power ..... $197.00 
(ii)  (A)  Water service ..... $26.00 
(B)  Water service with gas or residential or general service 
Non-Demand electric ..... $19.00 
(iii)  Gas service: 
(A)  Residential ..... $44.00 
(B)  Residential with water or electric ..... $36.00 
(C)  Non-residential ..... $100.00 
(D)  Non-residential with water or electric ..... $91.00 
(iv)  In addition to all other applicable charges, the following rates may also apply: 
(A)  If guaranteed service is requested for the same or any fully-scheduled workday ..... $40.00 
(B)  If service is provided anytime on holidays or weekends ..... $50.00 
*Workdays shall be weekdays, except for city holidays. 
3.  Field visit trip charge (§ 27-15b): 
(A)  Electric ..... $38.00 
(B)  Water ..... $38.00 
(C)  Wastewater ..... $38.00 
(D)  Gas ..... $44.00 
4.  Field visit for special purpose (§ 27-15c, d): 
(i)  Delinquent disconnection: 
(A)  Electric ..... $52.00 
(B)  Water ..... $52.00 
(C)  Gas ..... $75.00 
(D)  Additional fee if commercial gas service is disconnected ..... $28.00 
(E)  Additional fee if water service is disconnected ..... $24.00 
(F)  If electric service is disconnected at the point of service (pole, service drop, or transformer) ..... $214.00 
(G)  Additional fee if service reconnection is requested after normal working hours*, and the work is performed by a field service technician: 
(1)  Electric service ..... $87.00 
(2)  Water service ..... $87.00 
(3)  Gas service ..... $78.00 
(H)  Additional fee if service reconnection is requested after normal working hours*, and the work requires a lineworker ..... $112.00 
* Workdays shall be weekdays, except for city holidays. Normal working hours are 7:00 am. to 6:00 pm. Eastern Standard Time. 
(ii)  Special visit at customer request to: 
(A)  Reread meter where reading is found to be correct: 
(1)  Electric meter ..... $24.00 
(2)  Water meter ..... $24.00 
(3)  Gas meter ..... $24.00 
(B)  Temporarily disconnect meter: 
(1)  Electric meter ..... $26.00 
(2)  Water meter ..... $26.00 
(3)  Gas meter ..... $26.00 
(C)  Remove and replace water meter ..... $58.00 
(D)  Provide conservation service where customer failed to appear as scheduled: 
(1)  Electric ..... $26.00 
(2)  Water ..... $38.00 
(3)  Wastewater ..... $38.00 
(4)  Gas ..... $26.00 
(E)  Turn on gas where the customer failed to appear as scheduled ..... $30.00 
(F)  Light pilot light for natural gas appliance ..... $30.00 
(iii)  Meter testing charges: 
(A)  Electric, if meter not more than two percent fast (§ 27-26.1) ..... $66.00 
(B)  Gas, deposit (§ 27-280.2) ..... $95.00 
(C)  Water: 
(1)  Water meter sizes 5/8 " through 2" ..... $44.00 
(2)  Water meter larger than 2": prices determined at time of request* 
* The city does not have the capacity to test the meters with its own personnel. Any zone and per diem charges that are made by an outside company to make these tests will be chargeable to the customer. 
5.  Temporary electric service, installation and removal (§ 27-25) ..... $50.00 
6.  Water meter removal due to nonpayment of deferred fees and charges (§ 27-121) ..... $127.00 
7.  Returned payment, each (§ 27-14.3a): 
(i)  For returned payments up to $50.00 ..... $25.00 
(ii)  For returned payments between $50.01—$300.00 ..... $30.00 
(iii)  For returned payments between $300.01—$800.00 ..... $40.00 
(iv)  For returned payments over $800.00, the service charge shall be five percent of the face value of the transaction. 
8.  Late fee for combined statement (§ 27-14(e)) ..... $1.00 
* (or 1½ percent of the unpaid balance amount, whichever is greater) 
9.  Electronic remote read meter installation charges (§ 27-8(c)): 
(i)  Electric service: 
(A)  Non-demand meter ..... $195.00 
(B)  Single-phase demand meter ..... $207.00 
(C)  Three-phase demand meter ..... $368.00 
(ii)  Water service ..... $153.00 
(iii)  Gas service, residential ..... $112.00 
(iv)  Gas service, non-residential ..... $155.00 
10.  Unauthorized service investigation (§ 27-26.2(c); § 27-126.3(c); § 27-280.1): 
(i)  Electric service ..... $151.00 
(ii)  Water service ..... $124.00 
(iii)  Wastewater service ..... $139.00 
(iv)  Gas service ..... $151.00 
VEHICLES FOR HIRE: 
Annual company license for 1—10 driver authorizations ..... $262.50 
Annual company license for 11—20 driver authorizations ..... $525.00 
Annual company license for 21—49 driver authorizations ..... $1,050.00 
Annual company license for unlimited driver authorizations ..... $9,975.00 
Editor's note— The following ordinances have affected the schedule of fees, rates and charges set out in this appendix. 
(Code 1960, §§ 2-41, 7-18, 8-2, 9-8, 9-17, 9-33, 10-15, 12-14, 13-37, 14A-2(a), 16-3, 17-1, 19-9, 20A-33, 23-18, 23 42, 24-8, 24-17, 24-58, 24-59, 27-14, 28-3.1—28-3.4, 28-6, 28-7, 28-7.01, 28-7.1, 28-7.2, 28-13.1, 28-16, 28-26, 28-27, 28-34.1, 28-36.2, 28-37, 28-37.1—28-37.6, 28-40, 28-40.1, 28-42, 28-57, 28-64, 28-64.1—28-64.7, 28-64.9, 28B-4, 31-11; Ord. No. 3045, § 1, 8-20-84; Ord. No. 3058, § 1(13B-5), 9-24-84; Ord. No. 3069, §§ 1, 2, 10-15-84; Ord. No. 3087, §§ 1—6, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 3114, § 1, 3-18-85; Ord. No. 3138, § 1, 6-10-85; Ord. No. 3170, § 2, 10-14-85; Ord. No. 3174, §§ 1, 2, 10-21-85; Ord. No. 3191, § 21, 1-22-86; Ord. No. 3254, § 2, 9-22-86; Ord. No. 3259, § 1, 9-22-86; Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 9-22-86; Ord. No. 3262, § 1, 9-22-86; Ord. No. 3263, § 1, 9-22-86; Ord. No. 3264, § 1, 9-22-86; Ord. No. 3265, § 1, 9-22-86; Ord. No. 3266, § 1, 9-22-86; Ord. No. 3289, § 1, 10-13-86; Ord. No. 3290, § 1, 10-13-86; Ord. No. 3302, § 1, 11-24-86; Ord. No. 3303, §§ 1, 2, 11-24-86; Ord. No. 3309, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 3325, § 1, 2-23-87; Ord. No. 3328, §§ 1, 2, 3-9-87; Ord. No. 3344, § 1, 6-15-87; Ord. No. 3374, §§ 1, 2, 9-28-87; Ord. No. 3404, §§ 1—3, 2-8-88; 4-11-88; Ord. No. 3449, § 1, 8-8-88; Ord. No. 3460, § 2, 9-19-88; Ord. No. 3467, §§ 1—5, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 3468, § 1, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 3469, § 1, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 3470, §§ 1, 2, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 3484, §§ 2, 4, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 3493, §§ 1—4, 11-21-88; Ord. No. 3503, § 1, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 3516, §§ 1, 2, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 3521, § 1, 3-6-89; Ord. No. 3531, §§ 1, 2, 4-24-89; Ord. No. 3564, §§ 1—4, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 3565, §§ 1—4, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 3567, §§ 1, 4, 5, 9-25-89; Ord. No. 3574, § 1, 10-9-89; Ord. No. 3577, §§ 1, 2, 10-9-89; Ord. No. 3581, § 1, 12-4-89; Ord. No. 3597, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-90; Ord. No. 3663, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3665, §§ 8—15, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3666, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3667, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3668, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 3689, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 3738, §§ 3—7, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3739, §§ 9—12, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3740, §§ 8—11, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 3754, §§ 70—79, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 3756, § 1, 2-17-92; Ord. No. 3758, § 1, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 3760, § 1, 4-16-92; Ord. No. 3786, § 2, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 3787, §§ 1, 2, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 3788, §§ 1—3, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 3789, §§ 1, 2, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 3791, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 3833, § 1, 2-15-93; Ord. No. 3837, § 1, 3-1-93; Ord. No. 3842, §§ 1—8, 3-15-93; Ord. No. 3851, § 2, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 3854, § 4, 5-19-93; Ord. No. 3856, § 1, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 3897, § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 3898, § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 3899, § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 3900, §§ 1—3, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 3902, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 3915, § 1, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 3990, § 1, 7-25-94; Ord. No. 4018, § 3, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 4019, § 1, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 4032, § 4, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 4033, § 3, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 4071, § 3, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 4076, § 1, 5-22-95; Ord. No. 950300, § 1, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 950302, § 3, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 950504, §§ 1, 2, 8-31-95; Ord. No. 950601, § 2, 9-25-95; Ord. No. 950731, § 2, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 950732, § 1, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 950733, § 5, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 950734, § 1, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 950735, § 2, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 950802, § 1, 10-23-95; Ord. No. 951183, § 1, 2-26-96; Ord. No. 951263, § 3, 8-12-96; Ord. No. 951541, § 4, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 960267, § 1, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 960268, § 1, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 960269, § 1, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 960270, § 2, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 960332, § 1, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 960970, § 1, 4-28-97; Ord. No. 960498, §§ 2, 3, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 960798, §§ 2, 3, 6-23-97; Ord. No. 970088, § 1, 8-11-97; Ord. No. 960494, §§ 1—6, 8-25-97; Ord. No. 970203, § 1, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 970306, § 1, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 970307, § 1, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 970319, § 1, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 970250, § 1, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 970434, § 2, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 970593, § 2, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 970793, § 1, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 970469, § 3, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 970631, § 3, 6-8-98; Ord. No. 980566, § 1, 11-9-98; Ord. No. 980557, §§ 4—8, 11-23-98; Ord. No. 980949, § 3, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 981158, § 1, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 990079, § 3, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 990288, § 1, 9-13-99; Ord. No. 990390, § 1, 9-27-99; Ord. No. 990391, § 1, 9-27-99; Ord. No. 990299, § 2, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 990193, § 2, 11-8-99; Ord. No. 990452, § 2, 11-8-99; Ord. No. 990861, § 2, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 00057, § 1, 8-14-00; Ord. No. 980745, § 4, 9-25-00; Ord. No. 000252, § 1, 9-25-00; Ord. No. 000199, § 1, 10-9-00; Ord. No. 000682, § 1, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 000867, §§ 2—5, 2-26-01; Ord. No. 000903, § 2, 5-14-01; Ord. No. 000566, §§ 1, 2, 8-27-01; Ord. No. 001661, § 1, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 001662, § 1, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 001699, § 1, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 001871, § 3, 10-8-01; Ord. No. 001839, § 1, 4-22-02; Ord. No. 002566, § 1, 5-13-02; Ord. No. 020244, § 1, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 020245, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 020266, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 020267, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 020268, § 2, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 020638, § 1, 4-14-03; Ord. No. 020903, § 2, 4-14-03; Ord. No. 020233, § 2, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 030165, § 1, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 030278, §§ 22—24, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 030279, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 030280, § 1, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 030281, § 1, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 030468, §§ 1—5, 10-27-03; Ord. No. 030480, § 1, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 030604, § 1, 12-15-03; Ord. No. 030694, § 2, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 040128, § 1, 7-26-04; Ord. No. 040378, § 1, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 040392, § 1, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 021198, § 3, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 041148, § 1, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 041241, § 1, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 050064, § 2, 7-11-05; Ord. No. 050120, §§ 10, 11, 9-26-05; Ord. No. 050326, § 1, 9-26-05; Ord. No. 050327, § 1, 9-26-05; Ord. No. 050374, § 1, 9-26-05; Ord. No. 050669, §§ 1, 2, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 050801, § 1, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 050823, § 1, 3-27-06; Ord. No. 060002, § 2, 8-28-06; Ord. No. 060103, § 5, 9-11-06; Ord. No. 060198, §§ 6, 7, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 060347, § 1, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 060383, § 1, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 060434, § 1, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 060435, § 1, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 060436, § 1, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 060345, § 1, 11-13-06; Ord. No. 060378, §§ 3, 2, 1-8-07; Ord. No. 060433, § 2, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 060457, § 4, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 060613, §§ 4, 3, 3-26-07; Ord. No. 050530, § 2, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 050749, § 2, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 051224, § 2, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 070022, § 14, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 070107, § 3, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 070372, § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 070375, § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 070376, § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 070377, § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 070378, § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 070429, §§ 2—7, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 070726, § 1, 9-18-08; Ord. No. 070744, § 2, 6-9-08; Ord. No. 070916, § 1, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 080200, § 1, 9-18-08; Ord. No. 080201, § 1, 9-18-08; Ord. No. 080202, § 1, 9-18-08; 080203, § 1, 9-18-08; Ord. No. 080263, § 1, 9-18-08; Ord. No. 080102, § 4, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 080566, § 2, 2-5-09; Ord. No. 070268, § 2, 2-19-09; Ord. No. 080284, § 3, 3-19-09; Ord. No. 080860, § 1, 5-21-09; Ord. No. 080988, § 1, 5-21-09; Ord. No. 090036, § 1, 7-2-09; Ord. No. 080984, § 2, 7-16-09; Ord. No. 090284, § 1, 9-17-09; Ord. No. 090285, § 1, 9-17-09; Ord. No. 090286, § 1, 9-17-09; Ord. No. 090287, § 1, 9-17-09; Ord. No. 090294, § 2, 10-15-09; Ord. No. 090325, § 1(Exh. A), 9-17-09; Ord. No. 090326, § 3, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 090350, § 1, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 090007, § 3, 4-1-10; Ord. No. 090410, § 1, 11-19-09; Ord. No. 080579, § 1, 6-17-10; Ord. No. 100140, § 1, 8-19-10; Ord. No. 100104, § 1, 9-16-10; Ord. No. 100162, § 1, 9-16-10; Ord. No. 100163, § 1, 9-16-10; Ord. No. 100164, § 1, 9-16-10; Ord. No. 100165, § 1, 9-16-10; Ord. No. 100223, § 1, 9-16-10; Ord. No. 100309, § 1, 10-7-10; Ord. No. 100588, § 2, 2-17-11; Ord. No. 100840, § 7, 5-19-11; Ord. No. 110017, § 3, 8-18-11; Ord. No. 110213, § 1, 9-15-11; Ord. No. 110236, § 1, 9-15-11; Ord. No. 110159, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 110160, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 110161, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 110162, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 110377, § 1, 11-17-11; Ord. No. 110076, § 11, 8-2-12; Ord. No. 120167, § 1, 9-20-12; Ord. No. 120168, § 1, 9-20-12; Ord. No. 120169, § 1, 9-20-12; Ord. No. 110942, § 5, 9-6-12; Ord. No. 120438, § 1, 12-20-12; Ord. No. 110373, § 6, 3-21-13; Ord. No. 120597, § 2, 3-21-13; Ord. No. 120152, § 2, 6-20-13; Ord. No. 120139, § 3, 9-5-13; Ord. No. 130196, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-13; Ord. No. 130222, § 1, 9-19-13; Ord. No. 120642, § 4, 3-6-14; Ord. No. 130695, § 5, 3-6-14; Ord. No. 120206, § 3, 6-19-14; Ord. No. 120516, § 3, 8-21-14; Ord. No. 130912, § 1(Exh. A), 8-21-14; Ord. No. 140171, § 5(Exh. A), 9-18-14; Ord. No. 130460 , § 2, 11-6-14; Ord. No. 130895 , § 2, 12-18-14; Ord. No. 140297 , § 1, 1-15-15; Ord. No. 140495 , § 22, 3-5-15; Ord. No. 140190 , § 22, 4-16-15; Ord. No. 120883 , § 3, 8-20-15; Ord. No. 140741 , § 3, 9-3-15; Ord. No. 140949 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-17-15; Ord. No. 150246 , § 4(Exh. A), 9-17-15; Ord. No. 110541 , § 2, 4-7-16; Ord. No. 140292 , § 3, 7-21-16; Ord. No. 160253, § 9, 9-15-16; Ord. No. 160433 , § 1, 11-17-16; Ord. No. 160580 , § 1, 2-16-17; Ord. No. 160725 , § 2, 3-16-17; Ord. No. 150872 , § 9, 5-4-17; Ord. No. 170013 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-2-17; Ord. No. 170257 , § 2, 9-21-17; Ord. No. 170410 , § 1, 11-2-17; Ord. No. 170580 , § 3, 1-4-18; Ord. No. 170673 , § 1, 1-18-18; Ord. No. 170722 , § 3, 2-1-18; Ord. No. 180282 , § 2, 9-20-18; Ord. No. 171056 , § 2, 12-6-18) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The schedule in this appendix contains all of the fees, rates and charges, except for taxes, which are prescribed in this Code of Ordinances. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; taxation, Ch. 25; occupational license tax schedule, § 25-51. 

--- (2) --- 
The per room fee is applied to the number of hotel or motel rooms and no additional fee is applied for meeting rooms, kitchens, lobby areas and/or other rooms directly associated with the hotel or motel operation. Restaurant facilities or retail establishments within a hotel or motel shall be considered commercial establishments and shall pay all applicable fees. 

--- (3) --- 
The per room fee is applied to the number of hotel or motel rooms and no additional fee is applied for meeting rooms, kitchens, lobby areas and/or other rooms directly associated with the hotel or motel operation. Restaurant facilities or retail establishments within a hotel or motel shall be considered commercial establishments and shall pay all applicable fees. 

