CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH 
____________ 
CHARTER AND GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN 
____________ 
Published in 1991 by Order of the Town Commission 
Republished in 2001 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF ORIGINAL CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Joseph A. Boulay 
Mayor 
____________ 
Bill Paul 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Arthur Eypel 
John F. Rand 
Arlin Voress 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Mary Ann Mariano 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Mr. Thomas E. Sliney 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Anne M. Kowals 
Town Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, FLORIDA 
AT TIME OF REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Thomas J. Reid 
Mayor 
____________ 
Michael W. Hill 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
John J. Sorrelli 
Robert L. Lowe 
Rachael Scala-Pistone 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Ben Saag 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Thomas E. Sliney 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Doris M. Trinley 
Town Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Bernard Featherman 
Mayor 
____________ 
Miriam S. Zwick 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Doris J. Trinley 
John J. Pagliaro 
Dennis J. Sheridan 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Kathleen D. Weiser 
Interim Town Manager 
____________ 
Thomas E. Sliney 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Beverly M. Brown 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    Part I of this volume contains the Charter of the City. Part II, the Code of Ordinances, constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the Town of Highland Beach of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1972 Code, as supplemented through November 3, 1987, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-1 and the fifth section of Chapter 3 is 3-5. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 3-4 and 3-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 3-4.1, 3-4.2 and 3-4.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 4 and 5, it will be designated as Chapter 4.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The 2001 Republication was supervised by A. Lawton Langford, President; John Dombrowski, Supplement Supervisor; H. James Thompson, Jr., Supplement Editor; and Mary E. Renfroe, Supplement Proofreader. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Ben Saag, Town Manager, Ms. Doris M. Trinley, Town Clerk, and Mr. Thomas E. Sliney, Town Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. The publisher is most grateful to the administration and staff of the town for their assistance in the course of the 2001 Republication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
    This Code is presented for the use and benefit of the citizens of the Town of Highland Beach, Florida. 
April, 2001 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 610 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, FLORIDA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND THE TOWN COMMISSION OF THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, FLORIDA, THAT: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Highland Beach" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 30, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 17, 1989, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. It is the intent of this ordinance that all ordinances relating to zoning and Comprehensive Plans which are in full force and effect at the date of adoption of this ordinance remain in full force and effect and are not repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any other ordinance of the Town shall be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum allowed in F.S. Section 162.09. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this Section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and Town Commission to make the same part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 17, 1989 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective June 5, 1991. 
    Passed and adopted by the Mayor and Town Commission this 4th day of June, 1991. 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Anne M. Kowals       /s/       TOWN CLERK JOSEPH A BOULAY, 
MAYOR       05-07-91       /s/       FIRST READING BILL PAUL, 
VICE MAYOR       05-08-91       /s/       POSTED AFTER 1ST READING ARLIN G. VORESS, 
COMMISSIONER       05-17-91       /s/       PUBLISHED ARTHUR G. EYPEL, 
COMMISSIONER       06-04-91       /s/       FINAL READING JOHN F. RAND, COMMISSIONER       06-05-91       POSTED AFTER FINAL READING  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
  
Ordinance 
 Number Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supplement 
Number 10-004  1- 4-11 Omitted 8 11-001  5- 3-11 Included 8 12-001  5- 1-12 Included 9 12-002  9- 4-12 Included 9 12-004  9- 4-12 Included 9 12-005 10- 2-12 Included 9 12-006  9- 4-12 Included 9 12-007 10- 2-12 Included 9 12-003  9- 4-12 Included 10 13-001  3- 5-13 Included 10 13-002  9- 3-13 Included 11 13-003 11- 5-13 Included 11 14-001  3- 4-14 Included 11 14-002  3- 4-14 Included 11 14-003  3- 6-14 Included 11 14-004  5- 6-14 Included 11 14-006  7- 1-14 Included 11 14-007 10- 7-14 Included 11 14-008 10- 7-14 Included 11 14-005  1- 6-15 Included 12 15-001  5- 5-15 Omitted 12 15-002  4- 7-15 Included 12 15-003  5- 5-15 Included 12 15-004  5- 5-15 Included 12 15-005  6- 2-15 Included 12 15-006  6- 2-15 Included 12 15-007  6- 2-15 Included 12 15-008  1- 5-16 Included 13 16-001  3- 1-16 Included 13 16-002  3- 1-16 Included 13 16-004  3- 1-16 Included 13 16-005  3- 1-16 Included 13 16-006  3- 1-16 Included 13 16-007  5- 3-16 Included 13 16-008  7- 5-16 Included 14 16-009  8- 2-16 Included 14 16-010  9- 6-16 Included 14 16-011 11- 1-16 Included 14 17-001  8- 1-17 Included 15 17-002  9- 5-17 Included 15 17-003 10- 3-17 Included 15 17-004 11- 7-17 Included 15 18-004  6- 5-18 Included 15 18-006  8- 7-18 Included 15 18-007  8- 7-18 Included 15 18-008 10- 2-18 Included 16 18-010 12- 4-18 Included 16 18-011 12- 4-18 Included 16  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the restated Charter of the Town of Highland Beach, Florida, as adopted by Ord. No. 701 on Jan. 7, 2003. Subsequent amendments will be denoted by history notation following a particular amended section. The Charter Comparative Table following the Charter shows the disposition of amendatory legislation. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.01. - Town Established; Corporate Limits. 
    A Municipal Corporation to be known as the Town of Highland Beach, is hereby created and established in Palm Beach County, Florida, and the territorial limits of said Municipality shall be as follows: 
    Beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot Twenty-One (21) of Byrd Beach Subdivision in Section 28, Township 46 South, Range 43 East, according to a plat of said Subdivision on file in Plat Book 20, at Page 1, of the public records of Palm Beach County, Florida; run thence West along the South line of said Lot 21 and Lot 21-A of said Byrd Beach Subdivision to a point where the South line of said Lots extended intersects the center line of the right-of-way of Intra-Coastal Waterways Canal; run thence Southerly along the center line of said right-of-way of Intra-Coastal Waterways Canal to a point where the North line of Lot Forty (40) of a Subdivision of the South half (S 1/2) of Government Lots 1 and 4 in Section 9, Township 47 South of Range 43 East, according to a plat of said subdivision on file in Plat Book 9, Page 29, of the public records of Palm Beach County, Florida, extended intersects said center line of said Canal right-of-way; run thence East along the North line extended of said Lot 40, of said Subdivision, to a point where said North Line of said Lot 40 extended intersects the waters of the Atlantic Ocean; run thence Northerly along the waters' edge of the Atlantic Ocean, at low tide, to the point of beginning, the same being the Southeast corner of said Lot 21 of Byrd Beach Subdivision. 
    Any additional property lying adjacent to the boundaries above described in this section of this Act, or as the boundaries may from time to time be fixed, and consisting of land subdivided and platted into lots and/or blocks, or parcels other than lots or blocks, may be annexed to and included within the legal corporate limits of the Town of Highland Beach aforesaid, by and with the consent of the Town Commission of the Town of Highland Beach, upon application being made to the Town Commission, in writing, and signed by a majority of the record owners of the property which is proposed to be annexed, by ordinance of the Town. 
    The territorial limits of said Town as above set forth may also be extended at any time or time(s) in accordance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 171, applicable Florida Statutes, or such other General Acts of the Legislature of the State of Florida as may be hereafter enacted with respect to the extension of the territorial limits of municipalities of the State of Florida. 
Sec. 1.02. - Corporate Limits Extended. 
    That the present corporate limits of the Town of Highland Beach, in the County of Palm Beach and State of Florida, be, and the same are, hereby extended and enlarged so as to include and so that said Town shall embrace and have jurisdiction over, in addition to the territory within its corporate limits, the following described lands and territory situate in the County of Palm Beach, State of Florida, to wit: 
    Lots 1, 1A, 2, 2A, 3, 3A, 4, 4A, 5, 5A, 6, 6A, 7, 7A, 8, 8A, 9, 9A, 10, 10A, 11, 11A, 12, 12A, 13, 13A, 14, 14A, 15, 15A, 16, 16A, 17, 17A, 18, 18A, 19, 19A, 20, 20A, 21 and 21A, BYRD BEACH, according to the Plat thereof, recorded in Plat Book 20, at Page 1, of the public records of Palm Beach County, Florida. 
Sec. 1.03. - Same-Municipal Authority Vested. 
    That said Town of Highland Beach shall have all the powers, authority and jurisdiction over and within the territory described in Sections 1.01 and 1.02 hereof, and of the inhabitants thereof, and the property located therein, as it now has over and within its present corporate limits, and all of the ordinances of said Town of Highland Beach shall apply to and have the same force and effect in all the territory described in Sections 1.01 and 1.02 of this act as if all such territory had been part of said Town of Highland Beach at the time of passage and approval of such laws and ordinances. 
Sec. 1.04. - Same-Privileges and Liabilities of Laws Annexed. 
    That all of the property, real and personal, within said additional territory as described in Sections 1.01 and 1.02 and the inhabitants thereof shall be subject to the government, jurisdictions, powers, franchises, duties, and privileges of the Town of Highland Beach, and the said property shall be liable proportionately for all of the present outstanding and existing, as well as future, indebtedness of said Town of Highland Beach. 
Sec. 1.05. - Corporate Authority in General. 
    The Town of Highland Beach, a municipal corporation, shall possess and shall have whatever governmental, corporate and proprietary powers are necessary to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions, and render municipal services. It may exercise any power for municipal purposes except when expressly prohibited by law and it can exercise such powers as are granted in expressed words or those necessary or fairly implied in or incident to the powers as expressly conferred or essential to the accomplishment of the declared powers and purposes of a municipal corporation as set forth generally by law as well as those allowed under F.S. ch. 166, commonly referred to as the "Municipal Home Rule Powers Act." 
    That said Corporation shall have perpetual succession and by the name of the Town of Highland Beach may sue, be sued and defend, plead and be impleaded in all courts and places, and in all matters and proceedings in accordance with law and section 9.03 of this charter; may have and use a common seal and alter the same at pleasure; may acquire by gift, grant, devise, bequest, purchase or in any other manner, similar or dissimilar, receive, own, lease, hold, use and enjoy or sell and dispose of real and personal property or any interest therein; may take by devise, bequest, gift, donation or otherwise any property, real or personal, in trust for public, charitable or other purposes and do all acts and things necessary or appropriate to effectuate such trusts, with power to manage, sell, lease or otherwise dispose of said property in accordance with the terms of said trust; may use any of said real property, whether within or without the territorial limits of said municipality, for parks, playgrounds, roads, cemeteries, and the erection, maintenance and operation of municipal buildings, works and constructions of every character including municipal offices, schools, courthouses, fire and police stations, hospitals, infirmaries, dispensaries, wharves, docks, bridges, markets, lighting and power plants and waterworks and cable and other telecommunication services for public service to be sold for profit to supply light, power and water for public purposes or to be sold for profit and buildings, works and constructions for all other purposes that said Municipality through its commission may deem necessary or proper for the welfare of said Municipality or the inhabitants thereof, and may exercise all other powers herein conferred. 
    Upon adoption of any amendment to the Charter of the Municipality by either referendum or administrative ordinance the governing body of said Municipality shall have the amendment incorporated into the Charter and shall file the revised Charter with the Department of State, at which time the revised Charter shall take effect. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 1.06. - Town Commission Created; Election; Terms; Town Clerk; Qualifications of Electors; General Election Law. 
(1)  That the corporate authority of said Municipality shall be vested in a Commission created by this Act. Said Commission shall be composed of a Mayor-Commissioner, Vice Mayor-Commissioner and three (3) other Commissioners, all of whom are to be elected at large. 
(2)  On the second Tuesday in March, 2007, and every three (3) years thereafter, the qualified electors of the Town shall elect one (1) Commissioner for a term of three (3) years. On the second Tuesday in March, 2008, and every three (3) years thereafter, the qualified electors of the Town shall elect a Mayor-Commissioner and one (1) other Commissioner for terms of three (3) years. On the second Tuesday in March 2009 and every three (3) years thereafter the qualified electors of the Town shall elect a Vice Mayor-Commissioner and one (1) other Commissioner for terms of three (3) years. However, the Town's municipal election in 2016 shall coincide with the presidential primary election scheduled for March 15, 2016 which is the third Tuesday in March 2016. 
(3)  No person may serve more than two (2) successive elected full terms as Mayor. No person may serve more than two (2) successive elected full terms as Vice Mayor. No person may serve more than two (2) successive elected full terms as Commissioner. The aforesaid term limitations regarding the offices of Mayor, Vice Mayor and Commissioner shall not include any appointments by the governing body to fill unexpired terms. The offices of Mayor, Vice Mayor and Commission member shall be considered separate offices for the purpose of consecutive term limits set forth in this section. For transition purposes, the current Town Commission members, including the Mayor and Vice Mayor, who have not served three (3) consecutive terms as of March, 2007 shall have their current terms extended by one (1) additional year. 
(4)  The Commission shall designate by resolution a qualified person to serve as Town Clerk. Once employed, the Town Clerk shall report to the Town Manager, in accordance with Section 4.01 of this Charter and the Town's Personnel Rules and Regulations. 
(5)  To be eligible for election or appointment as Commissioner (including offices of Mayor and Vice-Mayor) a person must be a citizen of the United States. Additionally, a person to be eligible for election or appointment as Commissioner (including offices of Mayor and Vice-Mayor) must be both domiciled within the corporate limits of the Town of Highland Beach, State of Florida, and a qualified elector of the Town of Highland Beach, State of Florida registered in Precincts as may be established from time to time within the Town of Highland Beach, State of Florida for a period of not less than one (1) year immediately preceding the beginning of the qualification period, for candidates for Commission as set forth in section 1.06(6) of the Town Charter, or one (1) year immediately preceding the effective date of any appointment as commissioner, and shall retain such qualifications during their tenure and occupancy of said office. 
(6)  Each person seeking to qualify as a candidate for the office of town commissioner as a candidate shall file with the Town Clerk such qualification papers and pay such fees as may be required by law, no earlier than noon on the last Tuesday in November nor later than noon on the second Tuesday in December preceding the calendar year in which the election is to be held. 
(7)  The town clerk or designee of the clerk along with the supervisor of elections or the designee of that office shall canvass and certify returns of all town elections in the manner provided for in sec. 100.3605, Fla. Stat., as amended from time to time. Additionally, the town commission shall appoint one commission member, which may include the mayor, whose seat is not scheduled to be voted upon, who shall serve as the third member of the canvassing board. If any member of the canvassing board is unwilling or unable to serve, the town commission shall appoint another commission member as a replacement. Two members of the canvassing board shall constitute a quorum. 
(8)  Commissioners shall take office upon certification of the election results by the canvassing board and their swearing in by the town clerk or designee and shall remain in office until the election and certification of their successors. 
(9)  Any person who has qualified and is an elector of the State of Florida and who registers in the procedural manner prescribed by general law, and who has resided within the territorial limits of the Town of Highland Beach for a period of thirty (30) days preceding an election shall be a qualified elector of the municipality and shall be entitled to vote in any municipal election of said Town. 
(10)  The provisions of F.S. ch. 101, and any amendments thereto, providing for the casting of absentee ballots shall apply to any general, special or primary election, or referendum in which any qualified elector may vote. 
(11)  In case of vacancy in the Commission, the remaining Commissioners within thirty (30) days after the beginning of such vacancy, shall by resolution fill such vacancy or vacancies by appointment until the next regular general election. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 1, 8-9-06; Ord. No. 12-004, § 2, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 12-003, § 3, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 14-001, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 15-006, § 2, 6-2-15; Ord. No. 17-003 , § 2, 10-3-17) 
Sec. 1.07. - Rules of Procedure; Quorum; Meetings. 
    The Commission may enact rules of procedure and may prescribe penalties for the non-attendance or disorderly conduct of its members and enforce the same. A majority of the members of the Commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number must meet and then adjourn for the record and under the provisions of ordinances or rules of procedure may compel the attendance of absent members by imposition of fines and penalties. The Commission should hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month in such building as shall be designated by it as the Town Hall, at a fixed day and hour. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, § 4, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 1.08. - Oath of Office. 
    Each Commissioner, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his or her office, shall take and subscribe the following oath before some judicial officer of the state, viz: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support, protect and defend the Constitution and Government of the United States and of the State of Florida against all enemies, domestic or foreign, and that I will bear true faith, loyalty and allegiance to the same, and I am entitled to hold office under the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Florida, and that I will faithfully perform all the duties of the office of _______ on which I am about to enter, so help me God." 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Sec. 2.01. - Enumeration of Powers. 
    The Town of Highland Beach by and through its Town Commission shall have all governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers needed to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions and render municipal services, and may exercise any power for municipal purposes except when expressly prohibited by law. The Town of Highland Beach shall be deemed a home rule municipality and shall exercise all powers provided by the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166, and any amendments thereto. In furtherance thereof, the Town Commission shall have the power by ordinance to enact legislation in the following enumerated areas. The following enumeration, however, is illustrative and is not deemed exclusive and shall not limit the enactment of ordinances in areas not specifically enumerated herein: 
(1)  Taxes. To raise, by taxation and licenses authorized by the constitution or general law, and by user charges or fees, authorized by ordinance, amounts of money which are necessary for the conduct of municipal government, and to enforce their receipt and collection in the manner prescribed by ordinance not inconsistent with the law. 
(2)  Appropriations. To appropriate money for the payment of debts and expenses of the Town. 
(3)  Health, safety and general welfare. To make rules and regulations to secure the general health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants. 
(4)  Public facilities. To establish appropriate public facilities. 
(5)  Nuisances. To make rules and regulations to prevent and remove nuisances. 
(6)  Fills. In accordance with all applicable laws, to fill in all low ground in the Town and to compel owners of low ground in the Town to fill the same up to an established grade so as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes and sand gnats, and the spread of disease. 
(7)  Land clearance. To compel owners of land or riparian rights within the Town to remove therefrom all brush, weeds, obnoxious growth of any kind, overgrowth, filth, garbage, trash, debris, decayed buildings, ruins of any kind and buildings or docks in a falling or dangerous condition. 
(8)  Public water. To provide the Town with a supply of water for public purposes and to sell the same at fees provided by ordinance, by waterworks to be within or beyond the boundaries of the Town, and for the purpose to acquire, build, construct or lease or permit others to acquire, build, construct or lease waterworks and a water system, and/or water mains and water pipe lines, and to dig and/or drill artesian wells. In order to finance and install water mains and water pipe lines within the Town, the Town may assess the entire cost of the construction of said water mains against the abutting property benefited by said water main in proportion to the frontage thereon. 
(9)  Fire and rescue protection. To provide for emergency rescue and for the prevention and extinguishment of fires and to organize and establish fire rescue departments. 
(10)  Gas and electricity. To provide for the lighting of the Town by electricity, gas or other illuminating material and to sell gas or electricity to others for profit, within or beyond the boundaries of the municipality. 
(11)  Cable and telecommunications. To the extent permitted by law, to provide for and regulate cable, telecommunications and electronic services within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(12)  Streets, sewers, etc. To authorize and make appropriation to construct, alter, open, extend, abolish, widen, establish, grade, pave or otherwise improve, clean and keep in repair streets, alleys and sidewalks and to erect and keep in repair bridges, culverts, sewers, drains, and gutters. 
(13)  Mains, pipe lines; assessments. To construct and provide for the construction and repair of water mains and/or water pipe lines, and to assess the cost of the construction of said water mains and/or water pipe lines, against the abutting property benefited thereby on a proportionate front foot basis. 
(14)  Drainage. To construct and to provide for the construction, operation and maintenance of canals and ditches for drainage, irrigation and transportation purposes in accordance with all applicable laws. To prohibit any property owner or any other persons from disturbing the natural ground condition in a manner that could cause additional rain or surface water to drain from said property onto any public street or highway. 
(15)  Lights and public buildings. To make appropriations for lighting the streets and public buildings and for the erection and maintenance of all buildings necessary or advisable for the use of the Town. 
(16)  License taxes. To regulate and license any theatrical or other exhibition, show, circus, parade, athletic or other amusement; and to license and tax any other business, occupation or profession, without regard to the amount of state license tax and without regard to whether the state shall license the same or not, and to revoke such license or licenses for failure to comply with this provision or other provisions of the Town Charter or with any Town ordinance. 
(17)  Noises, water and land pollution. To regulate, restrain and prevent the carrying on of manufactories of a nature tending to increase or produce loud or offensive noises and to restrain any person or corporation from polluting the soil, streets, sewers, air or bodies of water within the Town limits. 
(18)  Hazardous property. To impose penalties on the owners, occupants, or agents of any house, walk or sidewalk or other structure or place or thing which may be dangerous or detrimental to persons or property. 
(19)  Police; penalties. To provide for the organization and maintenance of a police force, and to impose fines, forfeitures and penalties and terms of imprisonment for a breach of a Town ordinance, but no penalty shall exceed an amount generally provided by state law for the same or similar offense and no term of imprisonment shall exceed a term generally provided by state law for the same or similar offense. 
(20)  Offenses. To have and exercise jurisdiction over the commission of all offenses within said Town as prescribed by Florida law. 
(21)  Town Manager. To provide by resolution for the employment of a Town Manager and to prescribe duties and fix compensation. The Town Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Commission and may be terminated by the affirmative vote of not less than three (3) members of the Town Commission. 
(22)  Buildings; fire limits and hazards. To designate and establish, from time to time, fire limits, within which designated types of structures and buildings shall not be erected, constructed, moved, added to or enlarged, or repaired except to such extent and in such manner as may be provided by ordinance, and within which all future buildings shall be constructed wholly, or in such part as may be required, or designated and approved fireproof or fire-resisting materials, and in accordance with such safety regulations as may be prescribed, to regulate the size, character, material, and other details of construction of buildings, fences and other structures, which may hereafter be erected in said Town, in such manner and convenience as the public safety and convenience may require; and to provide for the removal or destruction of any building, structure or addition thereto, which by reason of dilapidation, defect of structure, or any other hazard may have become dangerous to life or property, or which may be newly erected contrary to law. 
(23)  Zoning. To adopt by ordinance in the interest of the public health, safety, order, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare, a plan or plans for the districting or zoning of the Town for the purpose of regulating the location of trades, apartment houses, dwellings or other uses of property or for the purpose of regulating the height of buildings or other structures or in the area or dimensions of lots or yards in connection with buildings or other structures, or for the purpose of regulating the alignments of buildings or structures near street frontages. The Town in developing zoning plans or in regulating zoning may also take into consideration aesthetic factors, population control and the quality of life that will result from the zoning plans or zoning regulations. 
The zoning regulations may be based upon any one or more of the purposes above described. The Town may be divided into such number of zones or districts and such districts may be of such shape and area as shall be best suited to accomplish the purposes of the zoning regulations. In the determination and establishment of districts and regulations, classifications may be used on the nature or character of the trade industry, profession or other activity conducted or to be conducted upon the premises, the number of persons, families or other group units to reside in or use buildings, the public, quasi-public or private nature of the use of the premises or upon any other basis relevant to the promotion of the public health, safety, order, morals, convenience, prosperity or welfare. 
(24)  Eminent domain. To acquire appropriate private grounds, in manner and form provided by law or by condemnation for widening streets or parts thereof, or for extending the same or for laying out or extending of new streets, avenues, squares, sewers, or drains, when the public convenience may require it, or for the construction and maintenance thereon of any municipal plants, works or for any other necessary public purpose. 
(25)  Littering prohibited. To prohibit the dumping of filth, dirt, garbage, shells, trash, refuse or other things in any body of water within the Town limits, or any body of water adjacent to or adjoining the Town limits, or on or upon any lot, tract, or parcel of public or private land, or on or upon any public street, highway or road-of-way within the Town, or upon any public or private beach within the Town. 
(26)  Corporate seal. To adopt, use and change the corporate seal of the Town, only as authorized by the Town Commission. 
(27)  House trailers, boats, and boat trailers. To regulate, restrict and/or prohibit the parking of any automobile trailers, boats, and campers in which sleeping accommodations are used or provided, within the limits of the Town, and to regulate, restrict and/or prohibit the establishment of automobile trailer parks, courts or lots within the Town. 
(28)  Beaches. To regulate, restrict and prohibit the trespassing by any person over and along the private ocean front beaches within the limits of the Town. 
(29)  Codification of ordinances. To codify its ordinances into a "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Highland Beach" and by a single ordinance to adopt such "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Highland Beach" as a complete ordinance of the Town. 
(30)  Funding limitation. Any single project or cumulation of projects, or extension of Town services requiring an allocation of more than $350,000.00 in any given fiscal year shall not be funded until the purposes and amounts of such allocations shall first have been approved by the majority of votes cast in an election of qualified electors residing within the Town. Exceptions to this would be a natural catastrophe defined as a sudden and extraordinary misfortune, unforeseen mischance bringing with it the destruction of life and/or property, as well as litigation settlement. Such election shall only be held between November 1 of a given year through April 1 of the following year. 
(Ord. No. 12-005, § 2, 10-2-12; Ord. No. 12-003, § 5, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 14-007, § 1, 10-7-14) 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL ORGANIZATION AND OFFICERS 

Sec. 3.01. - Town Manager. 
    The affairs of the Town of Highland Beach shall be administered by a Town Manager, who shall be the chief administrative officer employed by and responsible to the Town Commission. The Town Commission shall employ the Town Manager by an affirmative vote of at least three (3) members of the Town Commission. The Town Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Commission and may be terminated by the affirmative vote of not less than three (3) members of the Town Commission. 
Sec. 3.02 - Finance Director-Employment and Responsibilities. 
    The Town Manager shall designate a Finance Director who should be bonded in an amount equal to the largest amount thereof that may come into his/her hands at any time. The bond must be annually approved and renewed by the Town Commission. The Finance Director shall attend to the financial affairs of the Town and give financial advice in all matters referred to him/her. 
(1)  Payment of lawful debts. The Finance Director shall audit for propriety all accounts, claims, and demands against the Town. The Finance Director will draw checks only on the basis of duly approved invoices, claims or payrolls which checks will be valid only when signed by the Town Manager and one Commissioner. The Finance Director shall sign checks in the absence of the Town Manager. In the absence or inability of both the Town Manager and the Finance Director, the signatures of two (2) members of the Town Commission are authorized. 
(2)  Annual external audit. The Town Commission shall provide for an independent annual audit of all Town accounts and may provide for more frequent audits, as it deems necessary. Such audits shall be conducted by a certified public accountant or firm of such accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the Town government or any of its officers. The Commission may, without requiring competitive bids, designate such accountants or firms annually. 
(3)  Bond ordinance and sinking funds. The Finance Director will ensure that all money is collected, disbursed and invested in accordance with bond ordinance covenants and that such transactions are recorded in the proper accounts or sub-accounts. 
Sec. 3.03. - Departments of the Town. 
    The Town Manager shall have charge of and shall direct the administration of the Town's departments. Such departments shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to the following or some combinations or variations thereof: Clerk, Finance, Building, Police, Library, Fire and Public Works. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, § 6, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3.04. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 7 of Ord. No. 12-003, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, and approved by voters on March 12, 2013, repealed § 3.04, commissioners may hold town office; personnel. 
Sec. 3.05. - Salaries of Commissioners and Mayor. 
    The members of the Town Commission who are appointed and/or elected under the provisions of this act shall receive such salaries as the Commission may determine by ordinance from time to time. 
Sec. 3.06. - Performance Bonds. 
    The Commission may require that any fidelity bond shall be made by a responsible surety company duly authorized to do business in the State of Florida, and may pay the premium thereof from the monies of the Town. 
Sec. 3.07. - Fiscal Year. 
    The Town of Highland Beach shall establish a fiscal year beginning October 1st of each year and ending September 30th of the following year. 
Sec. 3.08. - Creation and Abolishment of Offices; Appointment of Officers; Salaries; Bonds. 
    The Commission shall have the power and is hereby authorized to create such offices as may in its judgment be necessary for the good government of the Town. The Commission shall have the power at any time to abolish any office created by it. The Commission shall have power to prescribe the functions, powers, and duties of all departments of the Town, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. Employees of the Town may be required to give such bond as the Commission may prescribe by ordinance or resolution and may be required to take oath to faithfully discharge their several duties. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUSPENSION AND DISCHARGE OF PERSONNEL; POLICE POWERS 

Sec. 4.01. - Town Manager. 
    The Town Manager shall have general supervision over all Town affairs, shall see that all of the ordinances are faithfully executed, and shall have the power to hire, evaluate, discipline, suspend or discharge any administrative officer or employee of the Town, with the exception of the hiring or discharge of the Police Chief and Town Clerk, in accordance with the Town's Personnel Rules and Regulations. Upon vacancy in the position of Town Clerk, the Town Manager shall present to the Town Commission a ranked list of up to five qualified applicants for that position. The Town Commission retains the power to hire and discharge the Chief of Police and Town Clerk either on its own initiative or to approve the recommendation of the Town Manager. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, § 8, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 4.02. - Mayor. 
    The Mayor shall have the authority to suspend the Town Manager and shall report his or her action in writing with the reason therefor and promptly call a special meeting to the next regular or special meeting of the Commission for its approval or disapproval. Until action by the Town Commission is taken, the Town Clerk shall act as interim Manager. 
Sec. 4.03. - Chief of Police, Employment; Chief of Police And Police Officers' Duties; Power of Arrest; Duties. 
    The Commission shall have the right and authority to employ a Town Chief of Police. Upon vacancy in the position of Police Chief, the Town Manager shall present to the Town Commission a ranked list of up to five qualified applicants for that position. The Town Commission may terminate the employment of the Chief of Police where notice of the proposed action and the reasons therefore are provided to the Chief of Police at least five (5) calendar days prior to the meeting at which the termination is to be decided. At such meeting, the Chief may present a written statement or evidence challenging such termination prior to the vote being called. 
    The Chief of Police and his subordinates' duties shall be such as may be prescribed by all applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, § 9, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 4.04. - Power of Arrest in "Hot Pursuit." 
    The Chief of Police and/or any policeman of the Town of Highland Beach may arrest when in hot pursuit as prescribed by law. 
ARTICLE V. - ORDINANCES 

Sec. 5.01. - Authority to Enact; Procedure; Execution; Posting; Emergency Ordinances. 
    The Town Commission shall have the right to adopt such ordinances authorized by the powers granted under this Charter or allowed by a state statute. 
    Adoption of Ordinances Shall be Subject to: 
(a)  A proposed ordinance shall be read on two (2) separate days. 
(b)  A proposed ordinance may be read by title or in full for both the first reading and for the final reading. A roll call vote is required for final passage of every ordinance. 
(c)  Further, all proposed ordinances, after a first reading and at least ten (10) days prior to adoption, shall be published by title once in a newspaper of general circulation serving the municipality. The notice of proposed enactment shall state the date, time, place of the meeting, the title or titles of proposed ordinances and the place or places within the municipality where such proposed ordinances may be inspected by the public. Said notice shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard with respect to the proposed ordinance. 
    The majority of the members of the governing body shall constitute a quorum. In the event the quorum present shall constitute less than four (4) members of the Commission, any ordinance or resolution shall not be adopted or enacted unless there are at least three (3) aye votes. The Town Clerk shall record the vote of each member of the commission which shall be entered on the official records of each meeting. 
    All resolutions and/or ordinances shall be attested by the Town Clerk and signed by the Mayor. In the absence, inability or incapacity of the Mayor and/or Town Clerk, the signatures of the Vice-Mayor and a Commissioner shall constitute sufficient compliance with the foregoing. All adopted ordinances shall be posted prominently for inspection by the public. All adopted ordinances or resolutions shall become effective ten (10) days after passage or as otherwise provided therein. 
    For the purpose of considering and/or taking action deemed desirable or necessary, special meetings may be held at the call of the Mayor and/or the Town Manager or shall be called at the request of three (3) of the commissioners. Further, to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property or the public peace, the commission may adopt one or more emergency ordinances. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. The affirmative vote of four (4) members shall be required for adoption. Such emergency ordinances shall immediately be effective, or at such later time as the ordinance may specify. 
    Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed as of the 61st day following the date on which it was adopted, but that shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
    It shall be required that all emergency ordinances be posted prominently and remain posted until repealed or superseded by reenactment, whichever shall first occur. As a general rule, all other adopted ordinances shall be posted as soon as practicable and remain posted for thirty (30) days. 
    The Commission may adopt one or more emergency ordinances to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property or the public peace, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, and regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. It shall be the duty of the four (4) Commissioners, who approve the emergency ordinance to sign same. 
Sec. 5.02. - Franchises; Notice; Limitation. 
    No public franchise of any description shall be granted except by ordinance. The Commission may by ordinance give or grant to any person or persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, the right or privilege to erect, construct, operate or maintain an electric light plant and/or electric distribution system, water works and/or water distribution system, telecommunication systems, free or toll bridge, or other public utility within the Town and to use the streets, alleys, utility easements and public waters of the Town for such purposes. Whenever such ordinance has been passed upon its first reading by the Commission, the Commission shall have the same posted publicly in full for a period of ten (10) days at the front door of the Town Hall, entitled "A Proposed Ordinance of the Town of Highland Beach Granting a Public Franchise" before the Commission shall take further action thereon. If such ordinance is amended after such posting, it shall be considered as again up for the first reading. Upon passage, the ordinance shall again be posted as herein required. But no such franchises shall be for a longer period than thirty (30) years, and shall in every respect comply with the provisions of F.S. § 180.14, as amended. 
Sec. 5.03. - Record of Ordinances; Rule of Evidence. 
    It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep the record of all ordinances adopted by the Commission in a book kept for that purpose. A copy of any ordinance therefrom, certified by the Clerk, under the seal of said Town, shall be taken and considered in all courts of this state as prima facie evidence that such ordinance was duly passed and posted or published. 
ARTICLE VI. - BONDS 

Sec. 6.01. - Purposes; Election; Exceptions. 
    Bonds of the Town of Highland Beach, Florida, may be issued for any purpose permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Florida, provided, however, that if required by the Constitution of the State of Florida, no such bonds shall be issued except when approved by vote of the qualified electors of the Town. Such election shall only be held between November 01 of a given year through April 01 of the following year. Exceptions to this would be for bond referendums necessitated by a natural catastrophe defined as a sudden and extraordinary misfortune, unforeseen mischance bringing with it the destruction of life and property as well as litigation settlement. 
ARTICLE VII. - REVENUE AND TAXATION 

Sec. 7.01. - Taxing Authority. 
    The Commission shall have power to raise by ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within said Town all sums of money which may be required for improvement and government of the Town and for carrying out of the powers and duties herein granted and imposed. The Commission shall also have power to levy annually such special tax on taxable property, real and personal, within the corporate limits of said Town, as may be necessary to provide funds for the payment of bonds or interest bearing warrants of maturity and the same shall be deposited in full compliance with applicable Florida statutes. 
Sec. 7.02. - Taxation of Property. 
    All property, real and personal, in the Town of Highland Beach not expressly exempt by laws of the state shall be subject to taxation for the purpose mentioned in this Charter. 
Sec. 7.03. - Annual Millage Limit. 
    That the Town is hereby empowered to levy and collect the annual tax for general municipal purposes not to exceed ten (10) mills on a dollar on the assessed valuation of all taxable property within the Town. It may also levy and collect, in addition to the amount already stated in this section, such taxes as may be necessary, for the payment of interest on bonds to be issued in accordance with law, and to create or continue a sinking fund or funds for the payment of the principal of said bonds. 
(Ord. No. 12-006, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 7.04. - Lien of Taxes. 
    All taxes shall be a lien against the property upon which they are levied or assessed from the first day of January of the year in which such levy and assessment is made and shall be due and payable on the first day of November in such year or as soon thereafter as the assessment roll may come into the hands of the collector. Unless such taxes are paid on or before the first day of the following April, the property against which the same are a lien may be sold for such taxes. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STREETS 

Sec. 8.01. - Town Created an Independent Road District. 
    The territory contained within the corporate limits of the Town of Highland Beach with the exception of State Road A-1-A is hereby declared and constituted to be an independent road district. 
Sec. 8.02. - Control and Supervision of Streets, Assessments, Etc. 
    The Commission shall have complete control and supervision of all the streets, roads, and alleys which have been dedicated to the use of the public forever with the exception of State Road A-1-A within the corporate limits of the Town and shall by ordinance prescribe the method and manner of keeping up the working of the same, not inconsistent with the laws of the State of Florida. The Town shall have the power of assessment as provided by applicable Florida statutes. 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 9.01. - General Laws Applicable. 
    All general laws of the state which are not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter or with the ordinances or resolutions enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by this Charter are applicable to the Town of Highland Beach. 
Sec. 9.02. - Contract for Expenditures Limited. 
    Neither the Commission nor any officer or employee of said Town shall have authority to make any contract involving the expenditure of public money, or impose upon said Town any liability to pay money, unless and until a sufficient amount of money shall have been appropriated for the liquidation of all pecuniary liability of said Town under such contract or in consequence thereof to mature during the period covered by the appropriation. Such contract shall be ab initio null and void, as to the Town for any other or further liability provided, first, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the Commission from providing for payment of any expense, the necessity of which is caused by any casualty, accident or unforeseen contingency arising after the passage of the ordinance making such appropriation. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to or limit the authority conferred in relation to bonded indebtedness or monies to be collected by special assessment for local improvements. 
Sec. 9.03. - Limitation on Legal Action Against Town, Notice of Action. 
    No suit or any cause of action of whatsoever kind or nature against the Town of Highland Beach shall be instituted except in conformance with F.S. § 768.28 or such other applicable law, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, § 10, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 9.04. - Savings Clause. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause; phrase or word of this Charter is for any reason held or declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, inoperative, ineffective, inapplicable or void, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not be construed to effect the portions of this act not so held to be unconstitutional, void, invalid, ineffective or affect the application of this act to other circumstances and not so held to be invalid. 
Sec. 9.05. - Evidence of Notice. 
    The certificate of the Clerk under the seal of the Town as to the publication or posting of any notice required under or provided for by this act shall be conclusive evidence as to such publication or posting. 
Sec. 9.06. - Legal Rights. 
    If a person, firm, or corporation has by actions in reliance on prior regulations, obtained vested or other legal rights that in law would have prevented a local government from changing those regulations in a way adverse to its interests, then nothing in this Chapter [Charter] authorizes any government agency to abridge those rights. Nothing in this Charter authorizes any governmental agency to adopt a rule or regulation or issue any order that is unduly restrictive or constitutes a taking of property without the payment of full compensation in violation of the State of Florida or of the United States. 
ARTICLE X. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

Sec. 10.01. - Initiative, Referendum and Recall. 
    The voters of the Town shall have the powers of initiative, referendum and recall, as set forth in applicable Florida statutes. 
ARTICLE XI. - REVIEW OF CHARTER 

Sec. 11.01. - Review of Charter. 
    A provision is hereby provided for the Town Commission to appoint a Charter Review Board every ten (10) years to review the Charter. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the disposition of Ordinance No. 636 and subsequent amendments to the Charter of the Town of Highland Beach, Florida. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Section  Section 
this Code 636 10-5-93 1.01-1.08, 2.01, 3.01-3.08, 4.01, 4.03, 4.04, 5.01-5.03, 6.01-6.05, 7.01, 7.02, 7.04, 7.05, 8.01, 8.02, 9.01-9.07, 10.01, 11.01 651  9- 5-95 1 6.01 2       Rpld 6.02-6.05 673 10-6-98 2.01(31) 678 9-7-99 3.05 701 1-7-03 1.01-1.08, 2.01, 3.01-3.08, 4.01-4.04, 5.01-5.03, 6.01, 7.01-7.04, 8.01, 8.02, 9.01-9.06, 10.01, 11.01 719  8- 9-06 1 1.06(2), (3) 12-003  9- 4-12 2 1.05 3 1.06(3), (5) 4 1.07 5 2.01(7), (25) 6 3.03 7       Rpld 3.04 8 4.01 9 4.03 10 9.03 12-004  9- 4-12 2 1.06(4), (8) 12-005 10- 2-12 2, 3 2.01(11), (30) 12-006  9- 4-12 2 7.03 14-001  3- 4-14 2 1.06(7), (8) 14-007 10- 7-14 1       Rpld 2.01(30) 15-006  6- 2-15 2 1.06(2), (6) 17-003 10- 3-17 2 1.06(6)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Highland Beach" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1972, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances, § 2.01(40). 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the content clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "charter" means the charter of the Town of Highland Beach, as amended, and included in Part I of this volume. 
    Code. The words "this Code" or "the Code" mean the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Highland Beach, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
    Corporate limits. Wherever in this Code an act is prohibited, declared unlawful, required to be performed, directly or by implication, such references shall imply "within the corporate limits of the Town of Highland Beach." 
Charter reference- Corporate limits, §§ 1.01, 1.02. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Palm Beach. 
State Law reference- Boundaries of Palm Beach County, F.S. § 7.50. 
    County Code. The words "county Code" mean the "Code of Laws and Ordinances, County of Palm Beach." 
    F.S. or Fla. Stats. Whenever the abbreviations "F.S." or "Fla. Stats." are used, they shall refer to the official Florida Statutes as adopted by the state legislature, and as amended. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency. Whenever any officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Town of Highland Beach, Florida." Whenever by the provisions of this Code any officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency of the town is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency shall mean and include such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency or a deputy or authorized subordinate thereof. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include and be applied to organizations, associations, clubs, societies, companies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. Personal property includes every species of property except real property. 
    Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
    Town. The words "the town" or "this town" shall be construed as if the words "of Highland Beach" followed it and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
    Town commission, commission. Whenever the words "town commission" or "commission" are used, they shall be construed to mean the town commission of the Town of Highland Beach. 
(Code 1972, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Construction of statutes, F.S. § 1.01 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1972, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1972, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code or the application thereof is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of the court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, or their application. 
(Code 1972, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the commission to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, so that a reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Highland Beach, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Highland Beach is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section shall read as follows: ...." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  When the town commission desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the commission desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: 
    "Section _____. It is the intention of the town commission, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Highland Beach, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1972, § 1-6) 
Charter reference- Procedure for adoption of ordinances and resolutions by the town commission, § 5.01 et seq. 
State Law reference- Procedures for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041. 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; 
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the town to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the town to be misrepresented. 
(Code 1972, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty. 
(a)  As provided in this section, a fine of not more than the maximum allowed in F.S. Section 162.09 may be imposed upon any person who shall be adjudged to have violated any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of this town. However, this section shall not conflict with any provision for penalties imposed for any offense under the laws of the state. 
(b)  The code enforcement board, upon notification by the code enforcement officer that an order of the code enforcement board has not been complied with by the set time or, upon finding that the same violation has been repeated by the same violator, may order the violator to pay the fine described in subsection (a) for each day the violation continues past the date set for compliance or for each time the violation has been repeated, and a hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order. 
(c)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the code enforcement board shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation; 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(d)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator; and it may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the personal property, but shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. After six (6) months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the code enforcement board may authorize the town attorney to foreclose on the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this section may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under Article X, Section 4, of the state constitution. 
(Code 1972, §§ 1-8, 2-69) 
Charter reference- Town authorized to fix penalty for violation of ordinances, § 2.01(29). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.09; fines and forfeitures in county court paid to municipality, F.S. § 34.191; penalty for ordinance violations, F.S. § 162.22. 
Sec. 1-10. - Scope of fines, penalties and forfeitures. 
    In all cases where fines, penalties or forfeitures are imposed, they shall be for, and extend and apply to, each act and omission and for each day's continuance of such act or omission, when it is of a continuing character; and in addition thereto the court is authorized, when the welfare of the town requires it, to cause to be removed, to any other place within or without the town, any and all persons, vessels, goods, property, obstructions, erections and nuisances that may be forbidden by any ordinance to remain in the town or any part thereof, at the expense of the offenders. 
(Code 1972, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-11. - Effect of notice of offenses. 
    When the unlawfulness of an act or omission shall depend upon the giving of a notice by any officer of the town, the continuance of the act or omission after such notice shall be deemed an offense, and the offender shall be punishable for each day of such continuance as for a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or occurring before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the town; 
(4)  Any right of franchise granted by the town; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the town; 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance or budget ordinance; 
(7)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective only for a stated or limited time; 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat; 
(10)  Any ordinance dealing with acquisition of property by the town; 
(11)  Any ordinance repealing prior ordinances; 
(12)  Any ordinance establishing tax millage; 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing zoning districts or adopting an official zoning map of the town; 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing or relating to salaries of the town officers or employees; 
(15)  Any special ordinance. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Ord. No. 184, § 3, 2-1-72) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Elections, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; pensions and retirement, Ch. 19; planning and development, Ch. 20; resource protection standards, § 20-101 et seq.; floodplains, § 20-301 et seq.; police, Ch. 21; sewers, Ch. 22; solid waste, Ch. 24; streets, sidewalks and bicycle/walkway paths, Ch. 25; taxation, Ch. 27; water system, Ch. 29; enforcement of mechanical installation regulations, § 6-213; housing board of adjustments and appeals, § 12-3; planning board, § 20-26 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 20-46 et seq.; administration of zoning ordinance, Ch. 30, §§ 7, 8. 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule powers, F.S. Ch. 166. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Corporate seal. 
    The seal of the town shall be composed of two (2) concentric circles, the outer circle being approximately one and seven-eighths (1 7/8 ) inches in diameter, and the inner circle being approximately one and one-fourth (11/4) inches in diameter. Between the circles the following words shall appear: "TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, FLORIDA." Within the inner circle shall appear the following words and figures within and near the inner circle: "INCORPORATED 1949 SEAL." 
(Code 1972, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Use of town stationery. 
    The use of official town stationery or reproduction thereof is prohibited, except for official town use only. Town stationery may not be used by any person for personal business or political use. All use of town stationery shall be processed by town staff members only. Violators of this section shall be subject to sanctions pursuant to the State of Florida Ethics Law. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 4-2-91) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 608, § 1, adopted April 2, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included herein as § 2-2. Section 2 of said ordinance provided for codification. 
Secs. 2-3-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWN COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 

Sec. 2-26. - Duty of vice-mayor. 
    In the event of the death, absence, disability or disqualification of the mayor, the vice-mayor shall discharge the duties of the mayor. 
(Code 1972, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-27. - Vacancy in office of mayor and vice-mayor. 
    In the event of the death, absence, disability or disqualification of the mayor and the vice-mayor, the members of the town commission shall by resolution appoint one of its members to act as mayor until such time as the vacancy in the offices of mayor and/or vice-mayor have been properly filled. 
(Code 1972, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-28. - Rules of procedure. 
    The rules of procedure of the town commission are as follows: 
(1)  Rule No. 1. The commission shall meet and hold it's monthly meetings on the first Tuesday of each month, except where that falls on a legal, town observed holiday then such meeting will be held on the next secular day. Said meeting shall commence at 1:30 p.m. A workshop shall be held on the last Tuesday of the month and shall begin at 1:30 p.m. Either a particular meeting or workshop may be rescheduled or cancelled by a majority vote of the commission at the previous meeting if it is known that a quorum will not be present for the meeting or workshop. All sessions are public hearings and the public is invited to attend. 
(2)  Rule No. 2. The mayor, or in his absence the vice-mayor, or in the absence of the mayor and vice-mayor a member of the commission shall take the chair at the hour named at any regular, special or adjourned meeting and shall call the meeting to order and cause the roll to be called. If there is a quorum present, the commission shall proceed with the usual order of business, but a smaller number must adjourn, and under the provisions of ordinances or rules of procedure may compel the attendance of absent members by the imposition of fines and penalties. If the quorum present shall constitute less than four (4) members of the commission, any ordinance or resolution shall not be adopted or enacted unless there are at least three (3) aye votes and if there are less than three (3) aye votes, the proposal shall be deemed tabled until the next special or regular meeting of the commission, at which time the proposal may be adopted by a majority of the quorum of the members present. 
(3)  Rule No. 3. The presiding officer shall enforce order and decorum and appoint all standing and special committees, unless the commission otherwise directs. 
(4)  Rule No. 4. The order of business may be as follows, or as otherwise set forth in the agenda: 
Call to order. 
Additions, deletions or acceptance of agenda. 
Public comments and requests. 
Boards and committees. 
Proposed ordinances and resolutions. 
New business. 
Miscellaneous-Items left over. 
Reports-Town commission. 
Reports-Town attorney. 
Reports-Town manager. 
Public comments and requests regarding action taken or considered at meeting. 
Consent agenda. 
Adjournment. 
(5)  Rule No. 5. The town manager shall have charge of and shall direct the administration of the town's departments, and shall regularly report on the operations thereof at the meetings of the commission. 
(6)  Rule No. 6. Any motion, resolution or ordinance may be withdrawn by the mover or proposer at any time before amendment or putting to a vote. 
(7)  Rule No. 7. All public monies shall be deposited in the name of the town in full compliance with F.S. § 166.261, and all public monies shall be disbursed only on check, to be signed by the town manager, or in his/her absence, by the finance director, and countersigned by one town commissioner. In the absence or inability of both the town manager and finance director, the signatures of two (2) members of the town commission is authorized. 
(8)  Rule No. 8. It shall be the duty of the mayor, or in his absence the vice-mayor, to see that the proceedings of every meeting are properly and promptly recorded by the town clerk, and the record of each meeting shall be signed, when approved, by at least three (3) of the commissioners present at the meeting, and attested by the clerk. No ordinance shall be introduced or finally enacted into law except at a regular meeting of the commission or at some special meeting called for the particular purpose of considering the ordinance. All resolutions shall be introduced in writing. All motions shall be reduced to writing when requested by any two (2) members of the commission. 
(9)  Rule No. 9. No communication or petition to the commission shall be entertained unless the same is in writing. 
(10)  Rule No. 10. In acting upon ordinances, a proposed ordinance shall be in writing, and may be read by title or in full both the first reading and for the final reading. A roll call vote is required for final passage of every ordinance. 
All proposed ordinances, after a first reading and at least ten (10) days prior to adoption, shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation serving the town. The notice of proposed enactment shall state the date, time, place of the meeting, and the title(s) of proposed ordinance(s) and the place(s) within the town where such proposed ordinances may be inspected by the public. The public shall be invited to appear and be heard at such meetings. 
For the purpose of considering and/or taking action deemed desirable or necessary, special meetings may be held at the call of the mayor and/or the town manager or shall be called at the request of three (3) of the commissioners. Further, to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property or the public peace, the commission may adopt one or more emergency ordinances. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. The affirmative vote of four (4) members shall be required for adoption. 
Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed as of the sixty-first day following the date on which it was adopted, but that shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
It shall be required that all emergency ordinances be posted and remain posted until expired, repealed or superseded by reenactment, whichever shall first occur. As a general rule, all other adopted ordinances shall be posted as soon as practicable and remain posted for thirty (30) days. 
The commission may adopt one or more emergency ordinances to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property or the public peace, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, and regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services. No emergency ordinance shall be enacted which enacts or amends a land use plan or which rezones private real property. 
An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. It shall be the duty of the four (4) commissioners who approve the emergency ordinance to sign same prior to notification thereof. 
The majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. If the quorum present constitutes less than four (4) members of the commission, any ordinance or resolution shall not be adopted or enacted unless there are at least three (3) aye votes and if there are less than three (3) aye votes, the proposal shall be deemed tabled until the next special or regular meeting of the commission, at which time the proposal may be adopted by a majority of the quorum of the members present. All resolutions and/or ordinances shall be attested by the town clerk and signed by the mayor and in the absence, inability or incapacity of the mayor, the signature of the vice-mayor shall suffice in the place and stead of the mayor. In the absence of the town clerk, the signature of a commissioner shall constitute sufficient compliance in the place and stead of the town clerk. 
The town clerk shall record the vote of each member of the commission which shall be entered in the minutes. All adopted ordinances or resolutions shall become effective when adopted, unless otherwise provided therein. 
(11)  Rule No. 11. On all matters coming before the town commission, a majority vote shall govern, except as provided in this section. 
(12)  Rule No. 12. No member of the commission shall speak on any question or discuss any matter, nor interrupt another, nor make a motion, without first addressing the presiding officer and obtaining his recognition. 
(13)  Rule No. 13. A motion to reconsider any of the proceedings of the commission shall not be entertained unless it is made by a member who previously voted with the majority, nor shall it be entertained at any other meeting than the one at which the proceedings were had or at the regular meeting following. 
(14)  Rule No. 14. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, and any member of the commission dissatisfied with any of his decisions shall have the right to appeal to the commission. 
(15)  Rule No. 15. In all cases involving points of parliamentary law, Robert's Rules of Order shall be the book of reference, and the rules therein, so far as they are applicable and not in conflict with the charter, the general laws of the state, the town Code and ordinances, shall be the rules of the commission. 
(Code 1972, § 2-6; Ord. No. 592, 5-1-90; Ord. No. 601, § 2, 11-7-90; Ord. No. 609, 6-4-91; Ord. No. 618, 11-5-91; Ord. No. 620, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 703, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 13-001, § 2, 3-5-13) 
State Law reference- Procedures for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041; public meetings and records, F.S. § 286.011. 
Sec. 2-29. - Declaration of a state of emergency. 
(a)  The mayor, vice mayor, town manager, acting town manager, or chief of police, in the order named, based on availability, shall have the authority to declare a state of emergency. 
(b)  Any declaration of a state of emergency and all emergency regulations activated or rescinded under the provisions of this chapter shall be confirmed by the town commission no later than at the next regular meeting, unless the nature of the emergency renders a meeting of the town commission extremely impractical. 
(c)  Emergency resolutions authorized by this chapter shall include, but are not limited to, the following subjects: 
Resolution   Subject A Evacuation. B Curfews, declaration of areas off limits. C Suspension or regulation of the sale of, or offer to sell, with or without consideration, alcoholic beverages, ammunition, firearms, explosives and flammables or combustibles. D Prohibiting the sale of merchandise, goods or services at more than the average retail price. E Water use restrictions. F Suspension of local building regulations. G Regulating the use of and rationing of fuel, ice and other essentials. H Emergency procurement procedures.  
(d)  Upon declaration of a state of local emergency and during the existence of a declared state of local emergency, the mayor or designated city official, in addition to any other powers conferred upon the mayor or designated city official by F.S. Ch. 252, F.S. Ch. 870, or other law, has the power and authority among other nonenumerated powers to: 
(1)  Direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area within the town if the mayor or other designated city official deems this action necessary for the preservation of life or other emergency mitigation, response or recovery. 
(2)  Waive the procedures and formalities otherwise required of the town by law or ordinance pertaining to: 
a.  Performance of public work and taking whatever prudent action is necessary to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the community; 
b.  Entering into contracts; 
c.  Incurring obligations; 
d.  Employment of permanent and temporary workers; 
e.  Utilization of volunteer workers; 
f.  Rental of equipment; 
g.  Acquisition and distribution, with or without compensation, of supplies, materials and facilities; 
h.  Appropriation and expenditure of public funds. 
(3)  Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, highway or upon any other public property. 
(4)  Impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the town thereby prohibiting persons from being on public streets, highways, parks or other public places during the hours which the curfew is in effect. 
(5)  Prohibit any person, firm, or corporation from using the fresh water supplied by the town for any purpose other than cooking, drinking or bathing. 
(6)  Prohibit the sale or distribution of any alcoholic beverages, ammunition, firearms, explosives, and flammables or combustibles during a state of emergency with or without the payment or a consideration therefore. 
(7)  Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of business, places of entertainment and any other place of public assembly. 
(8)  Regulate the use of and ration fuel, ice and other essentials. 
(9)  Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil, or participation herein from taking place on any of the public rights-of-way or upon any public property. 
(10)  Suspend local building regulations as necessary during the existence of a public emergency. 
(11)  Prohibit the sale of merchandise, goods or services at more than the average retail price. 
(12)  The restrictions referenced in subsections (3) through (11) above may exempt from all or part of such restrictions, physicians, nurses and ambulance operators performing medical services, on-duty employees of hospitals and other medical facilities, on-duty military personnel, bona fide members of the news media, personnel of public utilities maintaining essential public services, town authorized or requested firefighter, paramedic, law enforcement officers, and emergency management personnel and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to preserve safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the town. 
(e)  A declaration of a state of emergency shall activate the emergency plans applicable to the town. A declaration of a state of emergency shall automatically invoke the emergency measures listed in F.S. § 870.044, if the emergency relates to overt acts of violence or the imminent threat of such violence. 
(f)  A state of emergency, when declared as provided herein, shall continue in effect from day to day until declared to be terminated. Provided, however, that a state of emergency declared pursuant to F.S. § 870.041 et seq. shall commence upon the declaration thereof and shall terminate at the end of a period of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours thereafter, unless, prior to the end of such seventy-two-hour period, the public official or town official declaring the emergency shall have terminated such state of emergency. An extension of the seventy-two-hour time limit must be accomplished by a declaration of extension of the state of emergency by the mayor or designated town official. 
(Code 1972, § 2-7; Ord. No. 715, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 2-30. - Termination of a state of emergency. 
    A state of emergency may be terminated by the official declaring the emergency or a person eligible to declare an emergency and the termination shall be confirmed by a vote of the town commissioners if practicable or upon the certification of the person who originally requested the declaration of the state of emergency, that the conditions leading to or causing the emergency no longer exist and the town's agencies and departments are able to manage the situation without extraordinary assistance. Provided, however, that a state of emergency established under F.S. § 870.041 et seq. shall terminate at the end of a period of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours after the declaration of the emergency, unless, prior to the end of the seventy-two-hour period, the public official calling for a declaration of emergency or the town commission has terminated such state of emergency. Notice of termination of the emergency declaration shall be made to the public by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 2, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 2-31. - Police emergencies. 
(a)  A public emergency may be declared because of civil unrest or imminent threat to public peace or order when the chief of police, or if unavailable, the next highest ranking officer in the police department chain of command, certifies to the town manager, or if unavailable, acting town manager, that an emergency condition arising from hostile actions of others, armed or unarmed or other imminent threat to public peace or order, requires extraordinary measures for control, including, but not limited to curfew; blockade; proscription of the sale of firearms and other weapons; alcoholic beverages; explosives and combustibles; evacuation; and other like actions. The town manager, or if unavailable, the acting town manager, shall report said certification to the officials in the order named in section 2-29 regarding the need to declare a state of emergency. Pursuant to section 2-29, a declaration of emergency may then be issued. 
(b)  Declaration of a public emergency because of civil unrest or imminent threat to public peace or order, shall authorize the mayor, vice mayor, town manager, acting town manager, chief of police or other designated official to exercise the powers provided in section 2-29 or require automatic emergency measures pursuant to F.S. § 870.044 et seq. In addition, additional discretionary emergency measures pursuant to F.S. § 870.045 may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 3, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 2-32. - Fire and hazardous materials emergencies. 
(a)  A public emergency may be declared because of fire or a hazardous materials incident emergency when the chief of the fire-rescue department, or if unavailable, the next highest ranking officer in the fire-rescue department chain of command, certifies to the town manager, or if unavailable, acting town manager, that an actual or potential condition arising from fire, explosion, chemical, radiological or biological spill, release or exposure, building or bridge collapse, or plane, train, or other vehicle accident or other actual or potential occurrences which pose an unreasonable risk to health, safety and property, which requires extraordinary measures for control, including, but not limited to calling out of off-duty and reserve personnel; assistance by outside agencies; evacuation; and other like actions. The town manager, or if unavailable, the acting town manager, shall report said certification to the officials in the order named in section 2-29 regarding the need to declare a state of emergency. Pursuant to section 2-29, a declaration of emergency may then be issued. 
(b)  Declaration of a public emergency because of fire, chemical, radiological or biological and hazardous material emergency shall authorize the town manager or other designated official to exercise the powers provided in section 2-29. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 4, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 2-33. - Utility emergencies. 
(a)  A public emergency may be declared because of utility conditions when the public works director, or if unavailable, the next highest ranking public works department official, certifies to the town manager, or if unavailable, the acting town manager that: 
(1)  A condition exists or is imminent that endangers the safety, potability, quantity, availability, collection, conveyance, transmission, distribution, treatment, or storage of water or wastewater through or within the town's water or wastewater utility system; or 
(2)  A condition exists or is imminent that endangers the safety, quality, quantity, availability, transmission, distribution, or storage of gas within the town's gas utility system; and 
(3)  Extraordinary actions to control and correct the situation are required, including, but not limited to, emergency purchase; call-in of off-duty personnel; assistance by other communities and agencies; and other like actions. 
The town manager, or if unavailable, the acting town manager, shall report said certification to the officials in the order named in section 2-29 regarding the need to declare a state of emergency. Pursuant to section 2-29, a declaration of emergency may then be issued. 
(b)  Declaration of a public emergency because of utility conditions shall authorize the exercise of emergency powers provided in section 2-29. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 5, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 2-34. - Weather emergencies. 
(a)  A public emergency may be declared because of weather conditions when the National Weather Service or state, county or local emergency management agency informs the town or the public that emergency conditions resulting from meteorological conditions are present or imminent. Meteorological conditions covered by this section shall include, but are not limited to, hurricanes, floods, tornadoes, or other severe weather conditions and the results therefrom. The town manager, or if unavailable, the acting town manager, shall request a declaration of a state of emergency from the officials in the order named in section 2-29. Pursuant to section 2-29, a declaration of emergency may then be issued. 
(b)  Declaration of a public emergency because of weather conditions shall authorize the exercise of emergency powers provided in section 2-29. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 6, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 2-35. - Suspension of local building regulations. 
    The town manager, or if unavailable, the acting town manager, may authorize a suspension of local building regulations during and following a declared state of emergency when the building official certifies to the town manager, or if unavailable, the acting town manager, that such action is necessary for the expeditious restoration of property damaged by the emergency event. Such suspension of building regulations may be applied on a case by case basis as required to remedy specific conditions and to facilitate the provision of emergency housing to disaster victims. The building official shall specify the provisions of the local building regulations to be suspended and the reasons therefore, when certifying the necessity of such suspension to the town manager. The town manager shall communicate to the town commission the need to suspend local building regulations to the officials in the order named in section 2-29. The town commission shall confirm the suspension pursuant to section 2-29. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 7, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 2-36. - Portable generators. 
(a)  The use and operation of a portable auxiliary electrical generator is prohibited within or on the following areas: 
(1)  Within five (5) feet of any opening (includes but is not limited to doors and windows) into a building or structure; 
(2)  Within garages, enclosed or partially enclosed areas, or under eaves or other overhangs; 
(3)  On roofs or roof areas, balconies, ingress/egress areas and discharge ways, including but not limited to walkways, stairways and stairwells. 
(b)  The generator shall be operated in a safe manner and in accordance with NFPA 70, the National Electric Code and all other applicable laws, regulations and town ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 716, § 1, 10-11-05) 
Secs. 2-37-2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TOWN OFFICERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 

Sec. 2-46. - Oath of office. 
(a)  Each commissioner and every town officer shall, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office, take and subscribe the town's oath of office as set forth in the charter. 
(b)  The following persons are deemed to be officers of the town: 
(1)  Town manager. 
(2)  Town clerk and/or deputy town clerk(s). 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Finance director. 
(5)  Code enforcement officer. 
(6)  Building official. 
(7)  All regular and/or alternate members of: 
a.  Planning board. 
b.  Board of adjustment and appeals. 
c.  Reserved. 
d.  Any other board, agency or commission which may be appointed by the town commission, except for the charter review board and any other statutory board having advisory powers. 
(8)  Chief of police and all members of the police force. 
(9)  Town prosecutor. 
(Code 1972, § 2-4; Ord. No. 688, § 1, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 12-001, § 2, 5-1-12) 
State Constitution reference- State and county officers' oath, Art. II, § 5. 
Sec. 2-47. - Town manager-Appointment; term; compensation; bond. 
(a)  There shall be a town manager who shall be the chief administrative officer in charge of all town affairs placed in his charge or under the charter or this Code and such other duties as may be required by the town commission. 
(b)  The town commission shall appoint a town manager by an affirmative vote of at least three (3) members of the town commission. The town manager shall serve at the pleasure of the town commission and may be terminated by an affirmative vote of not less than three (3) members of the town commission. 
(c)  Upon the death, resignation or termination of the town manager, the town commission shall appoint an acting town manager and thereafter, within a reasonable time, appoint a regular town manager. 
(d)  The compensation of the town manager shall be fixed by the town commission. 
(e)  The manager shall give a surety bond to the town in a sum to be fixed by the town commission but which shall not be less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and the surety upon such bond shall be a responsible surety company authorized to transact business in the state. The premium upon the bond shall be paid by the town and the bond shall be subject to the approval of the commission. 
(Code 1972, § 2-19; Ord. No. 611, 6-4-91; Ord. No. 662, 2-4-97; Ord. No. 673, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 2-48. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the town manager shall be to: 
(1)  See that the laws and ordinances of the town are enforced; preserve and enforce good order within the town; see that all lawful orders of the town commission are duly observed and enforced. 
(2)  Employ, suspend or discharge any administrative officer or employee of the town, except those who have been appointed to boards, commissions or committees, for cause including misconduct in office or neglect of duty. With respect to certain positions whose appointment is provided to be made by the commission, by charter or otherwise, the appointees shall not be discharged by the town manager without commission approval. 
(3)  Recommend to the commission for adoption or passage such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(4)  Keep the commission and the public fully advised of the financial condition and needs of the town. He shall prepare the proposed annual budget for presentation to and adoption by the commission. 
(5)  Present to the commission a periodic financial report showing the amount of funds collected by the town, the sources from which collected, the total disbursements of the town during the period and the general objects or purposes for which the same were made. 
(6)  Attend all meetings of the town commission and take part in the discussions of municipal matters at meetings of the commission; provided, however, that he shall have no vote. 
(7)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the charter and as may be required by the town commission. 
(Code 1972, § 2-20) 
State Law reference- Financial matters pertaining to political subdivisions, F.S. Ch. 218. 
Sec. 2-49. - Town registrar. 
    The town clerk shall be the town registrar or supervisor of registration and shall perform the duties of that office. 
(Code 1972, § 2-21) 
Sec. 2-50. - Town clerk-Duties generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the town clerk to attend all meetings of the town commission and to keep the regular minutes thereof; to keep a separate book or books in which there shall be entered in full all ordinances, bylaws and orders adopted by the commission; to keep a separate book in which shall be copies of all ordinances relating to assessments or liens on real or personal property in the town; to carefully file and preserve in his office the books and papers which may be delivered to him or come into his possession by virtue of his office, and to carefully and legibly mark such papers; to keep at all times the office free and accessible to any person having the right or claim of business therein. The town clerk shall prepare and be responsible for the agenda for the meetings of the town commission. 
(b)  When so designated by the town commission and/or at the request of the town manager, the town clerk shall, in addition to the foregoing duties and/or functions, also serve in the capacity of assistant to the town manager. In the absence, inability and/or incapacity of the town manager, the town clerk shall be empowered to carry out the functions and responsibilities of the town manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2-22) 
Sec. 2-51. - Same-Preservation of commission minutes. 
    The town clerk shall maintain a permanent record of the minutes of all town commission meetings. Such minutes shall make appropriate references to all adopted and approved resolutions and ordinances. Copies of resolutions shall be attached to the minutes and be an integral part thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 2-23) 
Sec. 2-52. - Same-Maintenance, preservation of original ordinances; dissemination of copies to public; codification of appropriate ordinances; distribution of supplements. 
    The town clerk shall be responsible for the maintenance and preservation of all original ordinances and shall maintain a duplicate copy thereof for dissemination to the public. The clerk shall ensure that appropriate ordinances are codified and supplements to this Code are distributed to authorized personnel, et al. 
(Code 1972, § 2-24) 
Sec. 2-53. - Deputy town clerk(s). 
    The deputy town clerk(s) shall assist in the performance of the duties of the town clerk (with respect to registration and elections) and any other duties as assigned by the town clerk. 
(Code 1972, § 2-25) 
Sec. 2-54. - Finance director. 
(1)  The finance director or his/her designee shall: 
(a)  Collect or supervise collection of all funds due to the town unless specifically assigned. 
(b)  Deposit, in such depositories as shall be designated by the commission, all monies of the town and supervise their investment. 
(c)  Establish, maintain, enforce and adhere to written accounting procedures that substantially conform with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(d)  Maintain the general accounting system of the town in conformance with generally accepted accounting principles as applied to governments. 
(e)  Prepare and submit monthly reports to the financial advisory board and commission. This report of the financial condition of the town shall include at a minimum actual revenue and expenditure performance compared to budget. Other financial management information shall be included as determined to be appropriate. 
(f)  Maintain an accurate and complete inventory of all personal property owned by the town and to promulgate rules and regulations for the control and protection of such property. 
(g)  Perform such other duties and responsibilities as assigned by the town manager or by ordinance. 
(2)  Payment of lawful debts. The finance director, or his/her designee, shall audit for propriety all accounts, claims, and demands against the town. The finance director, or his/her designee, shall draw checks only on the basis of duly approved invoices, claims or payrolls which checks will be valid only when signed by the town manager and one member of the town commission. The finance director shall sign checks in the absence of the town manager. In the absence or inability of both the town manager and the finance director, the signatures of two (2) members of the town commission are authorized. 
(Code 1972, § 2-27; Ord. No. 688, § 2, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 703, § 3, 5-6-03) 
Sec. 2-55. - Town attorney. 
    It shall be the duty of the town attorney to institute and carry on all actions at law and in equity in favor of the town to final judgment and defend all suits brought against the town where a defense should be made; to appear at the county court when so notified and he or a prosecutor appointed by the town shall prosecute all persons charged with the violation of any ordinance of the town; to investigate all titles on behalf of the town, and furnish written reports thereof, and to give his opinion, orally or in writing, on questions of law, to the officers of the town whenever officially requested; to reduce to writing the contracts where the town is a party, when requested; to keep a record of all opinions given by him in writing; at the request of the town commission and/or other agencies of the town, if convenient, the town attorney shall be present for consultation and/or guidance at meetings. 
(Code 1972, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-56. - Defense and indemnification of officers and employees. 
(a)  As used in this section, "official" shall mean any officer, or member of a board, or committee, whether appointed or elected, or any employee of the town. 
(b)  In any court action in which a current or former official of the town is named as a defendant in his or her individual capacity resulting from any alleged act or omission in the course of his or her duties as an official, the town commission shall provide for the defense of the current or former official or at that person's option, shall reimburse attorneys fees and costs incurred by that official in his or her defense upon the final determination of the action. 
(c)  In the event that any current or former official of the town is found liable in his or her individual capacity as the result of any alleged act or omission in the course of duties of the official, the town commission shall indemnify the official to the extent of the judgment, upon the final determination thereof, including any interest, trial and other costs and attorneys fees which may be awarded against the official. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any official of the town if the alleged act or omission of the official is judicially determined to have been committed in bad faith or with malicious purpose or in a manner exhibiting wanton and willful disregard of human rights, safety, or property, or while the official was acting outside the course and scope of his or her office or employment. In such cases, if the town commission has provided for the defense of the official, the official shall be required to reimburse the town for the costs and attorneys fees incurred by the town in providing such defense. 
(e)  The provisions of the section shall be applied retroactively for the benefit of any person who was an official of the town at the time the cause of action accrued or during subsequent actions in that or collateral cases. 
(Code 1972, § 2-8; Ord. No. 578, § 1, 7-5-89) 
Sec. 2-57. - Non-interference with town officers or employees. 
    Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigation, the town commission or its members shall deal with town officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the town manager solely through the town manager and neither the town commission nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. No. 612, 6-4-91) 
Secs. 2-58-2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-76. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the "Town of Highland Beach Code of Ethics for Public Officers." 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § 2, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 2-77. - Intent and purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to strengthen the quality of representative government through ethical principles governing the conduct of the town's elected and appointed officials. It is important to assure that, the policies and decisions made by public officers are made through established processes of government, that public officers do not utilize their public office for private or personal benefit, that public officers avoid actions which create the appearance of impropriety, and that the public has confidence in the integrity of town government and the town's public officers. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § 2, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 2-78. - Definitions. 
    References in this article to the Florida State Statutes shall be interpreted as meaning the Florida State Statutes as amended from time to time. 
    Business entity shall have the meaning ascribed in F.S. § 112.312(5). 
    Candidate shall have the meaning ascribed in F.S. § 112.312(6). 
    Conflict or conflict of interest shall have the meaning ascribed in F.S. § 112.312(8). 
    Gift shall have the meaning ascribed in F.S. § 112.312(12a). 
    Public officer shall have the meaning ascribed in F.S. 112.313(1). 
    Relative shall have the meaning ascribed in F.S. § 112.312(21). 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § 2, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 2-79. - Acknowledgement. 
    All public officers of the town and candidates for town elective office, upon appointment, election, or qualifying, are required to submit a signed statement to be provided by the town clerk acknowledging that they have received, read, understand, and agree to be bound by the Town of Highland Beach code of ethics for public officers. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § 2, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 2-80. - Applicability of Chapter 112, Florida Statutes. 
    The Town of Highland Beach Code of Ethics for Public Officers is an adoption, in its entirety, of F.S. Ch. 112 Public Officers and Employees: General Provisions, Part III, Code of Ethics for Public Officers and Employees (F.S. §§ 112.311-112.326). 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § 2, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 2-81. - Procedures on complaints of violations. 
    Written complaints of alleged violations shall be filed with the Florida Commission on Ethics as outlined in F.S. § 112.324. Blank forms for submitting the written complaint shall be made available by the office of the town clerk to any individual requesting such a form. The address for submitting the complaint (either via U.S. mail or via electronic submission) to the Florida Commission on Ethics shall be made clearly visible on the complaint form. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § 2, 7-6-10) 
Secs. 2-82-2-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMITTEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, adopted June 5, 2018, added a new art. V, §§ 2-96-2-101, 2-135-2-141, 2-155-2-160 as set out herein and renamed former art. V, code enforcement board, §§ 2-96-2-107, as art. V, div. 2, §§ 2-110-2-121 which derived from Ord. No. 09-002, § 2, adopted Apr. 7, 2009; Ord. No. 09-003, § 1, adopted May 5, 2009; Ord. No. 11-001, § 1, adopted May 3, 2011; and Ord. No. 15-008 , § 2, adopted Jan. 5, 2016. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board or board shall mean and include any board or committee of the town, both regulatory and advisory, at least one member of whom is appointed by the town commission, and which is established by ordinance or resolution. Board shall not be construed to include the town commission. 
    Inadequate attendance shall mean a member's absence at three (3) or more consecutive regular meetings of a board. A member shall be deemed absent if the member attends less than seventy (70) percent of a meeting, or a member is absent at thirty (30) percent or more of the regularly scheduled meetings of a board during a calendar year. 
    Member shall mean an individual selected to serve on any board, whether regular or alternate, as appointed by the town commission. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-97. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all boards, both regulatory and advisory, of the town and shall govern all members thereof, both regular and alternate. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-98. - Removal of board members. 
(a)  The town clerk shall certify to the town commission the inadequate attendance of any member and that the member has received written notification of the member's inadequate attendance. A member who has inadequate attendance shall be deemed automatically removed as a member of the board on the date that the town clerk provides certification to the town commission. The vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original selection. 
(b)  (1)  Except as provided under subsection (a), and except as otherwise provided by general or special law, a member of a board shall serve at the pleasure of the town commission notwithstanding that the member's appointment may be for a specified term. No member derives any property rights in the position on the board. 
(2)  The town commission may remove a board member appointed by the town commission for any reason or no reason by a majority vote of the membership of the town commission. The removal shall take effect immediately or upon any later date which the town commission may specify. 
(3)  The vacancy of an appointed board member shall be filled in the same manner as the original selection. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18; Ord. No. 18-006 , § 1, 8-7-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-006 , § 1, adopted Aug. 7, 2018, repealed § 2-98 which pertained to attendance at town commission meetings by the chairperson, and renumbered former § 2-99, removal of board members, as § 2-98, § 2-100, procedure for appointment and filling vacancies; qualification for membership of boards and committees; terms, as § 2-99, and § 2-101, attendance records, as § 2-100. Former § 2-98 derived from Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, adopted June 5, 2018. 
Sec. 2-99. - Procedure for appointment and filling vacancies; qualification for membership of boards and committees; terms. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, appointments to boards shall be filled by the town commission in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The chairperson of each board shall interview new applicants and reappointment applicants for the board and provide a recommendation to the town commission. Such recommendation shall be provided to the town clerk within a time frame so as to provide for the efficient appointment of board members. 
(2)  The town commission shall interview board members who desire reappointment and/or new applicants, regarding the vacancy to be filled. 
(3)  After the town commission has completed such interviews, it shall, in public session, select the person needed to fill such vacancy. A motion appointing a person to a town board shall require an affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the town commission. 
(b)  As a condition of eligibility for appointment and to serve as a member of any board, a person shall be a resident of the town and shall meet such other eligibility requirements as may be established by ordinance or resolution. However, residency in the town shall not be required for membership by any town employee on a board. 
(c)  A board member may become eligible for appointment to a different board by filing his/her conditional resignation with the town clerk, the effective date of which resignation shall be immediately upon appointment to a different board. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided in this article, the term for all boards shall be three (3) years and no board member may serve more than two (2) consecutive terms on the same board without first taking a one-year hiatus from the board. Appointments for partial terms shall not count toward the two-term limit. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18; Ord. No. 18-006 , § 1, 8-7-18) 
Note- See editor's note at § 2-98. 
Sec. 2-100. - Attendance records. 
    The town clerk shall maintain an attendance record of the members of all town boards which shall be furnished to the town clerk on a quarterly basis by each board. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18; Ord. No. 18-006 , § 1, 8-7-18) 
Note- See editor's note at § 2-98. 
Secs. 2-101-2-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD 

Sec. 2-110. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Code enforcement officer means any authorized agent or employee of the town whose duty it is to ensure code compliance. 
    Enforcement board means the town code enforcement board. 
    Special magistrate means an attorney admitted to the Florida Bar who possesses experience in zoning and land use law, building control and administrative law, and has been designated by the town commission with the power and authority to hold hearings and assess fines against violators of the town codes. In such instances, the special magistrate shall act in lieu of the code enforcement board. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-111. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town by providing an equitable, expeditious, effective and inexpensive method of enforcing the hereinafter described codes of the town. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-112. - Applicability. 
(a)  The code enforcement board or special magistrate shall enforce and have jurisdiction to enforce all technical codes in force in the town, including, but not limited to, occupational license, fire, building, zoning and sign codes. Effective with the adoption of Ordinance No. 11-001-O, the code enforcement board shall be reestablished and shall have jurisdiction to enforce all technical codes in force in the town in place of the special magistrate. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer may, in his/her discretion, refer violations of this Code to the court having jurisdiction in the county. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-113. - Organization. 
(a)  Generally. The town commission shall appoint a seven-member code enforcement board and legal counsel for the board or, may appoint a special magistrate in place of the code enforcement board. 
(b)  Residency requirement; appointments. Members of the enforcement board shall be residents of the town. Appointments shall be made on the basis of experience or interest in the fields of zoning and building control. The membership of the enforcement board shall, whenever possible, include: 
(1)  An architect; 
(2)  A businessman; 
(3)  An engineer; 
(4)  A general contractor; 
(5)  A subcontractor; and 
(6)  A realtor. 
(c)  Terms of office; vacancies; absence from meetings. All appointments to the enforcement board shall be made for staggered terms of three (3) years. A member may be reappointed for one successive term upon approval of the town commission, except that no member may serve for more than six (6) consecutive years. Appointments to fill any vacancy on the enforcement board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. 
(d)  Chairperson; quorum. The members of the enforcement board shall elect a chairperson, who shall be a voting member, from among its members. The presence of four (4) or more members shall constitute a quorum of the enforcement board. 
(e)  Counsel. The town attorney firm shall either be counsel to the enforcement board or may assist staff in presenting cases before the board. 
(f)  Special magistrate. A special magistrate shall be an attorney admitted to the Florida Bar who possesses experience in zoning and land use law, building control, code enforcement, and administrative law. A special magistrate shall not be a town employee, but shall enter into an agreement to provide professional services at a rate established by the town commission. The town shall provide necessary and reasonable clerical and administrative support to enable a special magistrate to perform his or her duties. A special magistrate shall not be authorized to hire or use the services of any other person except those provided by the town to assist him or her in the performance of his or her duties. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-114. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the code inspector to initiate enforcement proceedings of the various codes and ordinances; however, no member of the enforcement board nor the special magistrate shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c), if a violation of the codes or ordinances is found, the code enforcement officer shall notify the violator and give him a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the code enforcement officer may utilize whatever powers are available to him under the town building code and related codes or may notify the enforcement board or the special magistrate and request a hearing pursuant to the procedure in section 2-115. Written notice of such hearing shall be mailed or delivered to the violator, and posted, as provided in section 2-120. If the violation is corrected and then recurs or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code enforcement officer, the case may be presented to the enforcement board or the special magistrate even if the violation has been corrected prior to the board hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(c)  If the code enforcement officer has a reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the code enforcement officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may utilize whatever powers are available to him under the town building code and related codes or may proceed directly to the procedure in section 2-115. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-115. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  Upon request of the code enforcement officer, the town manager may call hearings of the enforcement board. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings by the enforcement board or the special magistrate and all hearings shall be open to the public. The town clerk shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by the enforcement board or the special magistrate. 
(b)  Each case before the enforcement board or the special magistrate shall be presented by either the town attorney firm or by a member of the town's administrative staff. 
(c)  The enforcement board or the special magistrate shall proceed to hear the cases on the agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The enforcement board or the special magistrate shall take testimony from the code enforcement officer and the alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the enforcement board or the special magistrate shall issue findings of fact, based on evidence of record and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with powers granted herein. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed if the order is not complied with by that date. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-116. - Powers. 
    The enforcement board or the special magistrate shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings; 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may be served by the town's police department; 
(3)  Subpoena evidence; 
(4)  Take testimony under oath; 
(5)  Issue orders having the force of law commanding whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance; 
(6)  Perform such other duties, in an advisory capacity, as directed by the town commission. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-117. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  Generally. The code enforcement board or the special magistrate, upon notification by the code enforcement officer that an order of the code enforcement board or the special master has not been complied with by the set time, or upon the finding that a repeat violation has been committed, may order the violator to pay a fine in an amount specified in this section for each day the violation continues past the date set for compliance or, in the case of a repeat violation, for each day the repeat violation continues, beginning with the date the repeat violation is found to have occurred by the code enforcement officer. 
(b)  Amount of fines. 
(1)  A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for a first violation and shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for a repeat violation. If the code enforcement board or the special magistrate finds the violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code enforcement board or the special magistrate may impose a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation. 
(2)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the code enforcement board or the special magistrate shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The gravity of the violation; 
b.  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
c.  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(3)  The code enforcement board or the special magistrate may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Administrative costs related to the prosecution of code enforcement cases. Costs incurred by the town in the successful prosecution of a code enforcement case shall be assessed against the violator pursuant to F.S. § 162.07(2). The amount of these costs shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town commission. The code enforcement board or the special magistrate shall not have authority to reduce or eliminate the administrative costs assessed against a violator pursuant to this section. 
(d)  Fine imposed. A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against personal property, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant to this part shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this section runs in favor of the town, and the mayor may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this section. However, the town commission shall not review an order of the code enforcement board or special magistrate. Only the code enforcement board or the special magistrate have the power to reduce code enforcement liens (but not administrative costs) pursuant to the provisions contained in this article. The mayor shall execute a satisfaction or release of lien upon direction of the building official. After three (3) months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the code enforcement board or the special magistrate may authorize the town attorney to foreclose on the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this section may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead property under Section 4, Article X of the Florida State Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-118. - Duration of lien. 
    No lien provided under this article shall continue for a period longer than twenty (20) years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-119. - Appeals. 
    An aggrieved party, including the town commission, may appeal a final administrative order of the enforcement board or the special magistrate to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the enforcement board or the special magistrate. An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-120. - Notices. 
    All notices required by this article shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested; by hand delivery by the code enforcement officer, sheriff or other law enforcement officer, or other person designated by the commission; and/or by other methods provided for in F.S. § 162.12, including posting, publication and substitute service. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-121. - Provisions of local government code enforcement boards act supplemental. 
    It is the legislative intent of F.S. §§ 162.01-162.12 to provide an additional or supplemental means of obtaining compliance with local codes. Nothing contained in such sections shall prohibit the town commission from enforcing its codes by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Secs. 2-122-2-134. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NATURAL RESOURCES PRESERVATION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-135. - Created; composition; terms of office. 
    A natural resources preservation advisory board is hereby created, consisting of seven (7) members, each of whom shall be appointed by the town commission for a term of three (3) years. The regular term of a board member shall commence on May 1 and shall expire on April 30 of the third year following appointment. Each member of the board shall serve until the expiration of the member's term, or until a successor is appointed. The town commission shall initially appoint members for staggered terms; however, no terms shall extend beyond six (6) consecutive years. In the event a member is appointed for a term that will continue beyond the six (6) consecutive years limit, the member shall be allowed to complete the term. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-136. - Qualifications for membership. 
    Members of the natural resources preservation advisory board shall be appointed from the residents of the town who shall be knowledgeable concerning environmental issues and problems, and concerned with the need to effect reasonable solutions thereto. Membership of the board may be composed of both laymen and professional representatives from such related fields of study as are pertinent to the scope of environmental problems, including the fields of law, biology, chemistry and engineering. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-137. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the natural resources preservation advisory board shall be filled by appointment of the town commission for the unexpired term of the membership vacated pursuant to section 2-100 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-138. - Organization; rules of procedure; quorum; records. 
(a)  An organizational meeting of the natural resources preservation advisory board shall be held on May 1 of each year, or as soon thereafter as is practicable, for the purpose of electing officers for the ensuing year. A chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be elected for a one year term by the board. The board may adopt rules of procedure to govern the conduct of its business. At least one regular meeting of the board shall be held each quarter, and special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any three (3) members of the board. 
(b)  Four (4) members in attendance shall constitute a quorum. 
(c)  Minutes shall be kept of the proceedings at each meeting and shall record the official acts taken by the board. All meetings, records and files of the board shall be open and available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-139. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the natural resources preservation advisory board shall be to provide constructive advice and counsel to town departments and boards, and to the town commission, with a broad outlook toward environmental and natural resources preservation, protection, and conservation. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-140. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the natural resources preservation advisory board shall include the following: 
(a)  Coordinate activities related to regular beach clean-up events. 
(b)  Assist the sea turtle program with activities related to the program and recruitment of volunteers. 
(c)  Review existing and proposed town ordinances which affect the environment, and advise the town commission regarding the need for modifications or changes to such ordinances. 
(d)  Assist in the effort to encourage homeowners and associations to keep adequate levels of vegetation on the beach in order to avoid erosion. 
(e)  Promoting green landscaping and advocating environmental concerns relating to plastics, etc. 
(f)  Make recommendations about regulations related to beach cleaning as the board sees fit. 
(g)  Assist the town commission, upon the commission request, with items and issues related to waterways within the corporate limits of the town including boat wakes, manatee protection and mangroves. 
(h)  Perform other reviews as assigned or requested by the town commission. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-141. - Advisory capacity. 
    The actions decisions and recommendations of the natural resources preservation advisory board shall not be final or binding on the town commission but shall be advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Secs. 2-142-2-154. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINANCIAL ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-155. - Created; composition; terms of office. 
    A financial advisory board is hereby created, consisting of seven (7) members, each of whom shall be appointed by the town commission for a term of three (3) years. The regular term of a board member shall commence on May 1 and shall expire on April 30 of the third year following appointment. Each member of the board shall serve until the expiration of the member's term, or until a successor is appointed. The town commission shall initially appoint members for staggered terms; however, no terms shall extend beyond six (6) consecutive years. In the event a member is appointed for a term that will continue beyond the six (6) consecutive years limit, the member shall be allowed to complete the term. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-156. - Qualifications for membership. 
    Members of the financial advisory board shall be appointed from the residents of the town who shall have expertise applicable to municipal finance issues and problems and who shall be concerned with the need to effect reasonable solutions thereto. Membership of the board may be composed of both laymen and professional representatives from such related fields of study as are pertinent to the scope of municipal finance, including the fields of law, accounting, and finance. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-157. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the financial advisory board shall be filled by appointment of the town commission for the unexpired term of the membership vacated pursuant to section 2-100 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-158. - Organization; rules of procedure; quorum; records. 
(a)  An organizational meeting of the financial advisory board shall be held on May 1 of each year, or as soon thereafter as is practicable, for the purpose of electing officers for the ensuing year. A chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be elected for a one year term by the board. The board may adopt rules of procedure to govern the conduct of its business. At least one regular meeting of the board shall be held each quarter, and special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any three (3) members of the board. 
(b)  Four (4) members in attendance shall constitute a quorum. 
(c)  Minutes shall be kept of the proceedings at each meeting and shall record the official acts taken by the board. All meetings, records and files of the board shall be open and available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-159. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the financial advisory board shall be to provide constructive advice and counsel to town departments and boards, and to the town commission regarding the budget, capital improvement programs and recommendations regarding practices and procedures related to benefiting the financial condition of the town. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 2-160. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  The financial advisory board shall have the following duties, powers and responsibilities: 
(1)  Conduct ongoing, selective review of the annual budget and capital improvement programs with a view towards recommendations on format and content. 
(2)  Review the annual financial audit report and management letter concerning the town's fiscal status, practices and procedures. Copies of the report shall be forwarded by the town manager to the board promptly after receipt from the auditor. The board shall provide its comments and recommendations, including any pertinent comments relative to the status of all town special and reserve funds, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the audit report from the town manager. 
(3)  Perform special studies upon the board's own initiative or upon the request of the town commission on matters that could either directly or potentially have financial impact upon the town or could provide financial aid or assistance to the town. Such studies may include, but not be limited to, the interim as well as long-term aspects of the budgetary process, proposed legislation, programs, policies or regulations of other governmental bodies or agencies. 
(b)  Except as may be specifically provided by other ordinances of the town, the actions, decisions and recommendations of the financial advisory board shall not be final or binding on the town commission but shall be advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 18-004 , § 2, 6-5-18) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Food and food services, Ch. 10; licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15; signs and advertising, Ch. 23; zoning, Ch. 30; operation of vehicle while intoxicated, § 16-10; containers of alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles, § 16-11. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, F.S. Ch. 561 et seq.; local regulation of alcohol, F.S. § 562.45. 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    The definitions contained in F.S. § 561.01 are adopted by reference and shall apply in the interpretation and administration of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 4-1) 
Sec. 3-2. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, or any member of any firm or corporation, violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code, and in addition thereto, all licenses issued by the town may be revoked and forfeited in the discretion of the town commission. 
(Code 1972, § 4-21) 
Sec. 3-3. - Public intoxication. 
    Whoever shall be found in a state of intoxication in any street, park or other public place in the town shall be deemed guilty of violating this section of the Code. 
(Code 1972, § 4-14) 
State Law reference- Local ordinances on public intoxication, F.S. § 397.701. 
Sec. 3-4. - Drinking in public places. 
    No person shall drink any spirituous, vinous, malt or other intoxicating liquors in or upon any street, avenue, alley, park or other public way or place in the town. 
(Code 1972, § 4-15) 
Sec. 3-5. - Provisions supplemental to zoning ordinances. 
    The terms and conditions of this chapter are not to repeal any of the terms and provisions of the zoning ordinances, but shall be deemed supplemental thereto. 
(Code 1972, § 4-19) 
Sec. 3-6. - Hours of sale. 
    No person shall sell any intoxicating or alcoholic beverages, wine, beer or ale, to any other person, or open his place of business for the sale of any intoxicating or alcoholic beverages, wine, beer or ale earlier than 9:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday and 12:00 noon on Sunday. No person may sell any intoxicating or alcoholic beverages, wine, beer or ale, or keep his place of business open to the public for such sale later than 2:00 a.m. seven (7) days per week. 
(Code 1972, § 4-20) 
State Law reference- Municipalities may regulate the hours of sale of alcoholic beverages, F.S. §§ 562.14, 562.45. 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
County Code reference- Licensing of animals, impounding, rabies, etc., Code of Laws and Ordinances Relating to Palm Beach County Government, Ch. 4. 
Cross reference- Health, Ch. 11; licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 16; nuisances, Ch. 17; zoning, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Wildlife, F.S. Ch. 372; livestock, F.S. Ch. 534 et seq.; animal industry, F.S. Ch. 585; livestock at large, F.S. Ch. 588; cruelty to animals, F.S. Ch. 828; local animal control or cruelty ordinances, penalty, F.S. § 828.27l ; dangerous dogs, F.S. § 767.11 et seq. 

Sec. 4-1. - Bird sanctuary-Designated. 
    The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the town is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1972, § 5-1) 
Sec. 4-2. - Same-Unlawful to molest birds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to trap, hunt or shoot or molest any bird or wildfowl in any manner or to rob bird nests or wildfowl nests; except, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregated in such number in any particular locality within the town to the extent that complaint is made to the town manager that such birds constitute a nuisance to health or property, a meeting shall be called by the town manager and representatives of the Audubon Society, bird club, garden club, humane society, or any or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the town, after having given at least three (3) days' actual notice of the time and place of the meeting. If as a result of the meeting no acceptable alternative is found to abate the nuisance, then the birds may be destroyed in such a manner and in such number as is deemed advisable by the town manager with the cooperation of the county sheriff. 
(Code 1972, § 5-2) 
Sec. 4-3. - Kennels. 
    The construction and/or maintenance of kennels and/or any premises used for breeding or boarding of cats or dogs in any zoning district within the town is prohibited. 
(Code 1972, § 5-3) 
Sec. 4-4. - Vaccination tags worn by dogs, cats. 
    Every person who owns, keeps or harbors any dog or cat over four (4) months of age shall secure a tag or license for each such dog or cat from the county animal regulation division, which requires evidence of vaccination for rabies by a licensed veterinarian. The tag shall be securely fastened about the animal's neck so as to be clearly visible at all times. 
(Code 1972, § 5-4) 
State Law reference- Rabies vaccinations for dogs, cats and ferrets, F.S. § 828.30. 
Sec. 4-5. - Running at large. 
    No person owning or having possession, charge, custody or control of any dog or cat shall cause, permit or allow the animal to stray, run, be, go or in any other manner to be at large upon any public property, or on private property of others without the express consent of the owner of such private property. "At large" shall mean off the premises of the owner or custodian of such animal and not under the control of a leash, cord, chain or mechanical restraint. In order for an animal to be allowed on public property or private property of others, it shall be restrained by a leash, cord, chain or mechanical restraint of dependable strength not exceeding ten (10) feet. Animal walkers are also required to carry a plastic bag, "pooper scooper" or other device sufficient for the removal of waste. Public and private property shall include the beach front, the Atlantic Ocean and any other bodies of water within the town limits. 
(Code 1972, § 5-5; Ord. No. 688, § 3, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 4-6. - Creation of nuisance. 
    The owner of any animal which habitually barks, whines, howls or causes other objectionable noise or which is at large, chases or runs after persons or vehicles, or which destroys or damages any property of another person or which causes serious annoyance to a neighboring residence and interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of his property, or which is otherwise offensive so as to create a nuisance shall be deemed to be committing an act in violation of this section. 
(Code 1972, § 5-6) 
State Law reference- Damage by dogs, F.S. Ch. 767. 
Sec. 4-7. - Penalties for violation of sections 4-4 through 4-6. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of sections 4-4 through 4-6 shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 5-7) 
Sec. 4-8. - Lighting restrictions for protection of sea turtles. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the threatened and endangered sea turtles which nest along the beaches of the town from light sources that disrupt their nesting and hatching. 
(b)  Definition. The "beach" is defined for purposes of this section as being that land along the area adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean extending westward to the dune or the permanent vegetation area within the town. 
(c)  Lighting restrictions along beach. No artificial light shall illuminate any area of the beach which may be used for turtle nesting and hatching during the period from March 1 to October 31 of each year, from dusk to dawn. 
(d)  Enforcement, penalty. Anyone violating any provisions of this section shall be punished in accordance with all provisions of this Code including but not limited to reference of the violation to the code enforcement board. 
(Code 1972, § 5-8; Ord. No. 703, § 4, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 718, 8-1-06) 
State Law reference- Rules authorized to protect coastal areas used by sea turtles, F.S. § 161.163; protection of marine turtles, nests and eggs, F.S. § 370.12. 
Chapter 5 - BEACHES AND BOATS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, Ch. 6; land clearance, Ch. 13; licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15; nuisances, Ch. 17; planning and development, Ch. 20; zoning, Ch. 30; coastal construction, § 6-76 et seq.; natural vegetative cover on beach dunes, § 28-37. 
State Law reference- Tidal lands and bulkheads, F.S. § 253.12 et seq.; deposit of material in tidewater or on wharf or quay, F.S. §§ 309.01, 309.02; financial assistance for local governments in acquiring beach property, F.S. § 375.065; coastal management, F.S. § 380.20 et seq.; public swimming and bathing facilities, F.S. Ch. 514. 

Sec. 5-1. - Parking of boats. 
    No boat shall be parked upon land visible from any public road within the town unless sheltered from view or placed in an enclosed garage, except for the express purpose of loading and unloading such boat. 
(Code 1972, § 6-1; Ord. No. 688, § 5, 1-2-01) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of vessels, F.S. §§ 327.22, 327.60. 
Secs. 5-2, 5-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 688, § 6, adopted Jan. 2, 2001, amended the Code by deleting former §§ 5-2 and 5-3, which prohibited the operation of public bathing beaches and set forth penalties therefor, and which derived from Code 1972, §§ 6-2 and 6-3. 
Sec. 5-4. - Rules, regulations for use of beaches. 
(a)  All persons using the beaches within the town shall comply with and abide by the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  No person shall dress or undress on the beach except in taking off or putting on dressing robes and shoes. 
(2)  No person shall dress or act indecently or be attired in indecent apparel. 
(3)  No person shall use loud, boisterous or profane language. 
(4)  No person shall place or deposit on the beach any loose paper or other trash or refuse, but shall deposit same in receptacles. 
(5)  No motor vehicle shall be driven upon the beaches without the previous written consent of the town commission. 
(b)  The violation of any of these rules and regulations shall constitute an offense against this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 6-4) 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of the landing of seaplanes, F.S. § 330.36; exposure of sexual organs, F.S. § 800.03; operation of aircraft in careless or reckless manner, F.S. § 860.13. 
Sec. 5-5. - Removal of sand, earth from beach. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to take or remove from the ocean beach within the limits of the town any sand or earth. 
(Code 1972, § 6-5) 
State Law reference- Coastal construction and excavation, F.S. § 161.053. 
Sec. 5-6. - Unlawful deposit of glass, crockery, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, lay or deposit a glass bottle or piece of crockery or any glass or glassware, or any part thereof, on any beach, whether the ocean beach or Inland Waterways Canal, or other part of the waterfront. 
(Code 1972, § 6-6) 
State Law reference- Littering, F.S. § 403.413. 
Sec. 5-7. - Living aboard boats. 
    No person shall live aboard a boat within the corporate limits of the town. This prohibition shall apply whether the boat is located in any waterways or canals or upon land within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Code 1972, § 6-7) 
Cross reference- Parking, storage or use of major recreational equipment, Ch. 30, § 5.12. 
Sec. 5-8. - Anchoring of watercraft in the navigable waters of the town; registration of watercraft. 
(a)  No person may anchor any watercraft in the navigable waters within the corporate limits of the Town of Highland Beach, with the exception of watercraft fastened to shore based docks. 
(b)  Violations of this section shall be subject to enforcement by the code enforcement board of the town. 
(Ord. No. 621, §§ 1-3, 2-4-92; Ord. No. 688, § 6, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 5-9. - Littering. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Beaches means that area abutting the Atlantic Ocean consisting of predominantly sand, whether below or above the mean high water mark. 
(b)  Prohibited. No person shall leave or deposit any trash, refuse or debris on any beach. Any such trash, refuse or debris shall be placed, when available, in a container clearly marked by the town for such purpose. If there is no receptacle, or if the receptacle is full, all trash or refuse must be removed from the beach. 
(c)  Private beaches. In regard to that portion of the beach determined to be private property, no person shall place or deposit on any such beach any trash, refuse or debris. Further, the owner of the private property shall not allow trash, refuse or debris to remain on his property for a period of time greater than seven (7) days after notification by the town. Any such trash, refuse or debris located upon private beachfront property shall be properly disposed of in a manner otherwise provided by the codes and regulations of the town. 
(d)  Violation. Any private property owner found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the town's code enforcement ordinance, and subject to penalties prescribed by the code enforcement board for each day a violation is determined to exist. 
(Ord. No. 693, 8-7-01) 
Sec. 5-10. - Beach rakers. 
    All beach rakers are to place identification and phone numbers on their tractors. All beach rakers are to be registered with the town. 
(Ord. No. 708, 7-6-04) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 708, adopted July 6, 2004, enacted provisions designated as § 5-9. Inasmuch as there already exists such a section said provisions have been redesignated as § 5-10 to avoid duplication of numbers. 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Elevators, dumbwaiters and moving walks, Ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; health, Ch. 11; housing, Ch. 12; licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15; planning and development, Ch. 20; resource protection standards, § 20-101 et seq.; floodplains, § 20-301 et seq.; sewers, Ch. 22; signs and advertising, Ch. 23; water system, Ch. 29; zoning, Ch. 30; code enforcement board, § 2-96 et seq.; storing building materials, § 25-4; newsracks, § 25-31 et seq.; development review, Ch. 30, Art. III; franchises, App. A et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal building code inspection fees, F.S. § 166.222; contracting, F.S. Ch. 489; building construction standards, F.S. Ch. 553. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Dune walkover structures. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Town of Highland Beach by protecting the coastal barrier dunes from erosion and deterioration and to preserve for future generations such dunes which are a valuable natural resource. 
(b)  Dune walkover structures required. All owners of ocean front property shall be required to erect dune walkover structures across any sand dune located on the owner's property. The term owner as applied to property in which the developer has turned over control to a condominium association or homeowner's association shall mean the nonprofit corporation which constitutes the condominium association or homeowner's association. 
(c)  Department of Environmental Protection permit required. Prior to construction of any dune walkover structure, each property owner to which this section is applicable shall file an application for a permit to construct the required elevated dune walkover structure(s) with the Department of Environmental Protection. A copy of the application filed by the owner with the Department of Environmental Protection shall be filed with the town's building department within ten (10) days after the application is filed with the Department of Environmental Protection. The application shall be prepared and filed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection. The building department of the town shall, if requested by the owner, assist the owner in preparing the application to the Department of Environmental Protection. The elevated dune structure shall only be built in accordance with the permit issued by the Department of Environmental Protection and a copy of the Department of Environmental Protection permit issued shall be filed with the town building department. 
(d)  Exemptions. The town commission may grant an exemption to any property owner that submits sufficient proof to the town commission that the dune over which the elevated walkover structure is to be built is not in need of any protection due to an existing in-ground stairs or lack of pedestrian traffic over the dune. In the event an exemption of the latter type is granted, the town commission, upon notice to the property owner and after public hearing, may revoke the exemption in the event circumstances change such that the need to protect the dune becomes manifest. 
(e)  Enforcement. In the event of noncompliance with the terms of this section by a property owner, the building official shall issue a notice of violation to the offending property owner, and the violation shall be referred to the code enforcement board for appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 577, §§ 1-6, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 677, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 12-002, § 4, 9-4-12) 
Cross reference- Coastal construction code, § 6-76 et seq. 
Secs. 6-2-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 12-002, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, repealed Arts. II-IV and VI-X, and added a new Art. II to read as herein set out. Former Arts. II-IV and VI-X derived from the 1972 Code and pertained to the building code, coastal construction code, plumbing code, gas code, mechanical installations, electrical code, and swimming pool code. Similar provisions have been enacted under this Art. II. 

Sec. 6-26. - Code adopted. 
(a)  The Florida Building Code, as developed by the Florida Building Commission and adopted by state statute, is hereby incorporated, by reference as the building code for the Town of Highland Beach, with the amendments set forth in this article. 
(b)  A copy of the above referenced code shall be kept on file in the town building department and shall be available for inspection by members of the public. 
(Ord. No. 12-002, § 5, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 6-27. - Administrative amendments to Florida Building Code. 
    The town has amended and supplemented Chapter 1 of the Florida Building Code through the adoption of "Administrative Amendments." A copy of these administrative amendments shall be kept on file in the town building department and shall be available for inspection by members of the public. 
(Ord. No. 12-002, § 5, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 13-003, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 6-28. - Building permit fees. 
    The schedule of building permit fees and related fees and charges shall be established by resolution of the town commission. 
(Ord. No. 12-002, § 5, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 6-29. - Property maintenance code. 
(a)  The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code for the town and incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  Any violation of the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code shall be a violation of this Code and shall be enforced in any manner provided by law or equity, including, but not limited to, the initiation of code enforcement proceedings pursuant to Article IV of Chapter 2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-002, § 5, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 6-30. - Height of ground floor area. 
    The ground floor living quarters and emergency power sources of all structures located west of State Road A1A shall not be less than three (3) feet above the crown of the road on which the property fronts. 
(Ord. No. 12-002, § 5, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 6-31. - Special flood hazard area provisions. 
    The Florida Building Code, Residential, is hereby amended by the following technical amendments. 
R322.2.1 Elevation requirements. 
1  Building and structures in flood hazard areas not designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
2  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot (305 mm), or to the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
3  In areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), buildings and structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM plus 1 foot, or at least 3 feet if a depth number is not specified. 
4  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
Exception: Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation, including basements whose floors are not below grade on all sides, shall meet the requirements of Section R322.2.2. 
R322.3.2. Elevation requirements. 
1.  All buildings and structures erected within coastal high-hazard areas shall be elevated so that the lowest portion of all structural members supporting the lowest floor, with the exception of mat or raft foundations, piling, pile caps, columns, grade beams and bracing is elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
2.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides are prohibited. 
3.  The use of fill for structural support is prohibited. 
4.  Minor grading, and the placement of minor quantities of fill, shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios and walkways. 
Exception: Walls and partitions enclosing areas below the design flood elevation shall meet the requirements of Sections R322.3.4 and R322.3.5. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 2, 8-2-16 ) 
Secs. 6-32-6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 

Secs. 6-51-6-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 

Secs. 6-76-6-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEAWALLS; BULKHEADS; RETAINING WALLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Bulkheads under subdivision regulations, § 26-30; zoning of bulkheads, seawalls and groins, Ch. 30, Art. V, § 3. 
State Law reference- Beach and shore preservation, F.S. Ch. 161; jurisdiction over bulkhead lines, F.S. § 253.128; location of bulkhead lines, F.S. § 253.1221; deposit of material in tidewater, F.S. § 309.01; environmental regulation, F.S. § 403.801 et seq. 

Sec. 6-126. - Penalties. 
    The town shall enforce the provisions of this article in any manner provided by law or equity, including, but not limited to, the initiation of code enforcement proceedings pursuant to Article IV of Chapter 2 of this Code. Each day in which any violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1972, § 21-6; Ord. No. 12-002, § 6, 9-4-12) 
State Law reference- Administrative fines under Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act, F.S. § 162.09. 
Sec. 6-127. - Construction. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever any property owner, including persons, firms, partnerships, corporations or combinations thereof who has legal or equitable title in and to real property situated within the town abutting or adjacent to any natural or artificial canal, stream or other body of water desires to construct and/or erect seawalls, bulkheads, retaining walls, revetments, rubble mound structures, groins or other aggregate materials, the town manager shall, after receiving the application, notify the town commission. The petitioner shall submit plans to the building department. The town commission shall either approve or deny the petition, after receiving proof of mailing that the property owner has notified the owner of the adjacent property on either side. 
(b)  Location on Intracoastal Waterway. The bulkhead line along all shores of the Intracoastal Waterway within the town shall be coincident with the right-of-way lines established for the Intracoastal Waterway, now of record in Plat Book 17, of the county records, except in locations where existing walls or bulkheads are located landward of such lines. In the latter case, the existing bulkheads shall be deemed to be the bulkhead line or the extension thereof up to but not beyond the right-of-way line of the Intracoastal Waterway in such manner as to produce the greater advantage to the lands affected; provided, however, that in relating height planes to bulkhead lines, the right-of-way line of the Intracoastal Waterway shall determine. 
(c)  Approval required for groins and breakwaters. No groin, breakwater or other similar obstruction shall be erected or constructed in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean unless approved by the town commission as being consistent with the peace, health, safety and welfare of the town, its inhabitants, and the owners of property abutting on the Atlantic Ocean, and with the approval of all federal, state and county agencies with jurisdiction over such construction activities. 
(d)  Protection of ocean ridge. 
(1)  No quantity of soil, sand or rock shall for any purpose be removed or moved from the natural ocean ridge within one hundred twenty (120) feet of the easterly survey line or the vegetation line (as established in subsection (d)(3) below), whichever lies the furthest west, in such manner or extent as to result in the lowering of the elevation of any portion of an east-to-west profile of such ocean ridge below elevation plus eighteen (+18.00) feet above mean sea level except for the purposes of constructing a seawall with elevation of not less than sixteen (16) feet or a swimming pool with deck elevation of not less than plus eighteen (+18.00) feet above mean sea level. Such seawall or swimming pool shall be constructed a minimum of fifty (50) feet west of the easterly survey line or the vegetation line, whichever lies the furthest west. 
(2)  The exterior wall of any structure aboveground shall be constructed not less than fifty (50) feet west of the easterly survey line or the vegetation line, whichever line lies the furthest west. The foundations of such structures shall not be commenced until the contemplated seawall has been completed east of the proposed structure and approved by the building official. When such seawall has been completed, sand, soil and rock can be moved and removed below elevation plus eighteen (+18.00) feet above mean sea level; however, as a prerequisite to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a structure located on a plot where excavation has been accomplished below elevation plus eighteen (+18.00) feet above mean sea level and east of State Road A1A, the final grade must be restored in the area of the ridge to a minimum of plus eighteen (+18.00) feet above mean sea level. 
(3)  The vegetation line referred to in this article shall be determined by visual inspection and set by the town engineer or other duly authorized individual at the time site or building plans are presented for preliminary or final approval, and such line shall be the eastward edge of a sustained, living and continuous beach vegetation line running in a straight line and approximately parallel to the easterly survey line. 
(4)  There shall be no removal of any soil, sand, rock or vegetation from any lot east of State Road A1A, except: 
a.  A permit shall have been issued for construction of a reinforced concrete seawall with a finished elevation of sixteen (16) feet above mean sea level. 
b.  This permit shall require drawings by an engineer licensed by the state and approved by the town engineer. 
c.  This permit shall be issued only upon a concurrent building permit for a permanent building west of the wall having been approved. 
d.  The wall shall be located at least fifty (50) feet west of the easterly survey line or the vegetation line, whichever lies furthest west along the entire width of the property. 
e.  In addition, no building permit for either a seawall or a building to be built on the ocean ridge between State Road A1A and the ocean shall be issued until the plans for such construction have been approved by the appropriate agencies of both the state and county. 
f.  When a seawall or any structure is to be erected, sheet piling must be driven to maintain the dune and the protective vegetation. Erection of the seawall must be to the west of the sheet piling. 
(5)  The foundation of the building shall not be commenced until the seawall has been completed and no part of the completed building shall extend above or easterly of the seawall. 
(6)  The ground floor (containing apartments and/or public living areas) of all buildings and the final grade between buildings and between a building and the side property line shall in no case be less than eighteen (18) feet, and if the elevation of adjoining properties is higher than eighteen (18) feet the final grade shall be sloped up to such level or an adequately strong wall constructed to retain the higher grade of the adjoining property. 
(7)  Where alignment of existing seawalls or structures makes it impractical to comply with the setback established by Chapter 30 of this Code, the town commission, upon advice of the planning board, may authorize an adjustment of the wall to meet existing conditions, but in no event shall any part of the building extend east of the state coastal construction control line. 
(8)  Basements for structures will be permitted west of the seawall as part of a structure for which seawall and building permits shall have been issued. 
(9)  In the event of the construction of a building on the top of the ridge without first having erected a seawall, basements will be permitted only if they are at least one hundred twenty (120) feet west of the easterly survey line or vegetation line, whichever lies furthest west. The structure may follow the slope of the dune, but no excavating shall be permitted below eighteen (18) feet above mean sea level within one hundred twenty (120) feet west of the easterly survey line, or the vegetation line, whichever lies furthest west. 
(10)  None or any of the above work shall be done or any permit for a seawall be issued without prior approval of the town commission. 
(11)  Beach cleaning vehicles shall be allowed on the beaches between low tide and mean high water vegetation line (littoral zone). Such vehicles shall be allowed west of the littoral zone only upon written consent of the owners. The written consent shall be on file in the town hall and a copy retained by the driver of the vehicle. Except for beach cleaning vehicles, no motorized or trailer equipment of any kind shall be permitted to operate on the beach east of a seawall in place or under construction without town commission approval. 
In an emergency threatening life or property, the town manager or designee may give immediate approval for the use of emergency vehicles on the beach, to be followed up by other appropriate approvals within five (5) business days. 
(12)  The terms and conditions of subsection (d), where in conflict with the provisions of any other chapter of this Code, shall take precedence. 
(Code 1972, § 21-1; Ord. No. 12-002, § 6, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 6-128. - Approval required for bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls; required notification of abutting property owners. 
(a)  No bulkhead, seawall, or retaining wall shall be erected or constructed in any water, canal or lake, or on land abutting thereon, within the limits of the town, unless plans and specifications have been submitted to and approved by all federal, state and county agencies with jurisdiction over such construction activities, the town commission and the town consulting engineer, with a copy of such plans and specifications being filed with the town. All property owners abutting the proposed wall within one thousand (1,000) feet on the ocean or on the waterway shall be notified of the project by the town at the applicant's expense. 
(b)  All seawalls west of State Road A1A shall be in excess of plus six (+6.00) feet elevation above mean sea level. All seawalls on the Intracoastal Waterway and the Atlantic Ocean shall, at the discretion of the town engineer, have rip rap at the base to dissipate the wave energy and to protect the berm. 
(Code 1972, § 21-2; Ord. No. 12-002, § 6, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 18-011 , § 2, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 6-129. - Inspection. 
(a)  All construction under this article shall be performed in accordance with the Florida Building Code. The work shall be inspected by the building department of the town and shall be performed so as to meet building department acceptance and approval. 
(b)  All material to be incorporated in the work, all labor performed and all appliances shall be subject to the inspection and approval or rejection of the building department. All construction shall be inspected by the building department, unless otherwise directed. The contractor shall in no way be relieved of responsibility for the work or use of inferior material and construction methods. 
(Code 1972, § 21-3; Ord. No. 12-002, § 6, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 6-130. - Maintenance. 
    All seawalls, bulkheads and retaining walls now existing or hereafter erected, constructed or built shall be maintained and kept in good repair by the owner thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 21-4) 
Sec. 6-131. - Violations; building permits withheld. 
    Any owner of a seawall, bulkhead or retaining wall not complying with all provisions of this article shall not be entitled to nor granted a permit for constructing, enlarging or repairing, moving, demolishing or changing the occupancy of a building or structure, repairing or resurfacing roofing, installing air conditioning and heating systems, or installing a steam boiler, furnace, incinerator or other heat-producing apparatus or other appurtenances, jalousies, stormstops, fences, walls, fuel tanks, pumps, bottled gas and related equipment, groins, docks, swimming or wading pools, waterproofing and sand blasting, signs or awnings, nor granted a permit to do any other thing for which a permit is required by this Code, until such owner complies fully with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 21-5) 
Sec. 6-132. - Abatement of nuisances, injurious or dangerous conditions. 
(a)  Whenever it comes to the attention of the town manager that any property, public or private, adjacent to any natural or artificial canal, stream or other body of water requires the construction of or maintenance or repair of a seawall, bulkhead or retaining wall on the property in order to abate a public nuisance, or abate a condition which is injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood or community, or dangerous to the navigability of any canal, stream or other body of water, the town manager shall notify the code enforcement officer and the code enforcement board. The code enforcement board, after a notice of violation and notice of hearing has been issued by a code enforcement officer, shall hold a hearing for the purpose of receiving the testimony of the town engineer, building official or other town staff and the testimony of the property owner or other person having a beneficial interest in the property, and such witnesses as may have evidence material to a proper decision by the code enforcement board. The code enforcement board shall provide the property owner or other person having a beneficial interest therein with at least ten (10) days' written notice of the date, time, place and purpose of such hearing as provided for in F.S. § 162.12. The code enforcement board shall, following the hearing, make a determination as to whether the condition of the real property which is the subject of this proceeding constitutes a public nuisance, or is injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood or the community, or is dangerous to the navigability of any canal, stream or other body of water and shall either dismiss the matter or enter an order directing the person or persons upon whom notice of hearing was served to abate such public nuisance, injurious or dangerous condition within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of the order. The order shall forthwith be served upon the person upon whom notice of hearing was served either by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  When conditions and circumstances exist regarding the abatement of a public nuisance, injurious or dangerous condition pursuant to an order of the code enforcement board entered under the provisions hereinabove set forth so that strict compliance with the requirements of the order causes unnecessary hardship to the person subject to the order, the town manager may, upon written application made by the property owner during the time period prescribed in the order and upon a showing and determination of good cause therefor, grant one extension only of the time requirements hereinabove provided, not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(c)  If the person subject to an order of the code enforcement board refuses, fails or neglects to abate the public nuisance, injurious or dangerous condition within the period set forth in such order and any extension thereto, the code enforcement board may, without further notice, authorize the town to take such action as is necessary to abate such public nuisance, injurious or dangerous condition. The costs of such action, together with the highest legal interest charges, attorneys' fees and court costs, if any, shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and shall be collected in the manner provided by law. 
(d)  If an emergency exists with regard to any seawall, bulkhead or retaining wall, the town manager shall call for an immediate meeting of the town commission at which meeting an emergency shall be declared. The town manager shall be then authorized to carry out whatever directive is decreed in the declaration of emergency. 
(Code 1972, § 21-7; Ord. No. 12-002, § 6, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 16-005, § 2, 3-1-16 ) 
Secs. 6-133-6-247. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNA SITING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 7 of Ord. No. 12-002, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, renumbered Art. XI as Art. VI. 

Sec. 6-248. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 9 of Ord. No. 12-002, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, provided for the repeal of conflicting ordinances or parts of ordinances. Inasmuch as the content of § 6-248, specifically pertained to §§ 6-243 and 6-244 which were repealed by Ord. No. 12-002, at the discretion of the editor, § 6-248, preamble, has been removed. 
Sec. 6-249. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this article: 
    Antenna: A transmitting and/or receiving device used in telecommunications that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, including directional antennas, such as panel and microwave dish antennas, and omni-directional antennas, such as whips, excluding radar antennas, amateur radio and television antennas and satellite earth stations with antennas of less that six (6) feet in diameter. 
    Communication tower: A guyed, monopole or self-support/lattice tower, constructed as a freestanding structure, containing one or more antennas intended for transmitting or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication, excluding radar towers, amateur radio and television support structures and satellite earth stations with antennas less than six (6) feet in diameter. 
    Guyed tower: A communication tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Microwave dish antenna: A dish-like antenna used to link communication sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data. 
    Monopole tower: A communication tower consisting of a single pole or spire self supported by a permanent foundation, constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Panel antenna: A flat, rectangular antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. 
    Self-support/lattice tower: A communication tower that is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Stealth facility: Any communications facility which is designed to blend into the surrounding environment. Examples of stealth facilities include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing structure, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and communication towers designed to look like light poles or trees. 
    Whip antenna: A cylindrical antenna that transmits signals in three hundred sixty (360) degrees. 
(Ord. No. 666, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 6-250. - Intent. 
    The regulations and requirements of this article are intended to: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of communication towers and antennas within the town; 
(2)  Minimize adverse visual effects of communication towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(3)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; 
(4)  Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of communication towers and antennas by maximizing use of any new or existing communication towers through shared use (i.e., co-location) to reduce the number of towers needed. 
(Ord. No. 666, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 6-251. - Where permitted. 
(a)  Antennas. Rooftop or building mounted antennas may be permitted only on town property unless the standards and requirements set forth in section 6-252 and section 6-254 have been met. 
(b)  Communication towers. Freestanding communication towers may be permitted only on town property unless the standards and requirements set forth in section 6-253 and section 6-254 have been met. 
(c)  Prohibitions. The location of a new antenna (or any existing antenna not properly permitted or installed) or communications tower, other than those that have met the standards in this article, shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 666, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 6-252. - Antennas. 
(a)  Minimum standards. All building or rooftop antennas shall be subject to the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Antennas, and related equipment buildings, shall be located or screened to minimize the visual impact of the antenna upon adjacent properties and shall be of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building or structure upon which it is situated; 
(2)  No commercial advertising shall be allowed on an antenna; 
(3)  No signals, lights, or illumination shall be permitted on an antenna, unless required by the Federal Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration; 
(4)  Any related unmanned equipment building shall not contain more than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of gross floor area or be more than twelve (12) feet in height; and 
(5)  If the equipment building is located on the roof of the building, the area of the equipment building shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the roof area. 
(6)  Antennas shall be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) prior to issuance of a building permit by the town. 
(b)  Antenna types. To minimize adverse visual impacts, antenna types shall be selected based upon the following hierarchy. The applicant shall be required to demonstrate, in a technical manner acceptable to town staff and the town commission, why each choice in the hierarchy cannot be used for the particular application in order to justify the selection of an antenna type lower in the hierarchy. 
(1)  Stealth; 
(2)  Panel; 
(3)  Whip; 
(4)  Dish. 
(c)  Antenna dimensions: 
(1)  Omni-directional (whip) antennas or unicell antennas and their supports shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and fifteen (15) inches in diameter and must be constructed of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building. 
(2)  Directional or panel antennas and their supports shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height or two and one-half (21/2) feet in width and must be constructed of (a material or color which matches the exterior of the building or structure) materials and coloration which achieves maximum compatibility and minimum visibility. 
(3)  Satellite and microwave dish antennas located below sixty-five (65) feet above the ground may not exceed six (6) feet in diameter. Satellite and dish antennas located sixty-five (65) feet and higher above the ground may not exceed eight (8) feet in diameter. Ground-mounted dish antennas must be located or screened so as not to be visible from abutting public streets. 
(Ord. No. 666, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 6-253. - Communication towers. 
(a)  Minimum standards. Communication towers shall be subject to the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Land-use compatibility. Communication towers shall be located and buffered to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses. To help ensure such compatibility, each application for a proposed communication tower shall include all requirements for site plan approval as listed in section 30-33 of Chapter 30 entitled "Zoning," plus the following information: 
a.  The maximum height of the proposed tower; 
b.  The color or colors of the proposed tower; 
c.  The location of the proposed tower, placed upon an aerial photograph possessing a scale of not more than one inch equals three hundred feet (1? = 300'), indicating all adjacent land uses within a radius of three thousand (3,000) feet from all property lines of the proposed tower location site; 
d.  Such other additional information as may be required by town staff to fully review and evaluate the potential impact of the proposed tower. 
(2)  Report. A report shall be submitted, prepared by a licensed professional engineer, which describes the tower height and design, including a cross-section of the structure; through rational engineering analysis demonstrates the tower's compliance with applicable standards as set forth in the town building code, latest edition; and describes the tower's capacity, including number and type of antennas it can accommodate. 
(3)  Height/setbacks and related location requirements: 
a.  The height of a communications tower shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. Tower height shall be measured from the crown of the road of the nearest public street and shall further be subject to the requirements of Tables 1-3, which are not set out herein, but can found on file with the town. Town-approved lightening rods and safety lighting may exceed the maximum height to the extent necessary for proper operation of the tower. 
b.  Communication towers shall comply with the minimum setback requirements provided in Tables 1-3. 
c.  Communication towers shall comply with the minimum requirements relating to distances between towers as provided in Table 4, which is not set out herein, but can be found on file with the town. 
d.  All buildings and other structures to be located on the same property as a communication tower shall conform with the setbacks established for the underlying zoning district. 
e.  Antennas shall not extend more than fifteen (15) feet above the highest point of any roof, including mechanical rooms. 
(4)  Aircraft hazard. Communication towers shall be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) prior to issuance of a building permit by the town. 
(5)  Approval required from other governmental agencies. Each application for a communication tower shall include written approval or a statement of no objection from other federal or state agencies that may regulate communication tower siting, design, and construction or proof acceptable to the town attorney that no approval is required. 
(6)  FCC emissions standards. All proposed communication towers shall comply with current radio frequency emissions standards of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(7)  Buffering: 
a.  An eight-foot fence or wall constructed in as measured from the finished grade of the site, shall be required around the base of a communications tower. 
b.  Landscaping, consistent with the detailed requirements of Chapter 28, section 8 of this Code, shall be installed around the entire perimeter of the fence or wall. Additional landscaping may be required around the perimeter of the fence or wall and around any or all anchors or supports if deemed necessary to buffer adjacent properties. The town commission may require landscaping in excess of the requirements of this Code as is deemed to be reasonably necessary in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent residential and nonresidential land uses. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of the perimeter wall. 
(8)  Equipment storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the communication tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made. 
(9)  Removal of abandoned or unused facilities. All abandoned or unused communication tower facilities shall be removed by the property owner within six (6) months of the cessation of use. 
(10)  Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs or advertising purposes, including company name, banners, streamers, etc., is prohibited. 
(11)  Colors. Towers shall be in neutral colors, designed to blend into the surrounding environment. This requirement may be superseded by the requirements of other county, state, or federal regulatory agency possessing jurisdiction over communications towers. 
(12)  Lighting. Artificial tower lighting shall be limited to mandatory safety lighting required by county, state, or federal regulatory agencies possessing jurisdiction over communications towers. 
(b)  Tower types. To minimize adverse visual impacts, tower types shall be selected based upon the following hierarchy: 
(1)  Stealth facility;* 
(2)  Monopole;* 
(3)  Self-support/lattice tower; 
(4)  Guyed tower. 
*No more than four (4) dish antennas may be installed upon monopole. 
(c)  Town commission action. The town commission, following a hearing on the site plan for a communication tower as provided in this Code, shall deny any application to permit construction of a communication tower or antenna if the application does not strictly comply with the requirement contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 666, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 6-254. - Co-location. 
(a)  No new tower or antenna shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the town commission that no existing tower or structure on town-owned sites can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing town site can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any one of the following: 
(1)  No town-owned sites are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(3)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(4)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing town sites unsuitable. 
In reviewing the applicant's evidence, the town may request additional information from the applicant and/or request independent, expert verification of any scientific claims made by the applicant. Should a study be determined necessary by the town, the applicant shall be required to place in a cost recovery deposit, the estimated cost of the study for payment of the costs incurred and must otherwise comply with the town's cost recovery ordinance. 
(b)  The applicant shall state in any application for permit that it will, as a condition of issuance of the permit, accommodate antenna facilities of other providers (at least one other for monopole and two others for lattice towers), on a nondiscriminatory basis on terms which are reasonable in the industry unless the applicant can affirmatively demonstrate, based on verifiable objective data, why it cannot do so. Refusal to continually comply with this obligation shall be a violation of this article and shall be grounds for revoking the applicant's permit. 
(Ord. No. 666, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 6-255. - Inspections. 
(a)  The Highland Beach Building Department may require periodic inspections of antennas and communication towers to ensure structural and electrical integrity. Such inspections may be required as follows: 
(1)  Monopole towers-once every five (5) years; 
(2)  Self-support towers-once every two (2) years; and 
(3)  Guyed towers-once every two (2) years. 
(b)  Inspections, when required, shall be at the expense of the applicant and shall be conducted by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Florida. The results of such inspections shall be provided to the building department. Based upon the results of an inspection, the building official may require repair or removal of the communication tower. 
(Ord. No. 666, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 6-256. - Exemptions. 
    Property owned by the Town of Highland Beach shall be exempt from the application of this article. 
(Ord. No. 666, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 6-257. - Review and permitting. 
    A permit shall be required prior to construction of an antenna or communications tower. The town manager may authorize other application requirements as deemed necessary. The fee for review shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus any cost recovery requirements. The above fee may be modified by the town commission by resolution. Additionally, for antennas or communications towers which are to be constructed on property owned by the Town of Highland Beach the applicant must also enter into a license agreement with the town prior to construction. The license agreement shall specify the location of the antenna or telecommunications tower, the term and license fee, the use, rights to equipment and condition on surrender, default and termination provisions and such other provisions as the parties deem appropriate. Nothing in this article shall require the town to enter into any license agreement for the use of town property or limit the conditions, license fee, rental charges or requirements in any license agreement with a prospective licensee. 
(Ord. No. 666, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 6-258. - Bond. 
    For other than stealth towers or stealth antennas, any applicant granted permission to install an antenna or communications tower shall post a ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) bond or irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the town to continually assure that the tower shall be removed if it ceases to be used for its intended purpose. Along with this bond, authorization from the property owner, in recordable form, shall be provided to the town (in a form acceptable to the town attorney) to assure the town has access to the tower to remove it. It shall be the obligation of the applicant and owner to remove the antenna or tower if it ceases to be used for its intended purposes for a period of six (6) consecutive months. Voluntary removal of the tower shall cause the bond or letter of credit requirement to cease. In lieu of a bond or a letter of credit, the applicant may substitute a removal agreement acceptable to the town attorney, provided the applicant pays the reasonable fee of the town attorney to review the removal agreement. 
(Ord. No. 666, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Chapter 7 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Town commissioners elected for terms of two years, § 1.06(2); no commissioner may serve more than three terms in succession as mayor or vice-mayor, § 1.06(3); qualification of electors, rules and regulations for registration of voters, and rules and regulations for holding general election shall be prescribed by ordinance § 1.06(9). 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - State law to govern elections. 
    The municipal elections shall be conducted in accordance with the Florida Election Code, which governs the conduct of a municipality's election in the absence of an applicable special act, charter, or ordinance provision. 
(Code 1972, § 8-10; Ord. No. 17-003 , § 2, 10-3-17) 
State Law reference- Electors and elections, F.S. Ch. 97 et seq.; election code violations, F.S. Ch. 104. 
Sec. 7-2. - Qualifications to vote. 
    A person residing within the town corporate limits who is a registered elector of the state of Florida and who complies with section 1.06(9) of the town charter, shall be qualified to vote in the municipal elections. 
(Code 1972, § 8-1; Ord. No. 17-003 , § 2, 10-3-17) 
Charter reference- Qualifications to vote in city elections, § 1.06(10). 
State Law reference- Permanent single registration system, F.S. § 98.041 et seq.; municipal electors, F.S. § 166.032. 
Sec. 7-3. - Qualification of electors. 
    All electors must register to vote with the Palm Beach County Supervisor of Elections, State of Florida and the register of all qualified electors shall be compiled from the general county register. 
(Ord. No. 17-003 , § 2, 10-3-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-003 , § 2, adopted Oct. 3, 2017, amended § 7-3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 7-3 pertained to registration of electors and derived from Code 1972, § 8-2. 
State Law reference- Oath and identification of elector for registration, F.S. § 97.051. 
Sec. 7-4. - Resign-to-run. 
(a)  No individual may qualify as a candidate for the office of mayor, vice-mayor or commissioner whose name appears, or will appear, on the same or another ballot for another public office, the term of which, or its part, runs concurrently with the terms of the office of mayor, vice-mayor or commissioner. 
(b)  Any person holding an appointive position on any town committee, or board, or any town employee shall be required to resign from such position prior to qualifying as a candidate for mayor, vice-mayor or commissioner on or before the day such person files the necessary qualifying papers and pays the required fee to qualify for such election. Any person failing to resign such position shall be deemed to have resigned such position upon qualification with the town clerk for election to the office of mayor, vice-mayor or commissioner. No formal acceptance of such resignation by the town commission shall be necessary in order for such resignation to be effective. The resignation shall not be deemed to constitute a qualification for office but shall act only to terminate employment or membership on the appointive board. This section does not apply to a person who holds the office of mayor, vice-mayor or commissioner. 
( Ord. No. 16-007, § 2, 5-3-16 ) 
Sec. 7-5. - Tie vote. 
    If in any election the returns, as certified by the canvassing board, result in a tie vote, the election shall be decided by drawing lots. 
    If two (2) or more candidates receive an equal or highest number of votes for the same office, the election shall be determined by drawing lots. Each candidate with tied votes shall place their name on a piece of paper, which shall be placed in a container so that the candidates' names are not visible. The town attorney shall then draw one piece of paper containing the name of a candidate from the container. The candidate whose name appears on that piece of paper shall be declared elected to office. 
(Ord. No. 17-003 , § 2, 10-3-17) 
State Law reference- F.S. § 100.181. 
Sec. 7-6. - Notice of election. 
    The town clerk shall cause a notice of election to be published in a newspaper of general circulation two (2) times during the thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of the qualifying period and also on the town's website. If such a newspaper is not published within the period set forth, the town clerk shall post at least three (3) copies of the notice in conspicuous places in the town hall complex not less than ten (10) days prior to the first date set for qualifying. The notice of election shall state the date of the election, what offices are to be filled and any issue to be voted upon. 
(Code 1972, § 8-5; Ord. No. 17-003 , § 2, 10-3-17) 
State Law reference- F.S. § 1001.021. 
Sec. 7-7. - Procedure for holding election. 
    Town elections shall be held in accordance with F.S. § 100.3605 and any approved and effective agreement between the town and the supervisor of elections of Palm Beach County. 
(Code 1972, § 8-6; Ord. No. 15-002, § 2, 4-7-15) 
Charter reference- Absentee voting in municipal elections as prescribed by the state election code, § 1.06(11). 
State Law reference- Inspectors and clerks to conduct elections, F.S. § 102.012. 
Sec. 7-8. - Opening and closing of polls. 
    The polls at all municipal elections shall be open at 7:00 a.m. and shall be closed at 7:00 p.m. in accordance with F.S. § 100.011, as amended from time to time, or as otherwise required by law. 
(Code 1972, § 8-7; Ord. No. 15-002, § 3, 4-7-15) 
State Law reference- Opening and closing of polls, F.S. § 100.011; certificate of results in precincts where voting machines are used, F.S. § 101.55; proclamation of results where ballots are used, F.S. § 102.071. 
Sec. 7-9. - Certified results; declaration of election. 
    The certified results of each election shall be recorded in the minutes of the first meeting of the town commission held following the filing of the certificate in the town clerk's office. At that meeting the town commission shall declare those candidates receiving the greatest number of votes elected to such office and those candidates shall be sworn in by the town clerk or designee. 
(Code 1972, § 8-8; Ord. No. 15-002, § 4, 4-7-15) 
Charter reference- Oath of office, § 1.08. 
Sec. 7-10. - Continuance in office until election, qualification of successor; exception. 
    Any person elected to the office of town commissioner shall continue in such office until the election and qualification of his successor, unless sooner removed in accordance with the provisions of this Code or the charter of the town. 
(Code 1972, § 8-9) 
Charter reference- Vacancies in the commission shall be filled by appointment by resolution until the next regular general election by vote of the remaining members of the commission, § 1.06(12). 
Sec. 7-11. - Bond elections. 
    All special municipal elections for the approval of bond issues shall be held as provided by Article VI of the Town Charter and substantially in the same manner as the holding of the regular municipal elections, and the same shall be conducted substantially on the principle adopted for state elections, insofar as there is no conflict in the terms of this chapter and the Charter of the town. 
(Code 1972, § 8-11) 
State Law reference- Bond referendum, F.S. § 100.201 et seq.; issuance of bonds, F.S. § 166.121. 
Sec. 7-12. - Early voting. 
    The Town of Highland Beach hereby exercises its right to exempt itself from the provisions of F.S. § 101.657 [specifically related to early voting]. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 1-13-05) 
Secs. 7-13-7-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Voters to have the powers of initiative, referendum and recall, § 10.01. 
State Law reference- Municipal recall, F.S. § 100.361. 

Sec. 7-31. - General authority. 
(a)  Initiative. The qualified voters of the town shall have power to propose ordinances to the commission and, if the commission fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a town election. Such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of town officers or employees. 
(b)  Referendum. The qualified voters of the town shall have power to require reconsideration by the commission of any adopted ordinance and, if the commission fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a town election. Such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program except on capital projects financed by tax revenue certificates for water and sewer systems or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes. 
(Code 1972, § 8-25) 
Sec. 7-32. - Commencement of proceedings; petitioners' committee; affidavit. 
(a)  Any five (5) qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the town clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
(b)  Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed the clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee. 
(Code 1972, § 8-26) 
Sec. 7-33. - Petitions. 
(a)  Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the town equal in number to at least twenty (20) percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular town election. 
(b)  Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(c)  Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(d)  Time for filing referendum petitions. Referendum petitions must be filed within thirty (30) days after adoption by the commission of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
(Code 1972, § 8-27) 
Sec. 7-34. - Procedure after filing. 
(a)  Certificate of clerk; amendment. Within twenty (20) days after the initiative or referendum petition is filed the town clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective, and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the clerk within two (2) days after receiving the copy of his certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of section 7-33, and within five (5) days after it is filed the clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request commission review under subsection (b) of this section within the time required, the clerk shall promptly present his certificate to the commission and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(b)  Commission review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two (2) days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the commission. The commission shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the commission's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(c)  Court review; new petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
(Code 1972, § 8-28) 
Sec. 7-35. - Referendum petitions; suspension of effect of ordinance. 
    When a referendum petition is filed with the town clerk, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
(1)  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition; 
(2)  The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition; 
(3)  The commission repeals the ordinance; or 
(4)  Thirty (30) days have elapsed after a vote of the town commission on the ordinance unless a petition is in process. 
(Code 1972, § 8-29) 
Sec. 7-36. - Action on petitions. 
(a)  Action by commission. When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the commission shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the commission fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within sixty (60) days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty (30) days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the town. 
(b)  Submission to voters. The vote of the town on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held not less than thirty (30) days and not later than one year from the date of the final commission vote thereon. If no regular town election is to be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the commission shall provide for a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election, except that the commission may in its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls. 
(c)  Withdrawal of petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the town by filing with the town clerk a request for withdrawal signed by at least four (4) members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
(Code 1972, § 8-30) 
Sec. 7-37. - Results of election. 
(a)  Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the commission. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
(Code 1972, § 8-31) 
Sec. 7-38. - Recall. 
    Any member of the town commission may be removed from office by the electors of the town. The procedure in a recall petition shall be identical with that for an initiatory or referendary petition, except that: 
(1)  The petition shall state the reason for the recall. 
(2)  The town clerk shall approve the form of the petition. 
(3)  The person or persons circulating the petition must obtain signatures of electors of the town in the numbers required in F.S. Section 100.361(1)(a). 
(4)  All signatures shall be obtained within a period of thirty (30) days, and the petition shall be filed with the town clerk within thirty (30) days after the date the first signature is obtained on the petition. The city clerk shall canvass and certify the petition and shall submit it to the county supervisor of elections within twenty (20) days. 
(5)  If the person designated in the petition files with the city clerk, within five (5) days after notice of such petition by the clerk, his written resignation, the clerk shall at once notify the commission of that fact, and the resignation shall be irrevocable. The commission shall then proceed to fill the vacancy according to the provisions of the appropriate law. In the absence of a resignation, the chief judge of the judicial circuit in which the town is located shall fix a day for holding a recall election for the removal of those not resigning. Any such election shall be held not less than thirty (30) days or more than sixty (60) days after the expiration of the five-day period last-mentioned and at the same time as any other general or special election held within the period; but if no such election is to be held within that period, the judge shall call a special recall election to be held within such period. 
(6)  The question of recall shall be placed on the ballot in a manner that will give the elector a clear choice for or against the recall. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting on the question. 
(7)  If the majority is against recall the officer shall continue in office under the terms of his previous election. If the majority is for recall he shall, regardless of any defect in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office immediately. 
(8)  No recall petition against such an officer shall be certified within six (6) months after he takes office nor within one year after a recall petition against him is defeated. 
(9)  A vacancy created by recall shall be filled. 
(Code 1972, § 8-32) 
State Law reference- Municipal recall, F.S. § 100.361. 
Chapter 8 - ELEVATORS, DUMBWAITERS AND MOVING WALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, Ch. 6; streets, sidewalks and bicycle/walkway paths, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference- Elevators, F.S. Ch. 399. 

Sec. 8-1. - Code adopted; amendments. 
    The town adopts the current edition of the American National Standard Safety Code for elevators, dumbwaiters and moving walks, by reference, with all future revisions and/or amendments. 
(1)  All buildings more than three (3) stories in height shall provide fireman's service for elevators. 
(2)  All buildings constructed subsequent to January 7, 1975, having three (3) stories or more shall provide at least one elevator to be of sufficient size to accommodate an ambulance stretcher at least twenty-two (22) inches wide and sixty-five (65) inches long when in a raised-bed position. 
(Code 1972, § 91/2-1) 
Sec. 8-2. - Provisions of state statutes adopted. 
    The town adopts F.S. Ch. 399, Elevators, by reference. 
(Code 1972, § 91/2-2) 
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of town to prohibit sale of firearms, to regulate storage of combustibles, explosives and inflammable material and to regulate or prohibit sale of fireworks, § 2.01(22), (23); town may provide for the prevention and extinguishment of fires and organize and establish fire departments, § 2.01(10). 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; beaches and boats, Ch. 5; buildings and structures, Ch. 6; elevators, dumbwaiters and moving walks, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 12; land clearance, Ch. 13; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 16; nuisances, Ch. 17; police, Ch. 21; solid waste, Ch. 24; water system, Ch. 29; declaration of emergency, § 2-29; installation of fire alarms, § 6-246. 
State Law reference- Explosives, F.S. Ch. 552; conflict between building code and fire code, F.S. § 553.73(7); open burning, F.S. § 590.125; fire prevention and control, F.S. Ch. 633; minimum local firesafety standards, F.S. § 633.025; local fire chief authorized to enforce laws and rules of state fire marshal, F.S. § 633.121; sale of fireworks, F.S. Ch. 791. 

Sec. 9-1. - Penalty for violations. 
    In addition to the penalties as provided in the codes adopted in this chapter, any person convicted of a violation of such codes or this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 10-2; Ord. No. 626, 12-1-93) 
Sec. 9-2. - Adoption of Standard Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code. 
    The town adopts by reference the editions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) referred to in F.S. § 633.025(2), with the following changes: 
(1)  Multifamily and commercial buildings more than three (3) stories in height shall be equipped with standpipes to provide reasonable safety to persons and property. 
(2)  The automatic fire sprinkler systems herein referred to and the installation thereof which is required by this chapter shall all be as contained in and provided for according to the current edition of the National Fire Protection Association Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems (NFPA 13). These approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed throughout the following buildings devoted to residential use and/or occupancy: 
a.  All wood frame apartment buildings, hotels, motels, condominiums and/or cooperatives which are two (2) stories or more and which exceed twenty (20) feet in height. 
b.  All nonwood frame, noncombustible type of constructed apartment buildings, hotels, motels, condominiums and/or cooperatives which are four (4) stories or more and which exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
c.  In all other multifamily and commercial buildings (not covered by provisions in subsections (1) and (2) above) sprinkler systems are required in common gathering areas-specifically enclosed corridors, storage rooms, lobbies and recreation rooms. 
(Code 1972, § 10-1; Ord. No. 626, 12-1-93) 
Sec. 9-3. - Permit fees required. 
(1)  New construction: 
a.  Fire sprinklers - Permit based on valuation of the contract. 
b.  Electrical - Fire Control Panel $35.00, plus Remotes $10.00 each. 
c.  Plumbing - Fire Pump $35.00, Backflow preventer $35.00. 
(2)  Retrofitting and remodeling: 
a.  Fire sprinklers - $35.00. 
b.  Electrical - Fire Control Panel $35.00, plus Remotes $10.00 each. 
c.  Plumbing - Fire Pump $35.00, Backflow preventer $35.00. 
(Ord. No. 626, 12-1-93) 
Sec. 9-4. - Application of county fire code. 
    The town has entered into a contract with the county which requires that the county fire code shall prevail in any areas of conflict with the other ordinances of the town. Accordingly, for any period during which the town contracts for fire rescue services with the county through MSTU No. 3, in the event of any conflict with preexisting ordinances of the town, the county fire code shall prevail. 
(Code 1972, § 10-1.1; Ord. No. 626, 12-1-93) 
Sec. 9-5. - Duty of developers, owners, managers of apartment and condominium buildings. 
    Developers, owners and managers of apartment and/or condominium buildings shall observe such regulations and requirements as may be promulgated and requested by the fire marshal for the purpose of establishing fire safety procedures and including fire drills, testing of alarm systems and providing for their replacement, etc. 
(Code 1972, § 10-3; Ord. No. 626, 12-1-93) 
Cross reference- Licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15. 
Sec. 9-6. - Additional requirements for multi-unit construction. 
    In addition to meeting all fire code and public safety requirements, the following shall be required on all new multi-unit construction: 
(1)  A thirteen-foot, six-inch vertical clearance on designated routes for fire vehicles with aerial equipment. 
(2)  A twelve-foot-wide pavement for one-way traffic and a twenty-four-foot-wide pavement for two-way traffic movement on designated routes for fire vehicles. 
(3)  All internal roadways, driveway ramps and/or parking decks shall be capable of supporting a sixty-thousand-pound fire vehicle. 
(4)  All apartment units shall be accessible to firefighting equipment. 
(Code 1972, § 10-4; Ord. No. 626, 12-1-93) 
Sec. 9-7. - Insurance companies-Excise tax available to municipality providing fire protection services. 
(1)  There is hereby assessed and imposed on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaged in or carrying on, or who shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of property insurance as shown by the records of the state department of insurance, an excise tax in addition to any lawful license or excise tax now levied by the town, in the amount of one and eighty-five hundredths (1.85) percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits of the town. In the case of multiple-peril policies with a single premium for both the property and casualty coverages in such policies, seventy (70) percent of such premium shall be used as the basis for the one and eighty-five hundredths (1.85) percent tax. This excise tax shall be payable annually on March 1 of each year. 
(2)  All money derived from this tax shall be appropriated to the City of Delray Beach's Firefighter Relief and Pension Fund. 
(Ord. No. 720B, § 1, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-8. - Fire protection code adopted. 
    The Town of Highland Beach adopts by reference the fire code of the City of Delray Beach adopted under Ordinance 10-06, which is attached as Exhibit "A" to Ordinance No. 722. 
(Ord. No. 722, 12-12-06) 
Chapter 10 - FOOD AND FOOD SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; health, Ch. 11; licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15; nuisances, Ch. 17; signs and advertising, Ch. 23; solid waste, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Food and food handlers, F.S. Ch. 500 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public lodging and public food service establishments, F.S. Ch. 509. 

Sec. 10-26. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the town. 
(Code 1972, § 101/2-11) 
Sec. 10-27. - Florida Administrative Code provisions adopted. 
    Chapter 10D-13 of the Florida Administrative Code, subsections thereof and/or all amendments thereto is hereby adopted as part of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 101/2-12) 
Sec. 10-28. - Permit-Required; conditions of issuance; expiration; prerequisite to occupational license. 
(a)  No person shall operate a food establishment within the town without first obtaining and maintaining a valid permit or written approval from the county health department or the state division of health. Such permits shall be issued only after inspection of the premises of such food establishment by a duly authorized representative of the county health department. If such inspection reveals that the food establishment is in violation of any applicable city or county health ordinance or statute of the state, or any regulation of the division of health of the state department of health and rehabilitative services, such permit shall not be issued until the violation is corrected. Permits for food service establishments and food outlets shall automatically expire on September 30 each year. 
(b)  No occupational license shall be issued for the operation of any food establishment prior to the issuance of the county health department permit of approval. 
(Code 1972, § 101/2-13) 
Sec. 10-29. - Same-Transfer. 
    No food establishment permit shall be transferable from one person or from one location to another. 
(Code 1972, § 101/2-14) 
Sec. 10-30. - Submission, approval of plans. 
    In addition to other town requirements, no construction, extension or alteration of a food service establishment shall take place before the owner and operator have submitted complete plans for the establishment showing existing and proposed layout and the plans have received written approval by the county health department. 
(Code 1972, § 101/2-15) 
Sec. 10-31. - Completion of food hygiene course by managers and supervisors. 
    In order to ensure that management and supervisors are qualified to institute and maintain acceptable sanitary procedures in the operation of a food business to minimize the possibility of a foodborne disease outbreak, at least one person in management or supervision shall have completed at least a six-hour course of instruction and training conducted and/or approved by the health department in basic food hygiene relating to the proper storage, preparation and service of food and drink. Satisfactory completion of this course shall be demonstrated by successfully completing a written examination administered by the county health department, and a certificate valid for five (5) years shall be issued. Trained management shall be responsible for training of its employees, seeking assistance from the health department when needed. The manager shall be responsible for having his supervisors attend the training sessions as scheduled by the health department. Compliance with this section shall be mandatory within one year of the effective date of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 101/2-16) 
Sec. 10-32. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the director of the county health department or his duly authorized representative and the town commission to concurrently enforce the provisions of this article throughout the town. 
(Code 1972, § 101/2-17) 
Sec. 10-33. - Inspections; revocation of permits. 
(a)  The county health department shall make inspections of all food establishments within the town, and if it is determined that a violation of any provision of this article is being maintained therein, the health department shall give the operator of such food establishment seventy-two (72) hours or other reasonable time, by official notice, within which to correct such violation. 
(b)  Should the violation continue beyond the time specified within the official notice, the food establishment permit may be revoked by the concurrent action of the health authority and the town commission except in cases of food processing permits for which procedures are previously established. The health authority or his deputy appointed for such purpose and the town commission shall conduct a public hearing on revocation of the permit. Such hearings shall be held after fifteen (15) days' notice in writing to the operator, served by registered or certified mail. 
(Code 1972, § 101/2-18) 
Sec. 10-34. - Authority to close. 
    If in the opinion of the health authority conditions of a food establishment represent an immediate threat to the life or health of the patrons and/or employees, the establishment shall be ordered to close by action of the health authority. The establishment shall remain closed until, in the opinion of the health authority, no further danger exists. 
(Code 1972, § 101/2-19) 
Sec. 10-35. - Penalties and remedies. 
    Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this article may be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. The violation of any of the provisions of this article may also be enforced by injunction, including a mandatory injunction and such suit or action may be instituted and maintained in the name of the town. 
(Code 1972, § 101/2-20) 
Chapter 11 - HEALTH[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Town may make rules and regulations to secure the general health and to prevent and remove nuisances, § 2.01(6); town authorized to make regulations for prevention of contagious disease, quarantine laws and enforce same, § 2.01(4). 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; food and food services, Ch. 10; housing, Ch. 12; land clearance, Ch. 13; licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15; nuisances, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference- Public health, F.S. ch. 381 et seq.; municipal health regulations, F.S. § 381.0016. 

Sec. 11-1. - Public health department-Organization. 
    The public health department of the town shall consist of a commissioner and/or a health official who shall have cognizance, supervision and control of all matters affecting the health and sanitation of the town. 
(Code 1972, § 13-1) 
Sec. 11-2. - Same-Supervision. 
    The health official under the direction of the commissioner shall supervise employees of the health department and the official shall be required to furnish, from time to time, reports regarding activities of this department. 
(Code 1972, § 13-2) 
Chapter 12 - CONSTRUCTION SITES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 688, § 8, adopted Jan. 2, 2001, deleted Ch. 12, Housing, in its entirety. Said chapter derived from Code 1972, §§ 131/2-1, 131/2-1.1, 131/2-2, and 131/24. In addition, § 20 of Ord. No. 688 enacted a new Ch. 12 set out below. 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; land clearance, Ch. 13; land filling, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and bicycle/walkway paths, Ch. 25; xeriscape, Ch. 28. 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, demolition, substantial repair, alteration or similar action for or on public or private property and rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. Construction does not include general maintenance activities. 
(Ord. No. 18-007 , § 2, 8-7-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-007 , § 2, adopted Aug. 7, 2018, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been included as § 12-1, and the former § 12-1, construction site parking; storage of materials, has been redesignated as § 12-1.5. 
Sec. 12-1.5. - Construction site parking; storage of materials. 
(a)  On-site construction parking. On street parking is prohibited. All vehicles associated with the construction or construction personnel must be parked completely on the construction site and/or an alternate location approved by the building official. On-site parking areas must be completely off the pavement and should be covered with a suitable, compacted material to prevent dirt and mud from being tracked or washed onto adjacent streets and properties. Washing or repairing vehicles associated with the construction or construction personnel is prohibited anywhere in the town. 
(b)  Off-site construction parking. 
(1)  Alternate parking sites. Alternate parking sites within the town may be approved by the building official and/or police chief provided the following requirements are met: 
a.  The owner of the alternate parking site has granted written permission. 
b.  The alternate parking area is composed of a suitable, compacted surface. 
c.  The parking area is prepared in such a manner to prevent erosion and stormwater runoff onto streets and neighboring properties. 
d.  No significant vegetation (non-invasive trees or shrubs with a caliper of four (4) inches or greater) or topographic features shall be removed or disturbed. 
e.  Alternate parking sites shall be used for parking only. Washing or maintaining construction-related vehicles is prohibited as are all other activities related to the construction site. 
f.  Alternate parking sites shall be kept free of litter and other debris. 
g.  A plan shall be prepared showing the number and location of vehicle parking spaces. 
h.  Use of the alternate parking site shall not cause a traffic hazard or cause a significant disruption to the privacy and peaceful enjoyment of neighboring properties. 
i.  Prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy/completion for the construction site, the alternate parking site shall be restored to a condition and appearance better than or equivalent to the condition and appearance prior to the use as an alternate parking site. 
(2)  Parking in the public right-of-way on A1A. Parking on A1A is prohibited by the town. However, there may be some instances when the state department of transportation will allow it. To be able to park in the public right of way on A1A, the developer/owner or developer/owner's contractor must copy the building department with the letter to the state department of transportation requesting the right to park on A1A. The town may or may not comment on the request. If a permit from the state department of transportation is granted, the permit, along with a parking plan, which will include a remote location for overflow parking, must be submitted to the town. The state department of transportation permit must be provided to the town before any building permits from the building department will be released. All vehicles must be parked completely off the paved road. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to place or use on premises in the town any portable, fixed or mobile grout plants or concrete (batching) mixing plants where the capacity of the plants exceeds two (2) cubic yards. 
(d)  All temporary construction trailers and storage containers must be approved by the building official prior to placement and must comply with section 30-68(m). 
(Ord. No. 688, § 20, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 16-006 , § 2, 3-1-16; Ord. No. 18-007 , § 2, 8-7-18) 
Note- See editor's note at § 12-1. 
Sec. 12-2. - Construction site cleanliness; construction site safety. 
(a)  During the course of construction or demolition work being done on any premises, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit or allow the emissions of particulate matter from any source whatsoever, including, but not limited to, incidents caused by vehicular movement, transportation of materials, construction, alteration, demolition or wrecking of buildings or structures, or the stockpiling of sand or dirt, without taking reasonable precautions to prevent such emissions or to preclude fugitive particulates that may trespass on neighboring properties during dry and windy weather. In the case of stockpiled particulate materials, such materials shall be stabilized by adequate coverings, by wetting or by chemical application to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(b)  Construction sites and neighboring properties are to be maintained in a clean condition at all times and any papers, litter, dirt, dust and/or construction materials are to be disposed of and/or secured at the end of each day's work. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to unload and/or store any material used or required on any construction site without a permit having been issued for construction and/or demolition at that specific site. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to store any material in an unsecured area which is deemed unsafe or a danger to those accessing the site. It shall be unlawful to store any construction materials in any manner whereby the material or a portion of the materials is stored outside the legal boundaries of the site. Reasonable exceptions to this subsection, for a reasonable period of time, may be considered on a case-by-case basis by the town commission. 
(e)  All areas surrounding construction sites which are affected by dust, dirt and debris from the construction site shall be swept clean of such dust, dirt and debris a minimum of two times per day; at least one of which must be at the conclusion of work for that day. 
(f)  Any pool under construction shall be kept clean of any debris until such time as the pool is properly filtered. All sitting water in pools under construction must be properly treated to eliminate algae, insects, etc. 
(g)  All construction debris not placed in a dumpster shall be removed from the construction site within forty-eight (48) hours. 
(h)  The contractor shall be responsible for placement and emptying of adequate disposal containers for food, wrappers and other nonconstruction related garbage. 
(i)  In addition to other remedies for violation of this Code, including the imposition of fines by the code enforcement board or special magistrate, the violation of this section shall constitute grounds for the cashing of damage bonds, the issuance of a revocation of building permits and/or the issuance of a stop work order issued by the building official in accordance with the provisions of the building code. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 20, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 18-007 , § 3, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 12-3. - On-job toilet facilities. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner or contractor on any construction work in the town requiring a permit to provide and have available on the premises where such construction work is taking place such toilet facilities for all workers during the entire construction period as are deemed adequate by the building official. If a temporary building is used for that purpose, its condition, location and operation shall be approved by the building official. Such temporary toilet facility shall be kept in a clean condition and effectively sight-screened from all roads, streets, etc., by walls, hedges, buildings or other methods as approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 20, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 12-4. - Temporary construction fences. 
    A temporary construction fence is required on all construction sites undergoing land disturbing construction or land development activities. All construction/demolition activities as well as all dumpsters, portable toilets, storage facilities, materials and any other item related to the construction must be located inside the temporary construction fence area. Before the temporary construction fence may be erected, a site plan depicting the materials, location and access gates must be approved as part of the fence permit issuance. At a minimum, the construction site must be completely enclosed, on all sides, by temporary construction fencing to prevent public access. 
(a)  Temporary construction fences shall be six (6) feet in height and shall be constructed of chain link with screening material (scrim). 
(b)  Temporary construction fences shall not be erected until the town has issued a demolition permit or building permit for the land disturbing construction or land development activities. In no event may a temporary fence be erected more than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of land disturbing construction or land development activities. 
(c)  In the event that the demolition permit or building permit expires, all temporary construction fences shall be removed within ten (10) days of the permit expiration date. Within fifteen (15) days of removal of the fences, the site shall be brought to grade, tilled and planted with ground cover to include sodding or seeding which shall have irrigation and shall be maintained in accordance with this Code, regarding landscaping requirements. Alternate forms of ground cover may be approved by the building official. 
(d)  Temporary construction fences shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Temporary construction fences shall be installed in accordance with all Florida Building Code and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards. Temporary construction fences installed pursuant to this section shall be subject to any visibility at intersections requirements of this Code. 
(2)  All temporary construction fencing shall be maintained in a satisfactory manner by the permittee or landowner during the entire period of the land disturbing construction and land development activities to ensure adequate performance, to prevent nuisance conditions and to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. 
(3)  Gates shall be secured and locked with a lock substantial enough to ensure closure and security when workers are not on the job site. 
(4)  No temporary construction fence may encroach beyond the subject property line. No fence may encroach upon the public right-of-way without obtaining the appropriate permit(s). 
(5)  Screening details shall be submitted with the temporary construction fence permit application. Screening material shall be substantial enough to avoid rips or tears due to wind or sun and shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Screening material shall be of one color, either green or black, with the entire fence consisting of the same shade of green or black and approved by the building official with no signage, artwork or pictures of any kind as part of the screening material or affixed to the fence. 
(6)  All wind screening materials shall be removed upon the issuance of a hurricane warning for an area including the town. Screening materials shall be reinstalled not more than ten (10) days after the hurricane threat has ended. 
(7)  The building official may grant the use of a temporary movable construction fence as part of a phased construction or phased demolition permit. Within ten (10) days of the completion of the phase of construction or demolition, the temporary movable fence shall be removed, and may be replaced by another temporary construction fence meeting the provisions of this section. 
(8)  "No Trespassing" signage shall be placed on the construction site under the direction of the building official and in accordance with F.S. § 810.09, as amended. 
(e)  The building official may grant, in writing, a restriction or extension to the time frames for the erection or removal of temporary construction fences when necessary to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 20, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 16-001, § 2, 3-1-16 ; Ord. No. 16-010, § 2, 9-6-16 ) 
Sec. 12-5. - Hurricane preparedness. 
(a)  All construction materials on-site shall be properly secured and fastened upon a hurricane watch being issued and/or notification by the building official that the town has declared an emergency situation. 
(b)  Any roof tiles placed on the roof but not yet fastened before the issuance of a hurricane warning shall be removed from the roof or properly secured and fastened. 
(c)  Failure to follow the directive of the building official or his/her designee with regard to securing such building and/or construction material may result in a stop-work order being issued and/or a maximum five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) fine, such amount to be determined following the hurricane by the town commission. Failure to pay such fine, if assessed, will result in a certificate of occupancy or a final inspection being withheld. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 20, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 12-6. - Hours of construction. 
(a)  The construction (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a residential district is prohibited between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., and on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, except in the case of urgent necessity or in the interest of public safety and then only with notification to the police department after town working hours or with a permit from the building official during town working hours, which permit may be renewed for a period of three (3) days or less while the emergency continues. Approval by the police department allowing after hours construction work must be reviewed by the building official on the next available work day and the contractor or owner must apply for a permit even if the work is completed. For the purposes of this subsection, "holiday" shall be defined as any full day when the administrative offices of the town are closed except for the day after Thanksgiving. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the above, construction on Saturdays (that are not holidays) shall be allowed by the homeowner when the homeowner is making repairs or renovations to the homeowner's single family residence as the "owner-builder," so long as the project construction cost is less than fifty (50) percent of the total market value of the existing building. For the purposes of this section, the total market value shall be the amount established by the county's property appraiser's office for the preceding year. This section does not apply to developers. 
(c)  No construction workers associated with a construction project may arrive on-site more than one-half (0.5) hour before or leave said site more than one-half (0.5) hour after the construction hours listed in subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 20, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 18-007 , § 4, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 12-7. - Construction site noise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made any loud or raucous noise; any noise that tends to annoy the community or injure the health of the citizens in general; or any noise that annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any considerable number of persons. Further, it shall be unlawful for the contractor or the contractor's employees or agents to play music at any time at the construction site. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 20, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 18-007 , § 5, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 12-8. - Ingress and egress. 
(a)  All vehicles delivering materials to or picking up materials from any construction site within the town limits shall follow the legal rules of the road. 
(b)  Any vehicle which will be obstructing the normal flow of traffic for a period greater than three (3) minutes shall have a flag person present to assist in the safe passage of other motor vehicles. Such flag person shall wear a reflective vest. 
(c)  Any case where traffic is known to be disrupted for a period in excess of five minutes must be approved, in advance, by the Highland Beach Police Department and a police officer must be on-site during the disruption. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 20, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 12-9. - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). 
    All applicable sections of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements applicable to the town are incorporated as requirements hereto. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 20, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 12-10. - Tree protection during land clearing and construction. 
    All requirements related to tree protection during land clearing and construction listed in section 20-137 of this Code are incorporated into this code section by reference. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 20, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 12-11. - Construction site management handbook; application of Code; appeals. 
(a)  In addition to the regulations set forth in this section, the town commission will create and adopt a construction site management handbook by resolution, which may be amended from time to time by the town commission. The construction site management handbook shall supplement this section and provide detailed instructions for an owner and/or contractor to manage a construction site, and shall impose restrictions, bond requirements, and other standards for the health and safety of town residents. Upon such adoption, the construction site management handbook shall have the same force and effect as a town ordinance. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions in the code relating to parking, this chapter shall govern all parking for construction sites and construction related activities. 
(c)  An appeal of an interpretation of the building official or other town official regarding the provisions of this chapter shall be heard by the board of adjustment and appeals. A request for appeal must be filed with the town clerk within ten (10) business days of the date that the interpretation was rendered. 
(Ord. No. 18-007 , § 6, 8-7-18) 
Chapter 13 - LAND CLEARANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Town may compel owners of land or riparian rights to remove brush, weeds, decayed buildings, etc., § 2.01(8); authority of town to make rules and regulations to secure the general health of the inhabitants, § 2.01(6). 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; health, Ch. 11; nuisances, Ch. 17; solid waste, Ch. 24. 

Sec. 13-1. - Unlawful accumulations-Declared nuisance. 
    The allowing of debris, rubbish, trash, cans, papers or stagnant water to accumulate or to develop on any lot, tract or parcel of land within the town to such an extent that it constitutes a menace or may reasonably become a menace to life, property, the public health, the public welfare or creates a fire hazard shall be unlawful and is hereby prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1972, § 15-1) 
Charter reference- Authority of town to impose penalties on owners, occupants or agents of houses, walks, sidewalks, etc., which may be dangerous to persons or property, § 2.01(28); to prohibit the dumping of filth, garbage, trash, refuse, etc., upon any lot, street, highway or body of water, § 2.01(35). 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 13-2. - Same-Penalty for violation. 
    Any owner, lessee or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land in the town who permits debris, rubbish, trash, cans, papers or stagnant water to accumulate or a dense growth of trees, vines, underbrush, weeds, wild growth or grass in excess of twelve (12) inches from the ground to develop thereon to such an extent that it constitutes or may reasonably become a menace to life, property, the public health, the public welfare or a fire hazard shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 15-2) 
Sec. 13-3. - Notice to owner to abate nuisance; exception. 
(a)  If the town manager finds that debris, rubbish, trash, cans, papers or stagnant water has accumulated, or a dense growth of trees, vines, underbrush, weeds, wild growth or grass in excess of twelve (12) inches from the ground have developed on any lot, tract or parcel of land within the town to such an extent that it constitutes or may reasonably become a menace to life, property, the public health, the public welfare or creates a fire hazard, he shall notify, by certified mail, the owner of record of such property at his last known mailing address as shown by the records of the town that the town manager has found that a violation of this chapter exists and demand that such owner cause such condition to be remedied forthwith. 
(b)  The town manager shall also cause a copy of the notice to be served by a town police officer upon any occupant of the property, or upon any known agent of the owner thereof. The mailing of such notice shall be sufficient proof thereof, and the delivery of notice shall be equivalent to mailing. If the mailing address of the owner is unknown and the property unoccupied and the owner has no known agent in the town, the notice shall be posted upon the property as notice to the owner thereof and a copy posted in an appropriate location at the town hall. 
(c)  If the property in question is subject to erosion from drainage by the removal of weeds and undergrowth, the city manager may grant an exemption from the requirements for removal of underbrush and weeds. 
(Code 1972, § 15-3) 
Sec. 13-4. - Failure of owner to correct violation; action by town; lien. 
    If the owner does not remedy the condition described in the notice required by section 13-3 within ten (10) days, then the town engineer shall cause the condition to be remedied by the town at the expense of the owner of the property. After causing the condition to be remedied, the town engineer shall certify to the town manager the expense incurred in remedying the condition together with his certificate as to the condition of the property which necessitated incurring the expense, whereupon the expense shall become and constitute a lien and charge upon the property, which shall be payable, with interest at the rate of eighteen (18) percent per annum, from the date of such certification until paid, at the time ad valorem taxes on the property become due and payable to the town, and which expense and charge shall be a first and prior lien against the property, subject only to the lien of taxes due the county and of the same character as the lien of the town for municipal taxes. Upon failure of the owner of the property to pay the lien it may be enforced in the same manner as tax liens in favor of the town. 
(Code 1972, § 15-4) 
State Law reference- Interest rate on taxes, F.S. § 197.172. 
Sec. 13-5. - Record of liens. 
    The town shall keep a complete set of files and records relating to the liens authorized by this chapter. The amounts of such liens shall be included in tax statements for ad valorem taxes thereafter submitted to the owners of lots, tracts or parcels of land subject to such liens. 
(Code 1972, § 15-5) 
Sec. 13-6. - Authority of town to order removal of debris. 
    If at any time the town shall deem it necessary or expedient for the preservation of the public health or safety, or for the general welfare of the town, or for any other good reason, that any owner of land or riparian rights within the town shall remove therefrom all glass, cans, plastic, dead trees, debris of dead branches, garbage, substandard or unoccupied buildings, walls or other structures in a falling or dangerous condition, or the like, the town shall have the power to direct and require the owner of the land or riparian rights to remove the same from his land or riparian rights. Such a condition shall constitute a nuisance under Chapter 17 and shall be subject to enforcement as therein described or pursuant to the provisions of Article V of Chapter 2. 
(Code 1972, § 15-6) 
Chapter 14 - LAND FILLING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Beaches and boats, Ch. 5; buildings and structures, Ch. 6; licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15; nuisances, Ch. 17; planning and development, Ch. 20; zoning, Ch. 30; franchises, App. A et seq. 
State Law reference- Issuance of permits for certain activities, F.S. § 403.813; municipal ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to explosives, F.S. § 552.25. 

Sec. 14-1. - Permit-Application. 
    Any person desiring to add to or extend any lands, areas, including submerged lands, to remove sand, rock or earth from any submerged lands, to construct a finger canal, lagoon or yacht basin within the territorial limits of the town by any means, including, but not limited to, hydraulic dredging, pumping, dragline, dynamiting or shovel, shall first make application to the town commission for permission to do so. Such written application shall be accompanied by a plan or drawing showing the area to be filled and also showing the area from which any fill material is to be dredged or removed by other means. Specifications sufficient in detail as to clearly outline how the dredging or filling procedure will take place must also accompany the application. 
(Code 1972, § 151/2-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Same-Determination by commission, other authorities. 
    If an application for a permit under this chapter is found by the town commission not to be in violation of any statute, zoning law, ordinance or other restriction which may be applicable thereto, or that no harmful obstruction to or alteration of navigable waters will arise from such operations, or that no harmful or increased erosion, shoaling of channels or stagnant areas of water will result from such operations, or that no material injury or monetary damage to adjoining land or property, either public or private, will accrue therefrom, a permit shall be granted to the applicant, subject, however, to any additional requirements as may be provided by this chapter, and subject further to the approval of the trustees of the internal improvement trust fund of the state whenever required, and the United States Army Corps of Engineers whenever required and/or any other governmental regulatory agency. 
(Code 1972, § 151/2-2) 
Cross reference- Zoning, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Internal improvement trust fund, F.S. § 253.01 et seq. 
Sec. 14-3. - Same-Issuance; fee; compliance; conditions. 
(a)  No hydraulic filling of land and/or removal of sand, rock and earth from submerged lands by any means within the territorial limits of the town shall be made unless and until a permit for doing same has been issued by the town commission. No permit shall be issued until a fee has been paid to the town clerk in the amount herein set forth. The fee shall be based upon the estimated number of days in which the filling and/or dredging operation will take place. A fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day for each day's operation will be charged. A partial day's operation will count as one full day. If the actual number of operational days exceeds the estimated number of days, adjustment of the fee shall be made in accordance to a revised estimate. If in the opinion of the town manager this filling and/or dredging operation does not comply with the requirements set forth in the permit, or is in any way in violation of this chapter, he shall be authorized to employ any number of inspectors to inspect any phase of the operation at any time of the day or night. Such costs of additional inspection shall be charged to the applicant and thereby become a part of the permit fee due the town. Any continued breach of the permit and/or violation of this chapter shall result in the revocation of the permit by order of the town commission and all work shall cease immediately. A permit for the construction of a finger canal, lagoon or yacht basin shall be issued only in conjunction with and upon a concurrent issuance of a building permit for a permanent building. 
(b)  Sand or fill generated by excavation, leveling or site preparation for construction on oceanfront properties under development within the town shall be deposited on beachfront property and not removed from the town. Disturbed or destroyed vegetation shall be restored within sixty (60) days after written notification by the town. 
(Code 1972, § 151/2-3) 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 14-4. - Bond. 
    If in the opinion of the town commission damage to public or private property is likely to occur from any act or omission connected in any way or manner with both the dredging and filling operation, including but not limited to the operation as specified in the application for a permit under this chapter, the applicant may be required to furnish an indemnity bond protecting the public or private property. The form and amount of the bond as well as the sureties shall be subject to the approval and acceptance by the town commission. The cost of any such bond whenever required shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Code 1972, § 151/2-4) 
Chapter 15 - LICENSES AND LICENSE TAXES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of town to license and tax any business, occupation or profession, § 2.01(19). 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; buildings and structures, Ch. 6; food and food services, Ch. 10; land filling, Ch. 14; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 16; signs and advertising, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 26; taxation, Ch. 27; zoning, Ch. 30; franchises, App. A et seq.; air conditioning, heating and refrigeration licenses, § 6-199 et seq.; power company regulated, § 6-239; fire regulations in apartment and condominium buildings, § 9-4; commercial vehicle parking, § 16-5; newsracks, § 25-31 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal taxes, licenses, user charges and fees, F.S. § 166.201; municipal regulatory fees, F.S. § 166.221; local occupational license taxes, F.S. Ch. 205. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in this town, or anywhere else within its jurisdiction. 
    License or licensee includes respectively the words "permit" or "permittee" or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar privilege, wherever relevant to any provision of this chapter or other law or ordinance. 
    Occupation means any activity engaged in for profit which does not require professional training or skill. 
    Person means individuals, natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations; or any officers, agents, employees, factors or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself, or for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. 
    Premises means all lands, structures, places, and also the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property which is either affixed to or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises. 
    Profession means all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions and activities which require trained skill which is offered to the public for a fee or voluntary contribution. 
(Code 1972, § 16-1) 
State Law reference- Definitions, F.S. §§ 1.01, 205.022. 
Sec. 15-2. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person either directly or indirectly to engage in or conduct any business, profession or occupation for which a license or permit is required by any law or ordinance, without a license or permit therefor being first procured and kept in effect at all such times as required by this chapter or other law or ordinance of the town. The agents or other representatives of nonresidents who are doing business in the town shall be personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of businesses they represent with this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 16-2) 
State Law reference- Levy of municipal occupational license tax, F.S. § 205.042. 
Sec. 15-3. - Collection of license taxes. 
(a)  The building department shall collect all license taxes for such businesses, professions and occupations which are subject to such taxes. Licenses shall be issued therefor in the name of the town. 
(b)  All information furnished or secured under authority of this chapter shall be confidential and shall not be subject to public inspection. 
(Code 1972, § 16-4) 
Sec. 15-4. - License application; renewal. 
(a)  Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of any ordinance or law of the town shall submit an application for such license to the town. The application shall: 
(1)  Be a written statement upon forms provided by the town; such form shall include an affidavit, to be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public of this state. 
(2)  Require the disclosure of all information necessary for compliance with this chapter and of any other information which the town shall find to be reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Be accompanied by the full amount of the tax chargeable for such license. 
(b)  The applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit an application for such license to the town and such application shall contain such further information concerning the applicant's demeanor and the conduct and operation of the applicant's business, profession or occupation during the preceding licensing period as is reasonably necessary to the determination by the town of the applicant's eligibility for a renewal license. 
(Code 1972, § 16-6) 
Sec. 15-5. - Disapproval of license; refund of taxes, fees. 
    If any application is disapproved under the provisions of this chapter, the town shall refund to the applicant all taxes and fees paid in advance by the applicant, provided the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the town, or has not submitted a fraudulent application, or otherwise not intentionally violated this Code or any state law. 
(Code 1972, § 16-7) 
Sec. 15-6. - Multiple licenses; transfers. 
(a)  If a person is subject to more than one license in one location or one place of business, he shall be required to obtain only one license and shall pay in full only the highest tax for the one license required. 
(b)  All business licenses may be transferred to a new owner when there is a bona fide sale of the business upon payment of a transfer fee of three dollars ($3.00) and presentation of the original license and evidence of the sale. 
(c)  Upon written request and presentation of the original license, any license may be transferred from one location to another in the town upon payment of a transfer fee of three dollars ($3.00). 
(Code 1972, § 16-8) 
State Law reference- License transfer, F.S. § 205.043. 
Sec. 15-7. - Exemptions. 
    Disabled veterans, their spouses, handicapped persons, widows supporting minor dependents and persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older shall be allowed the exemptions that such persons are now or shall hereafter be entitled to by law in connection with state, county or municipal licenses. 
(Code 1972, § 16-9) 
State Law reference- Veterans' license exemptions, F.S. § 205.171. 
Sec. 15-8. - Charitable, etc., organizations. 
    Charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic, service and other such organizations shall be exempted from occupational licenses as provided in F.S. § 205.192. 
(Code 1972, § 16-10) 
Sec. 15-9. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
    Any license issued by the town may be temporarily suspended or absolutely revoked or canceled by a majority vote of the town commission when the commission has ascertained and determined in the exercise of its sound discretion that such action will promote the public peace, health, safety, harmony, welfare or good order of the town and neighborhood in which the licensee's place of business is located, or where he operates or carries on his business, trade, profession or occupation. In the case of the revocation and cancellation of such license, the town commission shall in its discretion refund to such licensee the pro rata unearned or unused portion of the license revoked or cancelled. 
(Code 1972, § 16-11) 
Sec. 15-10. - Payment; term. 
    All licenses shall be sold beginning September 1 of each year and shall be due and payable on or before October 1 of each year and shall expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. 
(Code 1972, § 16-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053. 
Sec. 15-11. - Doing business without license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business, trade, profession or occupation within the town without a license, or under a license issued based upon false statements made by the licensee or any person acting in his behalf. Any person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation without a license, or under a license issued upon false statements made by such person, or by another in his behalf shall pay a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the license fee in addition to the license fee. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided for in subsection (a), any person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation within the town without a license or under a license issued upon false statements made by the licensee or someone in his behalf, shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. In any prosecution under this section the fact that such person is open for business shall be prima facie evidence of engaging in such business, trade, profession or occupation, and the burden shall be upon the defendant to rebut same. 
(Code 1972, § 16-13) 
State Law reference- Doing business without license, F.S. § 205.053. 
Sec. 15-12. - Execution of licenses. 
    Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be signed in the name of the town by the building official and shall have the town seal affixed thereon. 
(Code 1972, § 16-14) 
Sec. 15-13. - Appeals. 
    Appeals to the town commission may be taken by any person aggrieved under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 16-15) 
Sec. 15-14. - License tax schedule. 
    A tax hereby is imposed upon certain specified businesses engaged in or carried on, either wholly or in part, within the corporate limits of the town, per annum in the respective amounts hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  Coin-operated machines ..... $  5.00 
(2)  Electric, gas and telephone franchises ..... 150.00 
(3)  Halls for hire ..... 25.00 
(4)  Rental unit fees, 10 rooms or less ..... 5.00 
Each additional room ..... 0.50 
(5)  Merchants, stock value: 
$10,000.00 or less ..... 25.00 
$10,000.00 plus ..... 50.00 
(6)  Restaurants: 
40 seats or less ..... 15.00 
40-100 seats ..... 25.00 
100 plus seats ..... 50.00 
With dancing facilities ..... 150.00 
(7)  Businesses not specifically mentioned ..... 25.00 
(Code 1972, § 16-16) 
Secs. 15-15-15-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTELS, MOTELS AND DINING FACILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 647, adopted April 4, 1995, repealed former Art. II, §§ 15-31-15-36, relative to hotels, motels and dining facilities, and enacted a new Art. II to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Art. II derived from Code 1972, §§ 16-30-16-35. 
State Law reference- Lodging nad food service establishments, F.S. Ch. 509. 

Sec. 15-31. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
(a)  Hotel: Any building where sleeping accommodations are offered to the public on a daily, weekly, monthly basis, or other basis less than annually, whether or not other businesses or services are offered in the same building. 
(b)  Motel/transient apartment: Any building, series of buildings, or series of cabins in which sleeping accommodations are offered to the public on a daily, weekly, monthly basis, or other basis less than annually, along with parking for motor vehicles, whether or not other businesses or services are offered on the premises. 
(c)  Dining facilities: Any establishment which serves food or beverages to the public. 
(Ord. No. 647, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 15-32. - License required. 
    No person shall operate a hotel, motel/transient apartment or dining facility in the Town of Highland Beach without first obtaining a license. Applications for licenses shall be made to the building department along with a current Palm Beach County Occupational License. The annual license fee shall be five dollars ($5.00) per room with a minimum fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00), due on October 1 of each year, which fee shall not be prorated. All buildings and dining facilities must comply with all applicable town ordinances and state laws. The building department shall issue the license. Copies of annual inspections by health department and fire department must be submitted upon request. 
(Ord. No. 647, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 15-33. - Exits. 
    At interior hallways shall have at least two (2) exits, provided that one such exit may be an emergency type exit or fire escape. All exits shall be clearly marked. 
(Ord. No. 647, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 15-34. - Condition of premises; inspections. 
    Any appropriate code enforcement officer may inspect any hotel, motel/transient apartment or dining facility at any time, provided that no inspector may enter any room rented to a guest or guests without the express consent or invitation of at least one of the guests occupying the room. 
(Ord. No. 647, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 15-35. - Exemptions. 
    For the purposes of this section, condominiums and cooperatives are hereby exempt. 
(Ord. No. 647, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 15-36. - Conflict of laws. 
    Any provision of this article prohibited by or in conflict with Florida Statutes Ch. 509 shall be ineffective to the extent of such prohibition or conflict without invalidating the remaining provisions of the article. 
(Ord. No. 647, 4-4-95) 
Sec. 15-37. - Penalty. 
    Violations of this article shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Code Enforcement Board of the Town of Highland Beach, and the penalties shall be in accordance with penalties set forth under the Code Enforcement Board Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 647, 4-4-95) 
Chapter 16 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of town to license, tax and regulate vehicles for hire and fix the rate to be charged for the carriage of persons or property, § 2.01(18); authority of town to regulate, restrict or prohibit the parking of any automobile trailers, boats and campers in which sleeping accommodations are used or provided, § 2.01(38). 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 4; elevators, dumbwaiters and moving walks, Ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; police, Ch. 21; signs and advertising, Ch. 23; streets, sidewalks and bicycle/walkway paths, Ch. 25; parking of boats, § 5-1; use of driveways, § 25-13. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles, F.S. Ch. 316 et seq.; powers of local authorities, F.S. §§ 316.002, 316.008; traffic control law to be uniform throughout state, F.S. § 316.007. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be ticketed by the police department. Violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 27-7) 
State Law reference- Traffic penalties generally, F.S. § 316.655; amount of civil penalties, F.S. § 318.18. 
Sec. 16-2. - Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law adopted by reference. 
    The town hereby adopts the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law in its entirety as set out in F.S. Ch. 316, as in effect as of the date of this chapter as the same may be hereinafter amended, modified and revised, as and for an ordinance of the town and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated into this Code as fully as if set out at length. 
(Code 1972, § 27-1) 
Sec. 16-3. - Parking on right-of-way. 
    It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle as defined in F.S. § 320.01(1)(a) to be parked on the public right-of-way for any street, road or highway within the limits of the town except those vehicles in distress, those commonly designated as emergency vehicles, or unless special permission is granted by the police department. It shall further be unlawful for any motor vehicle to park on private property in any area which is not a paved parking space approved by the town. 
(Code 1972, § 27-2; Ord. No. 638, 12-7-93) 
State Law reference- Local regulation of parking, F.S. § 316.008(1)(a). 
Sec. 16-4. - Recreational vehicle parking. 
(a)  Restriction. It shall be unlawful between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. to park any recreational-vehicle-type units as defined in F.S. Section 320.01(1)(b) within the corporate limits of the town so that such vehicles are visible from any public street. 
(b)  Permit. The town manager or his designee may issue, upon application therefor by an owner or agent, a permit extending any parking time limit set forth in this section up to but not exceeding, twenty-four (24) hours upon establishing that such permit is requested in good faith for a reasonable cause shown. The permit shall be displayed upon the vehicle or trailer in such a manner as to be visible from the street. 
(c)  Exemptions. This section does not apply to: 
(1)  Transients who are visiting the town. For the purpose of this section, "transients" are defined as staying not longer than three (3) days at a motel or regularly recognized rental apartment. 
(2)  Owners or operators of recreational vehicles who reside outside of the corporate limits of the town while visiting residents of the town for a period of not longer than three (3) days. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles stored in a garage or other covered structure. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Protection of residential zonings. This section is primarily for the purpose of protecting residential zoning. Therefore, any ordinances of the town or applicable statutes, whether primarily for the regulation of recreational vehicles or for purposes of zoning, imposing more stringent requirements or limitations shall apply. 
(f)  Effect on deed restrictions, condominium regulations, etc.; obligations of town. This section shall not be construed to limit any deed restrictions, condominium regulations or similar private limitations on land use imposing more stringent requirements or limitations than are provided herein. This section shall not be construed as creating an obligation on the town to enforce private limitations on land use. 
(g)  Presumption of continuous parking. For purposes of this section, it shall be presumed that a recreational vehicle or trailer is parked continuously from the time the recreational vehicle or trailer is first observed to the time of last observation, provided there is at least one additional observation not less than two (2) hours from the first and last observation. 
(Code 1972, § 27-4; Ord. No. 640, 8-2-94) 
Cross reference- Zoning, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Local regulation of parking, F.S. § 316.008(1)(a). 
Sec. 16-5. - Commercial vehicle parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle within the corporate limits of the town so that such vehicle is visible from any public street unless the vehicle is required to be on the premises because of on-going work. In no event may the vehicle be on such premises between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or on Sundays or legal holidays unless there is an emergency, with approval by the police department. 
(b)  The term "commercial vehicle" for the purpose of this section shall be defined as any one of the vehicles defined in the following sections of F.S. ch. 320 in effect on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this provision derives: F.S. § 320.01(6), F.S. § 320.01(7), F.S. § 320.01(13), F.S. § 320.01(14), F.S. § 320.01(21). The term "commercial vehicle" shall also include "for-hire vehicles," as defined in F.S. § 320.01(15)(a), including but not limited to taxis, limousines, ambulances and hearses. 
(Code 1972, § 27-5) 
Editor's note- The above section is derived from Ord. No. 346, § 5, 4-3-79, and Ord. No. 470, 3-1-83. The terms referred to are "trailer," "semitrailer," "truck," "truck-tractor," "farm tractor" and "farm trailer." 
State Law reference- Local regulation of parking, F.S. § 316.008(1)(a); legal holidays, special observances, F.S. § 683.01 et seq. 
Sec. 16-6. - Parking on sidewalks, bicycle paths or crosswalks or in fire lanes. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle as defined in F.S. § 320.01(1)(a) on or upon any sidewalk, bicycle path or crosswalk, or in any fire lane designated and approved by the fire marshal having jurisdiction in the town and posted with an official sign with the designation of fire lane. 
(Code 1972, § 27-3) 
State Law reference- Local regulation of parking, F.S. § 316.008(1)(a); stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places, F.S. § 316.1945. 
Sec. 16-7. - Vehicle repair in street or right-of-way. 
    It shall be unlawful to perform any motor vehicle repairs or overhaul work on any street or street right-of-way, or in any area, excluding private garages, which is in view of the abutting public street. This does not apply to emergency repairs to vehicles, provided such repairs are accomplished within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Code 1972, § 27-6) 
Sec. 16-8. - Operation of motor vehicles on bicycle/walking path. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or cause to be driven or operated any motor vehicle of over twenty (20) horsepower or less than four (4) wheels on any bicycle/walking path. 
(Code 1972, § 27-11; Ord. No. 688, § 9, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 16-9. - Speed restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle, or other vehicle recklessly or carelessly or at a dangerous rate of speed or negligently on any street in the town. 
    No person shall operate any vehicle at a rate of speed greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour on SR A1A and twenty (20) miles per hour on any road other than SR A1A. 
(Code 1972, § 27-8; Ord. No. 688, § 10, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 697, § 1, 2-5-02) 
State Law reference- Reckless driving, F.S. § 316.192; careless driving, F.S. § 316.1925. 
Sec. 16-10. - Operation of vehicle while intoxicated. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, while in an intoxicated condition or under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs, to drive, operate or cause to be driven or operated, on or over any of the highways, thoroughfares or streets within the town any automobile, truck or vehicle or motorcycle or any other vehicle propelled by gasoline, gas, vapor, electricity, steam or other power. 
(Code 1972, § 27-9) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference- Driving under the influence of alochol, F.S. § 316.1932. 
Sec. 16-11. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages, possession of open containers in motor vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Beverage law means F.S. chs. 561, 562, 563, 564, 565, 567 and 568. 
    Container means any bottle, carton or other vessel of alcoholic beverage. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is not powered by muscular power. 
    Open container means any container on which the seal is broken. 
    Person means any natural person. 
    Public or semipublic area open for vehicular travel means all public and private roads, streets, highways, lanes, alleys, parking lots and parking areas on which the public is expressly or implicitly invited to travel by motor vehicle or which are otherwise open for vehicular travel. It shall not include areas such as private driveways of property serving single or multiple dwelling units or condominium parking lots. 
(b)  Findings of fact: 
(1)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages or possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages while in or on motor vehicles leads to, and encourages: 
a.  The operation and control of motor vehicles while impaired; and 
b.  Distracting and disorderly conduct of passengers including, but not limited to, littering. 
(2)  The uncontrolled consumption of alcoholic beverages in or on motor vehicles is detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(c)  Possession or consumption prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any container of alcoholic beverage, except an original container with the seal unbroken, or to consume any alcoholic beverage, in or on a motor vehicle being operated or parked on a public or semipublic area open for vehicular travel. 
(d)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person engaged in picking up empty beverage containers for the purpose of collecting the deposit or value of the bottle or can itself, nor to any person taking part in a litter control campaign. 
(2)  The possession of open container by any licensed distributor or licensed vendor of alcoholic beverages, provided that such alcoholic beverage is being transported solely for commercial purposes. 
(3)  The transportation of any open container of alcoholic beverage in or on any motor vehicle provided that such container is in a compartment of the vehicle not readily accessible to the driver or passengers. 
(4)  The transportation of any open container or consumption of alcoholic beverage in or on any motor vehicle duly licensed and operated for hire to transport passengers, such as charter buses, regularly scheduled buses, taxicabs and the separate passenger compartments of limousines; provided the operator thereof is not in immediate possession of, or engaged in the consumption of, any alcoholic beverage or open container of alcoholic beverage. 
(5)  The operation, for a consideration, of any motor vehicle by an individual duly licensed and supplied by a chauffeur service, either public or private, limousine service, taxicab company or bus company; provided the operator thereof is not in immediate possession of, or engaged in the consumption of, any alcoholic beverage or open container of alcoholic beverage, and is operating the vehicle while under and in the scope of the employment of a chauffeur service, either public or private, limousine service, taxicab company or bus company. The operator must have in his possession evidence of employment by a bona fide chauffeur service, either public or private, limousine service, taxicab company or bus company. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be punished with a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(f)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty and responsibility of all appropriate law enforcement officers to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(g)  Conformance with county law. Insofar as any provision of this section shall conflict with or duplicate county law, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(Code 1972, § 27-9.1) 
State Law reference- Possession of open containers of alcohol in motor vehicle, F.S. § 316.1936. 
Sec. 16-12. - Operation by persons under sixteen years. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle over or upon any of the public streets of the town who is less than sixteen (16) years of age. The parents of such child may also be punished for permitting the child to operate the motor vehicle, and any person who rents any such vehicle to any person under such age shall be guilty of violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 27-10) 
State Law reference- Restricted operators' licenses, F.S. § 322.16. 
Secs. 16-13-16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTOR OR AUTO TRAILERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Town authorized to restrict or prohibit parking of any automobile trailer in which sleeping accommodations are used or provided and to regulate, restrict or prohibit the establishment of automobile trailer parks, § 2.01(38). 

Sec. 16-31. - Definition. 
    Within the meaning of this article the phrase "motor or auto trailers" is hereby defined as follows: any of the various types of vehicles with motor power or designed to be towed with an automobile or truck and adapted to human habitation for the purpose of sleeping, eating or preparation of meals or designed or adapted to use as an office or for the purpose of carrying on business. 
(Code 1972, § 28-1) 
Sec. 16-32. - Parking. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any motor or auto trailer on any of the public streets within the town for a space of time longer than one hour, and during such period of time in which such vehicle shall be parked, it shall be unlawful to prepare or serve any meals involving the cooking of foods. 
(Code 1972, § 28-2) 
Sec. 16-33. - Use for living purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any motor or auto trailer on any privately owned property within the town for the purpose of living in the motor or auto trailer, and it is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the chief of police is hereby directed and instructed to abate and prevent the same. 
(Code 1972, § 28-3) 
Sec. 16-34. - Camps. 
    Motor or auto trailer camps designed for the purpose of furnishing toilet and other sanitary accommodations and parking space for the occupants of motor or auto trailers, and parking space for motor or auto trailers for human habitation, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the chief of police shall prevent or abate the same. 
(Code 1972, § 28-4) 
Sec. 16-35. - Use for business office. 
    It shall be unlawful to use any motor or auto trailer for the purpose of an office or business headquarters in the town except as used by a building contractor as a temporary office under a permit by the town. 
(Code 1972, § 28-5) 
Sec. 16-36. - Detaching, parking on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any type of detachable trailer, or any movable or portable structure, in any location within the corporate limits of the town unless enclosed within a private garage. 
(Code 1972, § 28-6; Ord. No. 640, 8-2-94) 
Secs. 16-37-16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of town to prohibit the dumping of filth, dirt, garbage, trash, refuse or other things in any body of water within or adjacent to the town or upon any lot, tract or parcel of public or private land, or upon any public street, highway or road right-of-way, § 2.01(35). 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference- Lost or abandoned property, F.S. Ch. 705. 

Sec. 16-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in section 16-52, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Property means any real property within the town which is not a street or highway. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and to transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(Code 1972, § 17-3) 
Sec. 16-52. - Exterior storage of nonoperating vehicles. 
    No person in charge of or in control of any premises, whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise nonoperating motor vehicle to remain on such property longer than forty-eight (48) hours; and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the town for a longer time than forty-eight (48) hours; except that this section shall not apply with regard to any vehicle in an enclosed building. 
(Code 1972, § 17-3) 
Sec. 16-53. - Declaration of nuisance; removal. 
    The accumulation and storage of one or more of such vehicles as hereinbefore defined, on public or private property shall constitute a nuisance, detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of inhabitants of the town, and it shall be the duty of the registered owner of such vehicle and it shall also be the duty of the owner of the private property upon which such vehicle is located, to remove same from the town limits, or to have the same housed in a building where it will not be visible from the street. 
(Code 1972, § 14-2) 
Sec. 16-54. - Notice to remove. 
    It shall be the duty of the town manager or his designee to give written notice to the registered owner of any motor vehicle which is in violation of this article as described above or to give such notice to the owner or lessee or other person in possession of private land upon which such motor vehicle is situated, giving notice that such vehicle violates this article, and demanding that the motor vehicle be removed from the town limits within seventy-two (72) hours, or that within seventy-two (72) hours, same may be housed in a building where it will not be visible from the street. The notice may be given by personal service, or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Code 1972, § 14-3) 
Sec. 16-55. - Violation; removal of vehicle by town. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. However, if the person receiving the notice provided for in section 16-54 executes an agreement in a form similar to the following: 
"AGREEMENT-Know all men by these presents, that in consideration of an offer by the Town of Highland Beach, Florida, to remove the hereinafter described motor vehicle from certain premises in the town, the undersigned warrants (that he is the owner of the vehicle) (that he is the owner or occupant of the property where the vehicle is located), and hereby grants, bargains, sells, transfers and delivers unto the Town of Highland Beach, the following described motor vehicle: 
Dated this ________ day of ________, 19 ___. 
Witnesses: 
__________
Owner-Seller- 
Occupant _____ "  
The town will arrange for the removal of the vehicle for the party or parties receiving the notice, and no warrant for the arrest will be issued. The cost for such removal shall be the minimum cost available to the town for such removal at the time and shall be paid to the town by the party or parties at the time of executing such agreement. 
(Code 1972, § 14-4) 
Chapter 17 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; health, Ch. 11; housing, Ch. 12; land clearance, Ch. 13; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 18; solid waste, Ch. 24; trees, shrubs and vegetation, Ch. 28; junked motor vehicles, § 16-51 et seq.; lethal yellowing disease, § 28-81 et seq. 
State Law reference- Public nuisances, F.S. ch. 823; sanitary nusiances, F.S. § 386.01 et seq.; nuisance abatement, F.S. §§ 60.05, 60.06. 

Sec. 17-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the nuisance ordinance. 
(Code 1972, § 17-1) 
Sec. 17-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nuisance means any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial deterioration in the value of the subject property or in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping, the maintaining or the depositing on, or the scattering over the premises, of any of the following: 
(1)  Lumber, junk, trash or debris; 
(2)  Abandoned, discarded, unused or stored objects or equipment, whether operative or inoperative, such as automobiles, boats, trailers, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers or the like. 
(3)  Placing of certain obstructions in State Road A-1-A right-of-way shall be deemed a nuisance. These obstructions are reflectors, concrete pyramids, concrete rounds and wood and PVC poles. The term "concrete" shall include solid material of any kind and the term "rounds" shall include solid material of any shape and is not meant to be limited to a round shape. 
This definition does not limit the meaning of nuisance in section 17-3. 
    Property means any real property within the town which is not a street or highway. 
(Code 1972, § 17-3; Ord. No. 09-002, § 1, 4-7-09; Ord. No. 16-005, § 3, 3-1-16 ) 
Sec. 17-3. - Generally; declared unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, keep, maintain or permit on his property, or any property or in any place in or under his possession or control, any nuisance of any kind, nature or description, which nuisance tends to injure the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Code 1972, § 17-2; Ord. No. 16-005, § 3, 3-1-16 ) 
State Law reference- Nuisances, penalty, F.S. § 823.01. 
Sec. 17-4. - Nuisances on private property. 
    No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon. 
(Code 1972, § 17-3; Ord. No. 16-005, § 3, 3-1-16 ) 
Sec. 17-5. - Enforcement. 
    Enforcement of this chapter may be accomplished by the town in any manner authorized by law. With regard to the obstructions referred to in section 17-2(3) enforcement of that section concerning the placing of obstructions in State Road A-1-A right-of-way shall be by the town's code enforcement board and/or special magistrate. In addition, any person who by reason of another's violation of any provision of this chapter suffers special damage to himself different from that suffered by other property owners throughout the town generally, may bring an action to enjoin or otherwise abate an existing violation. 
(Code 1972, § 17-4; Ord. No. 09-002, § 2, 4-7-09) 
Charter reference- Authority of town to make rules and regulations to prevent and remove nuisances, § 2.01(6). 
State Law reference- Injunction to abate nuisances, F.S. § 60.05; sanitary and health nuisances, F.S. § 386.01 et seq.; public nuisances, F.S. ch. 823. 
Sec. 17-6. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or any other chapter, article or section of this Code regarding nuisances, shall, upon a determination that a nuisance exists, be subject to the penalties as provided in chapter 1 of this Code. These enforcement procedures shall be in addition to any costs incurred by the town in abating the nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which costs shall be charged to the owner as provided herein. 
(Code 1972, § 17-5; Ord. No. 16-005, § 3, 3-1-16 ) 
Sec. 17-7. - Notice to owner to abate nuisance; service of notice; right of hearing. 
(a)  Upon the failure of an owner, tenant or other occupant to comply with the provisions of section 17-6, the town shall give written notice by regular and certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery to the record owner of such property at the address indicated in the records of the county property appraiser, that a nuisance exists in violation of this chapter. The service of such notice shall be deemed complete upon delivery and shall be deemed sufficient notice of violation. 
(b)  The notice shall: 
(1)  Advise the owner of the existence and nature of the violation; 
(2)  Specify what corrective action must be taken; 
(3)  Require the owner to remedy or abate the violation in a period of time as determined by the building official; 
(4)  State that failure to take the prescribed corrective action within the specified time will result in the town abating the violation, the cost of which action, plus all administrative costs incurred, shall constitute a lien against the property; 
(5)  State that a lien will be recorded against the property; 
(6)  Advise the owner of a right to request a hearing as provided in section 17-8; 
(7)  Advise the owner that upon reoccurrence of the nuisance, the town may without further notice to the owner enter the premises and take steps reasonably necessary to effect abatement, the cost of which, plus administrative charges, will be a lien against the property; 
(c)  If a hearing is requested within seven (7) days from the date of receipt of the notice, enforcement shall proceed as provided in section 17-8. 
(d)  If no hearing is requested within seven (7) days from the date of receipt and the owner has not commenced the corrective action required, the town shall have the right to enter upon the premises and take steps reasonably necessary to effect abatement. 
(e)  If the notice sent is returned unclaimed or the return receipt is not received by the town within fifteen (15) days of the mailing and hand delivery cannot be made, a copy of the notice shall be posted in plain view upon the property; and if the nuisance is not abated within five (5) days of posting, the town shall have the right to enter upon the premises and take steps reasonably necessary to effect abatement. The town may post the property upon the mailing of the notice and upon the expiration of fifteen (15) days, if the nuisance is not abated, the town shall have the right to enter upon the premises and take steps reasonably necessary to effect abatement. 
( Ord. No. 16-005, § 3, 3-1-16 ) 
Sec. 17-8. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  The owner may appeal the notice of nuisance by filing a written request with the town clerk for a hearing within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the notice with the town. The code enforcement board shall hear the appeal on its regularly scheduled agenda, or sooner if so determined by the town manager, and the owner shall be notified in writing of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  At the hearing, the code enforcement board shall determine whether the condition described in the notice does or does not exist and whether it constitutes a public nuisance. At the hearing, the town and the property owner or his representative may introduce such witnesses as deemed necessary. Such determination by the code enforcement board shall be final. 
(c)  If the code enforcement board determines that the condition described in the notice to owner does exist, the property owner shall take the corrective action required in the notice within five (5) days of the hearing or as otherwise ordered by the board. If the property owner does not comply, the town shall have the right to enter the premises and take steps reasonably necessary to effect abatement without further notice to the owner. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the town from taking immediate action to abate the nuisance if in the opinion of the town manager the nuisance constitutes an imminent danger to human life or health. 
( Ord. No. 16-005, § 3, 3-1-16 ) 
Sec. 17-9. - Assessment of costs, interest and attorney's fees; lien. 
    As soon after the abatement as feasible, the town manager shall report to the town commission the cost of the abatement, including the cost of inspection and administration. Thereafter, the commission shall by resolution assess the cost against the subject parcel. This resolution shall describe the property assessed, show the actual cost of abatement, costs of inspection and administration, and indicate that the assessment shall bear interest at the rate of eight (8) percent per annum plus, if collection proceedings are necessary, that the property owner would be required to pay the cost of the proceedings including a reasonable attorney's fee. This resolution shall provide that payment must be made in thirty (30) days from the date of adoption. In the event that payment has not been received within thirty (30) days after the mailing date of the notice of assessment, the resolution shall be recorded in the public records and shall constitute a lien on the property. 
( Ord. No. 16-005, § 3, 3-1-16 ) 
Sec. 17-10. - Enforcement of assessment; priority of lien. 
(a)  The town may enforce the abatement assessments by an action at law, injunctive relief, foreclosure of the lien, which shall be foreclosed in the same manner as mortgages are foreclosed under state law, or any other lawful means. In the above types of action, the town shall be entitled to interest at the rate of eight (8) percent from the date of assessment, collection costs and reasonable attorney's fees. Such liens shall be on parity with general town taxes and shall have priority over all other liens and encumbrances, including mortgages. 
(b)  The town may alternatively enforce the action through the code enforcement process. 
( Ord. No. 16-005, § 3, 3-1-16 ) 
Chapter 18 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of town to make rules and regulations to prevent and remove nuisances § 2.01(6); authority of town to prohibit and suppress gambling, disorderly houses, obscenity, § 2.01(20); to regulate, restrain or prevent noises, water and land pollution, § 2.01(21); to regulate or suppress the sale of fireworks, § 2.01(23); to provide for the arrest and imprisonment of disorderly persons, vagrants, § 2.01(25); to provide for the punishment of all breakers of the peace, § 2.01(26); to impose fines, penalties for violation of municipal ordinances, § 2.01(29). 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference- Crimes, F.S. Ch. 775 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - State misdemeanor law-Adopted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit within the corporate limits of the town any act which constitutes a violation of any misdemeanor law of the state. 
(Code 1972, § 18-1) 
State Law reference- "Misdemeanor" defined, F.S. § 775.08. 
Case Law annotation- A similar ordinance adopting laws of the state relating to misdemeanors was upheld in the case of Jaramillo v. City of Homestead, 322 So.2d 496 (Fla. 1975). 
Sec. 18-2. - Same-Penalty. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of section 18-1 shall be punished by the same penalty as is provided by the laws of the state, but in no case shall such penalty exceed the penalty provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 18-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Helicopter, aircraft landing and operation. 
(a)  Prohibition; exceptions. The landing of helicopters or any type of aircraft within the town limits is prohibited, except as provided for in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Permit for construction, repair activities. 
(1)  No person shall operate a helicopter for the purpose of engaging in construction and/or repair activities within or over the corporate limits of the town without first obtaining a permit to do so from the town manager, or his designee, as provided herein. 
(2)  The town manager, or his designee, shall be authorized to issue a permit after determining that: 
a.  The person operating the helicopter is duly licensed by the Federal Aviation Administration; and 
b.  The person operating the helicopter has a minimum of ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) liability insurance coverage, as evidenced by a certificate of insurance. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to emergency or medical helicopter operations nor to military or National Guard personnel. 
(d)  Enforcement. Violations of this section shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the code enforcement board of the town, and penalties shall be in accordance with penalties set forth under Article V of Chapter 2. 
(Code 1972, § 18-3) 
State Law reference- Airports, F.S. Ch. 332. 
Sec. 18-4. - Disturbing the peace. 
    Whoever willfully disturbs the peace of another by violence, tumultuous or offensive demeanor, loud or unusual noise, profane, obscene or offensive language, or other conduct, calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, or by assaulting, striking, threatening or frightening another; or shall permit the same to be done upon premises in his possession, custody or control so that others in the vicinity are disturbed thereby, shall be guilty of violating this section. 
(Code 1972, § 18-4) 
State Law reference- Assault, battery, etc., F.S. ch. 784; breach of the peace, disorderly conduct, F.S. § 877.03. 
Sec. 18-5. - Disturbing schools and religious and other assemblies. 
    Whoever willfully interrupts or disturbs any school or any assembly of people met for the worship of God or for any lawful purpose shall be guilty of violating this section and shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 18-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 871.01. 
Sec. 18-6. - Lewdness, etc. 
    Any person who does any act in violation of F.S. Ch. 800 or 847 (relating to lewdness, indecent exposure, obscene literature and profanity) shall be guilty of violating this section and shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 18-6) 
Sec. 18-7. - Exposure of person while swimming. 
    No person shall bathe in the Atlantic Ocean within the town limits without being sufficiently clothed to prevent exposure of his or her person. 
(Code 1972, § 18-7) 
State Law reference- Exposure of sexual organs, F.S. § 800.03. 
Sec. 18-8. - Houses of prostitution. 
    Whoever shall keep or maintain a house of ill fame, or a house or other place resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, or whoever shall lease to another a house, room or other structure, or portion thereof, to be used for the purpose of prostitution, or any lewd, lascivious or immoral purpose, the lessor knowing or having reason to believe that the place so leased is to be used for any such purposes, shall be deemed guilty of violating this section. 
(Code 1972, § 18-9) 
State Law reference- Prostitution, F.S. § 796. 
Sec. 18-9. - Noises-Prohibited. 
    The creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in the city is prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, make or contribute to creating any loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise, and noises of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or such noises as unduly disturb the quiet and peace of the citizens of the town. 
(Code 1972, § 18-10) 
Sec. 18-10. - Same-Enumerated. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of section 18-9, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Blowing horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Playing of radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence. 
(3)  Keeping of animals. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(4)  Use of vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner, or to repair any such vehicle in such manner, as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, riveting or other loud or disturbing noises. 
(5)  Sounding of steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of danger. 
(6)  Exhaust discharge. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine motor or vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Compressed air device. The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Loading or unloading operations. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle, or repairing any vehicle, or opening and destroying bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  Sounding of bell or gong. The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises, which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(11)  Peddlers, hawkers, etc. The shouting, loud talking, crying and soliciting of peddlers, hawkers, taxi drivers, solicitors and vendors, which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood. 
(12)  Attention-getting devices. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display or advertisement of merchandise. 
(13)  Advertising. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks, airplanes or other vehicles for advertising or other purposes except where specific license is received from the proper town officials. 
(14)  Amplified sounds outside enclosed building. Operation on private property within the town of radios, phonographs, or other devices whereby sound is amplified, including so-called "juke organs," except within the confines of an enclosed building, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the following day is hereby declared to be unlawful. 
(15)  Amplified sounds during nighttime within enclosed building. Operation of the devices provided in subsection (14) between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the following day within the confines of an enclosed building housing any business establishment in such a manner as to be clearly audible from any portion of the residence dwelling nearest to the building is hereby declared to be unlawful. 
(16)  Maintenance of property. The operation or maintenance of any property, real or personal, within the city, mobile or immobile, which makes or causes to be made loud and unnecessary noises and disturbances, whether musical or nonmusical and whether produced by human or mechanical means or whether produced as a part of such property or upon such property, of such a nature as to disturb the serenity and decorum of other persons residing within the town is unlawful. 
(Code 1972, § 18-11; Ord. No. 688, § 11, 1-2-01) 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle horns and warning devices, F.S. § 316.271. 
Sec. 18-11. - Playing games of chance for money. 
    No person shall directly or indirectly solicit or attempt to interest any other person within this town to invest, engage, play, bet upon or participate in any game of chance for money or other thing of value. 
(Code 1972, § 18-12) 
State Law reference- Gambling, F.S. ch. 849. 
Sec. 18-12. - Wagering on contest of skill, speed or strength. 
    No person shall either directly or indirectly solicit any other person to make any bet or wager of any kind whatsoever, or any money or other things of value, upon the outcome or result of any horse race, whether real or pretended, or on any other contest of endurance, speed, strength or skill of any kind whatsoever. 
(Code 1972, § 18-13) 
State Law reference- Gambling, F.S. ch. 849. 
Sec. 18-13. - Malicious destruction or disfigurement of public property. 
    Whoever shall destroy or attempt to destroy or injure, mutilate, disfigure or displace any public property of any kind, nature or character whatsoever belonging to the town, or property used by any officer, agent, employee or worker of this town in his official duty, employment or work shall be deemed guilty of violating this section. 
(Code 1972, § 18-15) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, F.S. ch. 806.13. 
Sec. 18-14. - Trespass. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to protect the safety and general welfare of the residents of the town. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the police department to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any posted private property of another, or to place or store any personal property thereon, or drive or park any automobile or other vehicle on such property without the consent of the owner, lessee or person having such property in charge. The term "private property" shall include any land within the town whether enclosed or unenclosed. The term "posted" is hereby defined to mean the display upon such property of any sign containing the words "posted," "no trespassing," "private property" or any other word or explanation of a similar meaning. 
(Code 1972, § 18-16) 
State Law reference- Burglary and trespass, F.S. ch. 810. 
Secs. 18-15-18-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEXUAL PREDATORS/SEXUAL OFFENDERS 

Sec. 18-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Daycare center. Any building or shelter in which custodial care is rendered to children, and for which compensation is received in the form of a payment, fee, grant, goods or services in kind for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operating for profit or which is held out to the public to be an establishment which regularly provides child custodial care. The term also refers to the child care operation associated with the building or shelter, and also includes specialized child care facilities for the mildly ill. A daycare center includes the parking lot, curtilage, yards, landscaped areas, playgrounds, accessory buildings and all outdoor areas of the facility. 
    Park. A publicly owned or operated area used or available for the public's use as a recreational facility. 
    Permanent residence. A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
    Playground. An established or dedicated outdoor area for recreation and play, including, by way of example and not limitation, soccer fields, baseball diamonds, football fields and locations with outdoor equipment, such as, by way of example and not limitation, swing sets, climbing apparatus and slides. 
    Sexual offender. For purposes of this article, a sexual offender is a person whose victim, or intended victim, was, at the time of the offense, less than sixteen (16) years old. 
    Sexual predator. 
(1)  As defined in F.S. § 775.21; or 
(2)  As defined by the state or jurisdiction of the United States where said sexual predator was convicted; or 
(3)  An offense committed in another state or jurisdiction of the United States where the person would be considered a sexual predator if that offense had been committed in the State of Florida. 
    Temporary residence. A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 15-004, § 3, 5-5-15) 
Sec. 18-21. - Prohibitions; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of F.S. §§ 794.011, 800.04, 827.071, or 847.0145, as may be amended from time to time, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, in which the victim, or intended victim, of the offense was less than sixteen (16) years of age, to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school, designated school bus stop, day care center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate. This article shall also apply to any person who has been convicted of a similar provision of law in any state or jurisdiction of the United States and where an offense is committed in another state or jurisdiction of the United States where the person convicted would be considered a sexual predator if that offense had been committed in the State of Florida. 
(b)  For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outermost property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outermost property line of a school, designated school bus stop, day care center, park, or playground. 
(c)  Exceptions: A person residing within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school, designated school bus stop, day care center, park, or playground, does not commit a violation of this article if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to F.S. §§ 775.21, 943.0435 or 944.607 prior to the effective date of this article. 
(2)  The sexual offender or sexual predator established the permanent residence prior to the effective date of the article, provided however, that at the end of the then current rental term, in the case of a lease, the sexual offender or sexual predator shall be required to abandon that permanent residence and establish a new permanent residence at a location that is not within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school, designated school bus stop, day care center, park or playground. 
(3)  The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
(4)  The person is a minor. 
(5)  The school, designated school bus stop, park, day care center or playground within one thousand (1,000) feet of the person's permanent residence or temporary residence was opened after the person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to F.S. §§ 775.21, 943.0435 or 944.607. 
(Ord. No. 15-004, § 3, 5-5-15) 
Sec. 18-22. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to certain sexual offenders and sexual predators; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this article, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school, designated school bus stop, day care center, park, playground or library. 
(b)  A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this article shall constitute a violation of this Code, and shall subject the property owner to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided for in this Code of Ordinances, including the provisions that allow the town to seek relief as otherwise provided by law; or to any other means of enforcement allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 15-004, § 3, 5-5-15) 
Chapter 19 - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Florida Retirement System, F.S. ch. 121.011 et seq.; social security for public employees, F.S. ch. 650. 

Sec. 19-1. - Plan authorized. 
    The town may from time to time establish a pension and retirement plan as is deemed appropriate. 
Chapter 20 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and structures, Ch. 6; land filling, Ch. 14; sewers, Ch. 22; signs and advertising, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 26; water system, Ch. 29; zoning, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.; planning and development, F.S. Ch. 186 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Authority. 
    The town shall exercise the powers granted to it by F.S. Ch. 163. 
(Code 1972, § 2-43) 
Sec. 20-2. - Open space and recreational land dedication. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to provide land or funds or both to be used by the town commission to provide additional open space and recreational land necessary to meet the need for such open space and recreational facilities created by new residential development. 
(b)  Land dedication requirements. For every development of multiple-family units, the developer shall dedicate to the town land of suitable size, dimension, topography and general character to meet the town's open space and recreational land needs created by the development. The total amount of land to be dedicated for the development site must equal or exceed a ratio of one acre of land for every one hundred (100) residents of the development. For purposes of this section, two (2.0) persons per unit shall be deemed to reside in the proposed development. Such dedication shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. The following formula shall be used for computing the amount of open space and recreational land to be dedicated: 
2.0 × Total Units × .01 = Amount of acres of land to be dedicated 
(c)  In-lieu payments. If a multiple-family development as described in subsection (b) above is too small or for some other valid reason it is not feasible or advisable to dedicate open space land or land for recreation purposes, as determined by the town commission, the developer shall make an in-lieu payment to the town of a sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each unit. The in-lieu payment shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. The in-lieu payment shall be deposited into a separate nonlapsing open space land and recreational land fund established and maintained by the town. 
(d)  Single-family units. For a single-family unit, an in-lieu payment for each unit shall be required for the person seeking a building permit for that unit and shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a building permit. For a single-family unit which is built upon a lot which is part of a subdivision but which had not been built upon at the time the subdivision was originally subdivided into lots, an in-lieu payment of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be required from the person seeking a building permit for that unit and shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a building permit for that unit. 
(e)  Limitation on use of land and fees. The land and fees received under this section shall be used for the purpose of providing open space land and recreational facilities. The town shall establish a separate nonlapsing open space land and recreational land fund into which in-lieu payments shall be deposited. The money in this account shall be expended by the town only for the acquisition of open space land and recreation lands, improvement to lands consistent with these open space land and recreational purposes, and providing equipment and personal property incidental thereto. 
(f)  Requirements of deed. Any land required to be dedicated under this section shall be deeded to the town with marketable title free and clear of all encumbrances prior to the first issuance of a building permit for the development. 
(g)  Program for acquisition of lands. The town commission shall establish an effective program for the acquisition of lands for development as recreational facilities and open space areas in order to meet the existing need for municipal recreational and open space areas, and to meet, as it occurs, the need for municipal recreational facilities and open space areas created by further residential developments constructed after the effective date of this section. The annual budget and capital improvement program of the town shall provide for appropriation of funds as may be necessary to carry out the town's program for the acquisition of land for municipal recreational facilities and open space areas. The funds necessary to acquire lands to meet the existing need for municipal recreational facilities and open space must be provided from a source of revenue other than from amounts deposited in the open space land and recreational land fund. Amounts deposited in the fund shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, for the purpose of acquiring and developing land necessary to meet the need for municipal recreational facilities and open space areas created by new development in order to ensure that such recreational facilities or open space areas will be available to and substantially benefit residents of new developments. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 1, 9-7-88) 
Sec. 20-3. - Adoption of comprehensive plan. 
    The Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Highland Beach, entitled "Comprehensive Plan Town of Highland Beach, Florida," dated September 19, 1989, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit "A" to Ordinance Number 581 and incorporated herein by reference, is hereby adopted for the area of jurisdiction of the Town of Highland Beach pursuant to the Chapter 163, Part II, of the Laws of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 581, 9-19-89) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 581, adopted Sept. 19, 1989, did not specifically amend the Code and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included herein as § 20-3. 
State Law reference- Adoption of comprehensive plan, F.S. § 163.3167. 
Secs. 20-4-20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Local planning agency, F.S. § 163.3174. 

Sec. 20-26. - Established; membership; function. 
(a)  A planning board is hereby established. Such board shall consist of seven (7) regular members appointed by the town commission. Prior to appointment, all applicants must complete the town's application form and must be residents of the town. The members shall serve staggered terms commencing with the date of their appointment. All regular appointments shall be made for a term of three (3) years. 
(b)  The planning board shall review all matters of community planning, site plan reviews, plat reviews for subdivisions and any other division of land, with a recommendation of approval, approval with conditions or disapproval by a majority vote being submitted to the building official for transmittal to the town commission. Prior to such submittal, all plans shall be signed by the members, with their voting noted, and dated. 
(c)  The planning board shall process plans in the manner described in chapter 30 of this Code. See also chapter 30 regarding application for building permit and regarding certificates of occupancy. 
(d)  The planning board shall keep minutes of all meetings. The minutes shall be signed by all members of the planning board and retained in the town clerk's office. A chairperson and other officers deemed necessary to the operation of the board shall be elected yearly for one-year terms by the planning board members. 
(e)  Meetings of the planning board shall be held at the call of the town manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2-41; Ord. No. 562, 9-7-88; Ord. No. 617, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 633, § 2, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 15-008, § 3, 1-5-16 ; Ord. No. 17-004 , § 2, 11-7-17; Ord. No. 18-004 , § 4, 6-5-18) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Local planning agency, F.S. § 163.3174. 
Sec. 20-27. - Qualifications; filling vacancies; compensation; rules. 
    The town commission shall by resolution establish qualifications of planning board members, provide for filling vacancies and removal, provide for compensation, and provide for rules governing the proceedings of the planning board. 
(Code 1972, § 2-42) 
Sec. 20-28. - Designation of local planning agency. 
(a)  The town hereby declares its intent to exercise authority granted by F.S. ch. 163, pt. II (F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.). 
(b)  The planning board is hereby designated as the local planning agency pursuant to F.S. ch. 163, pt. II (F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.). 
(c)  The local planning agency shall prepare a comprehensive plan pursuant to F.S. ch. 163, pt. II (F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.), after hearings to be held after due public notice and shall make recommendations to the town commission regarding the adoption of such plan or element or portion thereof. 
(Code 1972, §§ 2-41, 2-42.1) 
State Law reference- Duties of local planning agency, F.S. § 163.3174; required and optional elements of comprehensive plan, studies and surveys, F.S. § 163.3177. 
Secs. 20-29-20-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS; ADMINISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; zoning, Ch. 30; housing board of adjustments and appeals, § 12-3; 

Sec. 20-46. - Membership; terms; removal; filling of vacancies. 
    A board of adjustment and appeals having been established pursuant to the town's adoption of F.S. ch. 163, pt. II (F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.), shall consist of seven (7) members designated as such to be appointed by the town commission, each for a term of three (3) years. No member shall serve for more than six (6) consecutive years. Vacancies shall be filled by the town commission within thirty (30) days after the vacancy occurs for the unexpired term of the member affected. No member of the board shall be an official or employee of the town. 
(Code 1972, § 2-81; Ord. No. 617, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 633, § 3, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 688, § 12, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 18-004 , § 4, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 20-47. - Organization; rules; records. 
    The board of adjustment and appeals shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson and shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the town. Terms of all officers shall be for one year with eligibility for reelection. The board shall adopt rules for transaction of its business, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be public record. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact. 
(Code 1972, § 2-82; Ord. No. 688, § 12, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 18-004 , § 4, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 20-48. - Meetings; filing of minutes. 
    Meetings of the board of adjustment and appeals shall be held at the call of the town manager. Minutes of the board shall be filed promptly with the town clerk. 
(Code 1972, § 2-83; Ord. No. 688, § 12, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 15-008, § 4, 1-5-16 ; Ord. No. 18-004 , § 4, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 20-49. - Copies of all business; distribution. 
    Copies of every application and appeal, notice of public hearing, and resolution of the board of adjustment and appeals shall be forwarded to each member of the town commission and planning board if the development will be presented to the town commission or planning board. 
(Code 1972, § 2-84; Ord. No. 688, § 12, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 18-004 , § 4, 6-5-18) 
Sec. 20-50. - Funding; establishment of fees. 
    The town commission is authorized and empowered to appropriate such funds as it may see fit for honoraria, fees and expenses necessary in the conduct of the work of the board of adjustment and appeals. The town commission is authorized and empowered to establish a schedule of fees to be charged by the board. 
(Code 1972, § 2-85; Ord. No. 688, § 12, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 20-51. - Inspections. 
    The town commission and board of adjustment and appeals may conduct on-site inspections in conjunction with all applications for variances and for administrative review. 
(Code 1972, § 2-86; Ord. No. 688, § 12, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 18-004 , § 4, 6-5-18; Ord. No. 18-008 , § 2, 10-2-18) 
Secs. 20-52-20-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 597, § 1, adopted Aug. 22, 1990, amended the 1972 Code by the addition of Ch. 31 and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included herein as Art. IV, Divs. 1-6. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and structures, Ch. 6; coastal construction code, § 6-76 et seq.; seawalls, bulkheads and retaining walls, § 6-126 et seq.; land clearance, Ch. 13; land filling, Ch. 14; xeriscape-landscape requirements, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Required land development regulations, F.S. § 163.3202. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-101. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish those resources or areas of a development site that must be protected from harmful effects of development. A developer should apply the provisions of this article to a proposed development site before any other development design work is done. Application of the provisions of this article anticipate that a proposed development site will be planned by determining areas that may be developed and areas that must generally be left free of development activity. The proposed development should then be designed to fit within the areas that may be developed. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(1), 8-22-90) 
Secs. 20-102-20-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE AND UNDERSTORY PRESERVATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Xeriscape-landscape requirements, installation and maintenance, Ch 28. 

Sec. 20-121. - Generally. 
    This division establishes rules and regulations governing the protection of trees and vegetative cover within the limits of the Town of Highland Beach, to encourage the proliferation of trees and vegetation within the town as well as their replacement, in recognition of their importance and their meaningful contribution to a healthy, beautiful and safer community attributable to their carbon dioxide absorption, oxygen production, dust filtration, wind and noise reduction, soil erosion prevention, beach erosion protection, surface drainage improvement, beautification and aesthetic enhancement of improved and vacant lands, and the general promotion of the health, safety, welfare and well being of the community. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.1), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-122. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed. 
    Buildable area. Buildable area shall be defined to mean that portion of a building site exclusive of the required yard areas on which a structure or building improvements may be erected. 
    Crown. The main mass of branching of a plant above the ground. 
    DBH. Diameter at breast height. "Breast height" is defined to be fifty-four (54) inches above the surface of the ground at the base of the plant or tree. In the case of a tree with multiple main stems, the diameter shall be the sum of the diameters of the stems. 
    Drip line. A vertical line run through the outermost portion of the crown of a tree and extending to the ground, provided, however, that the same shall be not less than a ten-foot diameter circle which is drawn from the center of the trunk of a tree. 
    Historic tree. A historic tree shall mean a tree which has been found by a qualified recognized expert to be of notable historic interest because of its age, type, size or historic association and has been so designated and that designation has been officially made and promulgated as part of the office records of the town. 
    Mangrove. Rooted trees and seedlings of the following species, but only when having a coastal or estuarine association: 
Red Mangrove ( Rhizophora mangle ). 
White Mangrove ( Laguncularia racemosa ). 
Black Mangrove ( Avicennia germinans ). 
Buttonwood Mangrove ( Conocarpus erecta ). 
    Protected tree. Any tree that has a DBH of more than eight (8) inches, and which is not otherwise exempted from this Code. For the purpose of this Code, all mangroves are hereby declared to be protected trees. In addition, all palms with at least four and one-half (41/2) feet of clear trunk between the ground level and the lowest branch are declared to be protected trees. 
    Removal. Removal of trees also includes any intentional or negligent act which will cause a tree to decline and die within a period of three (3) years, including but not limited to such damage inflicted upon the root system of a tree by the operation of heavy machinery; the change of the natural grade above the root system of a tree or around the trunk of a tree; damages from injury or from fire inflicted on trees which results in or permits infections or pest infestations; and relocation, damage, or poison. 
    Shrub. Shrub shall mean a bushy, woody plant, usually with several permanent stems, and usually not over ten (10) feet high at its maturity. 
    Specimen tree. A specimen tree shall mean a tree which has been determined by the judgment of a qualified recognized expert to be of high value because of its type, size, age or other professional criteria, and has been so designated and that designation has been officially made and promulgated as part of the official records of the town. 
    Tree. Any self-supporting woody perennial plant which has a DBH of two (2) inches or more and which normally attains an overall height of at least fifteen (15) feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. It may appear to have several stems or trunks as in several varieties of oak. 
    Tree protection zone. A circular zone around each protected tree defined as follows: 
(1)  If the drip line is less than ten (10) feet from the trunk of the tree, the zone shall be that area within a radius of ten (10) feet around the tree. 
(2)  If the drip line is more than ten (10) feet from the trunk of the tree, but less than twenty (20) feet, the zone shall be that area within a radius of the full drip line around the tree. 
(3)  If the drip line is twenty (20) feet or more from the trunk of the tree, the zone shall be that area within a radius of twenty (20) feet around the tree. 
    Vegetation inventory. A document which delineates the location and identifies the vegetation upon a lot, and which meets the standards established in section 20-127. 
    Yards. Yard shall mean the front, side or rear year as established and required under the comprehensive zoning code and the zoning district requirements applicable thereto. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.3), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-123. - Application of division. 
    The terms and provisions of this division shall apply to real property as follows: 
(1)  All real property upon which protected, specimen or historic trees are located which trees have been designated as such under the provisions of this division. 
(2)  All vacant and undeveloped property. 
(3)  All property in all zoning classifications that is intended to be redeveloped. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.4), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-124. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Single-family homes. Lots or parcels of land on which a single-family home is used as a residence shall be exempt from all provisions of these tree protection regulations, except that historic or specimen trees on such parcels shall be protected according to these regulations. This shall not be construed to exempt any residential developments that require the approval of a development plan by the town commission. 
(b)  Nuisance and unhealthy trees. Trees that are exempt from the tree protection requirements of this division are reflected in the current exemption list for tree protection provided by the Land Development Code of Palm Beach County, which list is hereby incorporated by reference. 
(c)  Utility operations. Tree removals by duly constituted communication, water, sewer, electrical or other utility companies or federal, state, or county agencies, or engineers or surveyors working under a contract with such utility companies or agencies shall be exempt, provided the removal is limited to those areas necessary for maintenance of existing lines or facilities or for construction of new lines or facilities in furtherance of providing utility service to its customers, and provided further that the activity is conducted so as to avoid any unnecessary removal and, in the case of aerial electrical utility lines, is not greater than that specified by the National Electrical Safety Codes as necessary to achieve safe electrical clearances. Written notice of the removal shall be provided to the department five (5) days prior to the removal, except that when the removal is needed to restore interrupted service under emergency conditions, no prior notice is required. 
(d)  Surveyors. A Florida licensed land surveyor in the performance of his duties provided such alteration is limited to a swath three (3) feet or less in width. 
(e)  Emergencies. During emergencies caused by a hurricane or other disaster, the building official may suspend these tree protection regulations. 
(f)  Hazardous trees exempt. In the event that any tree shall be determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare or safety, and requires immediate removal without delay, written authorization may be given by the building department and the trees removed without obtaining a permit as herein required. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.5), 8-22-90; Ord. No. 688, § 13, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 20-125. - Eradication program for prohibited plant species. 
    Each landscape plan required or permitted to be submitted by this article shall include a program to eradicate and prevent the re-establishment of prohibited plant species. Prohibited plant species include trees reflected in the current exemption list for tree protection provided by the Land Development Code of Palm Beach County, which list is hereby incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.6), 8-22-90; Ord. No. 688, § 13, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 20-126. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person, organization, society, association or corporation, or any agent or representative thereof, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or move, or effectively destroy through damaging, any protected tree, specimen tree or historic tree situated on property described above without first obtaining a permit as herein provided. 
(b)  Any permit so issued shall expire and become null and void if work authorized by such permit is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of the permit or if such work when commenced is suspended or abandoned at any time for a period of ninety (90) days. One extension up to sixty (60) days may be granted by the town for sufficient cause which must be submitted in writing by the permittee. If work has commenced and the permit becomes null and void or expires because of lack of progress or abandonment, a new permit covering the proposed tree removal activity shall be obtained before proceeding with the work. This provision shall not be applicable in case of civil commotion, or when said work is halted due to legal action by the town against the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.7), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-127. - Application for permit. 
    Permits for removal, relocation or replacement of trees covered herein shall be obtained by making application for the permit to the building department. The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A written statement specifying the location of the property and the expected land use and indicating the reasons for removal, relocation or replacement of trees thereon. 
(2)  Two (2) copies of a legible site plan drawn to a minimum scale of one inch equals twenty (20) feet unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the building official that a lesser detailed scale site plan of the area involved, either in whole or in part, will be sufficient for the purposes of this article, in which case an appropriate substitution shall be acceptable. Aerial photographs having a minimum scale of one inch equals fifty (50) feet may also be submitted for consideration as such an acceptable substitute for a site plan. 
(3)  A generalized vegetation inventory showing the approximate location and extent of vegetation upon the site. The inventory shall be based upon the most current available information. When the permit is requested due to an anticipated development activity, information shall be provided as appropriate for such development. For nonresidential and multi-family development, the inventory may be in the form of a field survey, and shall be accompanied by photographs illustrating typical areas of vegetation. For individual single-family or duplex development, the inventory may be in the form of hand drawn sketches accompanied by photographs of existing site conditions. The generalized vegetation inventory shall be prepared at the same scale as the site development plans, if for proposed development, or in some other manner which clearly illustrates the relationships between the areas of vegetation and the existing proposed site improvements. 
(4)  A brief written assessment of the plant communities which have been identified on the site. The assessment shall include an evaluation of character and quality of the plant communities identified, including their rarity, viability, and such other physical characteristics and factors which may affect their preservation. The assessment and evaluation shall be prepared by the Palm Beach County Soil and Water Conservation District, or their designees, or by a forester, ecologist, horticulturist, landscape architect, or by an aborist certified by the National Arborist Association, at the owners expense. 
(5)  The town's landscape consultant may require that the application include such additional information which is reasonable and necessary for adequate administration of this section. 
The application shall be submitted with no less than eight (8) copies of accompanying documents. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.8), 8-22-90; Ord. No. 688, § 14, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 20-128. - Site plan information. 
    Site plans submitted in connection with applications for permits for the removal, relocation or replacement of trees shall include the following information and details which shall be summarized in legend form on the plan: 
(1)  Survey. 
(2)  Site plan showing existing and proposed elevations, existing or proposed structures and/or improvements properly dimensioned and referenced to property lines, set back, yard requirements and open space relationships. 
(3)  Location of existing and proposed utilities. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.9), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-129. - Alternate site plan information. 
    In the event that there are no trees, shrubs or vegetative cover located on the site to be developed which are required to be protected under the provisions of this division, the applicant shall so state in his application for permit hereunder. If such statement is substantiated by a field inspection of the site by the building official or qualified specialist retained for such purpose, the applicant shall be relieved of the necessity of supplying unnecessary or unimportant information. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.10), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-130. - Pre-application inspection service. 
    In connection with applications under the alternate site plan procedure and in connection with applications involving large tracts of property, a qualified expert shall make his services available for pre-application inspection of the sites involved. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.11), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-131. - Application processing and review. 
    Upon receipt of a proper application pursuant to this division together with payment of a fee required thereon, the building department shall promptly review same and shall arrange for detailed examination, review and report, which at the discretion of the building inspector, may include a field check of the site either by the inspector himself or by his designee. Such application shall also be referred to other town departments, the town's landscape consultant, or other governmental agencies as may be necessary or required in order to determine whether any adverse effects will be incurred as to the general welfare of the public, adjacent properties or town services and facilities. These findings and those of the building inspector shall be included by the building department as the basis for its acceptance or denial of the aforesaid application for permit. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.12), 8-22-90; Ord. No. 688, § 14, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 20-132. - Issuance of permits. 
    If the building inspector, based upon the recommendations and findings, is satisfied that the work of removing, relocating or replacing trees, shrubs or natural vegetative cover, described in the application for permit and the drawings filed therewith conform to the requirements of this division and the other laws and ordinances applicable, he shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.13), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-133. - Special conditions for issuance of permits for removal. 
(a)  It is the intent of this section to minimize the removal of protected trees and that no authorization shall be granted to remove a tree if the developer has failed to take reasonable measures to design and locate the proposed improvements so that the number of protected trees to be removed is minimized. In particular, the design must attempt to preserve specimen and historic trees. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for removal of trees, shrubs or vegetative cover unless one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  The tree is located in the buildable area or yard area where a structure or improvements may be placed and for which a valid building permit has been issued, and it unreasonably restricts the permitted use of the property and such tree cannot reasonably be relocated elsewhere on the property, or at the discretion of the building official, trees may be relocated or removed in order to meet requirements pursuant to obtaining a building permit, covered in section 20-134(h). 
(2)  The tree cannot be relocated on or off the site because of the age, type, or size of the tree. 
(3)  The tree is diseased, injured, in danger of falling, too close to existing or proposed structures, interferes with existing utility service, creates unsafe vision clearance, or conflicts with other ordinances or regulations. 
(4)  It is in the welfare of the general public that the tree be removed for a reason other than set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.14), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-134. - Special conditions for issuance of permits for relocation or replacement; costs of moving to be borne by owner; replacement of destroyed trees, etc. 
(a)  Pursuant to an application for a permit to relocate trees which interfere with the buildable area of the site to an alternate location on the property or as a condition to the granting of a removal permit hereunder, the applicant may be permitted, where practical, to relocate the tree being removed to an appropriate new location on the site. Similarly, an applicant may be permitted to replace a tree being removed with another tree to be located elsewhere on the site. 
(b)  Trees removed pursuant to paragraph (a) above shall be replaced at the expense of the developer. 
(c)  For each inch of diameter of breast height removed, an inch of diameter at breast height shall be replaced. 
(d)  A replacement tree may be a tree moved from one location to another on the site, or moved off the site pursuant to paragraph (e) below. The building official shall prescribe measures to ensure the survival of the tree. 
(e)  Replacement trees shall, if practicable, be planted on the development site. If not practicable, replacement trees may be donated, or a fee in lieu may be paid, to the town for purposes of planting trees on public property. The fee in lieu shall be based on the cost of purchasing the requisite size and number of replacement trees. 
(f)  All replacement trees shall be of a type that will attain an overall height at maturity of at least fifteen (15) feet and a trunk diameter at maturity of at least three (3) inches, measured four and one-half (41/2) feet above grade, and shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in overall height when planted. 
(g)  When moving any landscaping which is in a public right-of-way must be moved for public safety reasons or other valid purpose determined to be in the public interest, any costs incurred in such removal and/or relocation shall be borne by the owner of the landscaping improvements. 
(h)  Any trees, shrubs and/or vegetation cover that becomes destroyed and/or disturbed as a result of test borings or any other procedures relative to proposed building must be replaced and/or restored within one hundred and eighty (180) days, if the building permit is not applied for and/or issued within this period, or within on hundred and eighty (180) days of the expiration of any building permit which has been once issued and then is allowed to expire. A cash bond shall be in an amount to be set at the discretion of the building official but not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), and shall be posted with the town in order to assure said replacement and/or restoration. Upon expiration of the one hundred and eighty (180) day period, if the building permit has not been properly applied for, or has been allowed to expire, said bond will be forfeited. If the building permit has been properly applied for during the one hundred and eighty (180) day period, and has not been allowed to expire and the building is completed in accordance with the plans submitted to the town, said bond will be returned. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.15), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-135. - Designation of specimen and historic trees. 
(a)  Any person, inclusive of local officials, may by written request to the town manager recommend from time to time the establishment by official designation certain trees located within the Town of Highland Beach as specimen or historic trees. Upon receipt of such a written recommendation, the town commission shall review same and add thereto their own comments and recommendations. The town commission shall consider the request of any person during a public hearing, with due notice to the owner of the tree, and shall either accept, modify or deny same and shall designate by ordinance those trees it deems appropriate as specimen or historic trees. 
(b)  The town hereby designates the following trees as specimen trees, and as such they are to be properly preserved and protected: 
(1)  Ficus, spp.-Lot 106, West of A1A, Town of Highland Beach. 
(2)  Those certain trees planted pursuant to the Highland Beach Greening of A1A program, including, but not limited to, the following species: 
a.  Buttonwood. 
b.  Seaside Mahoe. 
c.  Calophyllum. 
d.  Black Olive. 
e.  Norohonia. 
f.  Royal Palm. 
g.  Tabebuia. 
h.  Pigeon Plum. 
(c)  In order to properly preserve and protect the above specimen trees, no clearing or construction equipment or activity should be allowed within the confines of the drip line of the trees. This includes any area under the foliage. The purpose of this consideration is the protection of the subterranean life support systems. 
(d)  No historic or specimen tree shall be removed without a finding by the town commission that the tree is a hazard or that it is not economically or practically feasible to develop the parcel without removing the tree. The developer shall explain in detail why the tree is a hazard or why it is not economically or practically feasible to develop the parcel without removing the historic or specimen tree. The building official shall make a presentation to the town commission on the application and make a recommendation as to whether it should be approved or denied. The decision by the town commission on the application shall be made within forty-five (45) days of the date the application was filed. 
(e)  Any person, organization, society, association or corporation, or any agent or representative thereof, who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided for under section 20-146. In addition, violation of the above provisions shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of any permit granted for the construction or remodeling of any building or structure on the site so involved. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.16), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-136. - Schedule of permit fees. 
    Tree removal or relocation permit fee. Permits for removal, relocation or replacement of trees pursuant to the regulations and controls provided under this division are hereby established in accordance with the following schedule: 
Twenty-five dollars ($25.00), or five dollars ($5.00) per acre, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.17), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-137. - Tree protection during land clearing and construction. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  To assure the health and survival of protected trees that are not to be removed, the developer shall avoid the following kinds of tree injuries during all development activities: 
a.  Mechanical injuries to roots, trunks, and branches; 
b.  Injuries by chemical poisoning; 
c.  Injuries by grade changes; 
d.  Injuries by excavations; and 
e.  Injuries by paving. 
(2)  At a minimum, the protective measures described below shall be taken where appropriate to the development activity. The measures shall be planned and undertaken in consultation with the building official and shall not be construed as limiting the authority of the town commission, upon the advice of the building official to impose additional reasonable requirements as may be necessary to preserve the health of protected trees in particular circumstances. 
(b)  Avoiding mechanical injuries. 
(1)  Prior to any land preparation or other development activities a protective barrier easily visible to equipment operators shall be placed around all protected trees so as to encompass the entire tree protection zone. See Figure 2.18-A at the end of this division. 
(2)  No attachment, wires (other than supportive wires), signs or permits may be fastened to any protected tree. 
(3)  No equipment, construction materials or debris of any kind shall be placed within the protective barrier. 
(4)  Landscaping activities within the bounds of the protective barrier (before and after it is removed) shall be accomplished with light machinery or manual labor. Grubbing and similar activities are prohibited. 
(5)  In lieu of constructing the barriers required above, the developer may physically designate large areas containing protected trees where no land preparation or other development activities of any kind will occur. The area shall be designated by placing stakes a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet apart and tying ribbon, plastic tape, rope, etc., from stake to stake along the outside perimeter of the area. This perimeter line shall be beyond the tree protection zone of any protected trees growing within the area. 
(6)  Required protective barriers and perimeter lines shall remain in place until all construction activity, except landscaping within the protected area, is terminated. 
(c)  Avoiding injuries due to chemical poisoning. 
(1)  No fuel, paint, solvent, oil, thinner, asphalt, cement, grout or any other construction chemical or other material or tools of any kind shall be stored, or allowed in any manner to enter, within a required protective barrier or perimeter line. 
(2)  No equipment shall be cleaned within a required protective barrier or perimeter line. 
(d)  Avoiding injuries due to grade changes. Grade changes shall not be made within the tree protection zone unless the following protective measures are taken: 
(1)  When raising the grade, the following measures shall be taken: 
a.  Within the tree protection zone, existing sod, vegetation and leaf litter shall be removed and the solid loosened without injuring the roots. 
b.  The area within the tree protection zone shall be properly fertilized to improve the vigor and growth of the roots. 
c.  Porous, four-inch agriculture drain tiles shall be laid over the soil to drain liquids away from the trunk. A drop of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch per foot shall be provided. The drain field shall be designed to provide adequate drainage of the existing configuration of the trees. 
d.  The number of drains shall depend upon soil material; lighter sandy soils and porous gravelly material require fewer drains than heavy nonporous soils. 
e.  Aeration shall be provided by installing vertical tiles along the system. The vertical tiles shall be filled with gravel and capped with a heavy-duty mesh to keep out trash and debris. 
f.  Dry wells shall be large enough to allow for maximum growth of the tree trunk. Most large shade trees require at least a sixty-inch diameter well. For slow-growing mature trees, a space of twelve to eighteen (12-18) inches shall be provided between the trunk and the side of the well at every point. 
g.  To prevent washing of material into the well, the dry well casing walls shall be high enough to bring the coping just above the level of the proposed fill. 
h.  Dry well walls shall be constructed of materials that permit passage of air and water. Concrete blocks backed with galvanized screening may be used for the sides of the well. 
i.  Gratings or barriers shall be used around openings that are large enough to prevent a hazard to pedestrians. 
j.  Open wells shall be cleaned regularly to remove sediment, leaves, and debris that might interfere with the free passage of air. 
k.  Large stones shall be placed over the drainage tiles and a layer of smaller stones shall be placed over the remainder of the ground within the drip line. 
l.  A layer of gravel shall be placed over the stones. 
m.  The fill shall be completed with a layer of porous soil. 
See Figures 2.18-B through 2.18-D at the end of this division. 
(2)  When lowering the grade, the following measures shall be taken: 
a.  Roots shall be cut cleanly and retrimmed after excavation. 
b.  The canopy shall be pruned to aid in maintaining tree vigor. 
c.  When lowering the grade of the soil surrounding a protected tree, the maximum number of tree roots within the tree protection zone shall be preserved by using any of the following methods: 
1.  Terracing. The area within the tree protection zone is left at the original grade by terracing. 
2.  Retaining wall. The area within the tree protection zone is left at the original grade constructing a dry retaining wall. The retaining wall shall be porous to allow for aeration. 
3.  Terracing and retaining wall. The area within the tree protection zone is left at the original grade by the combined use of terracing and dry retaining wall. 
See Figure 2.18-E at the end of this division. 
(3)  Minor changes in grade. When the change in grade is minor, as determined by the building official, lesser protective measures than those described above may be taken. The building official shall approve the use of these methods where their use will not endanger the health of the protected tree. 
(e)  Avoiding injuries due to excavations. 
(1)  Water, sewer, and other utility lines should be routed around the tree protection zones of protected trees. 
(2)  If a line cannot reasonably be routed around the tree protection zone, the line shall be tunneled beneath the area within the zone. The tunnel shall be offset to one side of the trunk to prevent damage to the main tap roots. 
(f)  Avoiding injury by paving within the drip line. Porous paving may be placed within the tree protection zone of a protected tree, so long as no damage is inflicted to the tree by grade change, compaction of the soil, or any other cause. 
(g)  Inspections. During the land clearing and construction stage of development the building official or his assigned officer, shall periodically inspect the site to insure compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.18), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-138. - Special provisions for the protection of mangroves. 
(a)  Generally. In addition to the foregoing tree protection requirements, the following special provisions shall apply to the removal or alteration of mangroves (Black Mangrove, Avicennia germinans; White Mangrove, Laguncularia racemosa; Red Mangrove, Rhizophora mangle ). 
(b)  Replacement. Mangroves may not be removed unless the developer replaces or relocates on the same development site at least an equal number of mangroves, necessary to revegetate a land area equal to or greater than the land area from which mangroves were removed. The developer shall provide a plan to be approved by the building official or designee, to assure the survival of the replaced or relocated mangroves and to stabilize the shoreline from which mangroves were removed. The approved plan is an express condition of any permit. Failure to carry out any provision of the plan shall be a violation of this Code. 
(c)  Other protective measures. The following protective measures apply to all mangroves. 
(1)  A permit shall be obtained from DER for any alteration of mangroves in jurisdictional waters. 
(2)  A permit shall be obtained from the town for any alteration of mangroves which are exempt from DER permit requirements. 
(3)  Standards for alteration of mangroves shall be those contained in Rule 17.27, Mangrove Protection, of the Florida Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.19), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-139. - Preservation of protected trees as grounds for variance from other requirements of this Code. 
    The preservation of any protected tree may be considered as a factor in rendering a decision upon an application for a variance from the literal application of other requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.20), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-140. - Exceptions for betterment plans. 
    Applicants for permits shall be entitled to demonstrate by means of a proper landscape plan that an improvement or betterment of the environment can be accomplished over the existing site conditions, if such landscape plan is carried out to its fullest. If such a detailed landscape plan is so offered and is accepted by the city, the applicant shall guarantee by adequate bond, the faithful adherence and completion of such landscape plan. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.21), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-141. - Disposal of diseased trees. 
    Trees which are found to be diseased and to be in danger of contaminating other trees or of spreading such tree infection or disease, shall be removed and disposed of, if necessary, without undue delay and on an emergency basis, as the circumstances may require, cost to be borne by owner. The lethal yellowing of coconut disease shall be considered such an emergency type of tree infection or disease. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.23), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-142. - Natural growth to be preserved. 
    Every effort shall be put forth on all undeveloped property to retain particular area of natural vegetative cover that is determined to be a fragile ecosystem, unique, valuable or nearly extinct in our area, unless it would unduly restrict the use of surrounding property or create a condition of undue hardship on said owner. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.24), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-143. - Natural vegetative cover on beach dunes. 
    The natural vegetative cover on beach dunes shall be preserved in an undisturbed state of growth as a fragile ecosystem. Such beach dune vegetation, grass, sea grape and tree development shall be altered, removed or changed only in accordance with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.25), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-144. - Public lands. 
    No tree shall be removed from any town lands, public park or any areas of the public right-of-way except in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.26), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-145. - Appeals from decisions of the building department. 
    Any person, organization, society, association or corporation, or any agent or representative thereof, aggrieved by any decision of the building department in the endorsement of any terms or provisions of this division, may appeal to the town commission by filing within fifteen (15) days after the date of the decision complained of, a written notice of appeal thereof with the town manager, with a copy to the town clerk, which shall set forth concisely the decision appealed from and the reasons or grounds for the appeal. Each appeal shall cover the cost of publishing and mailing notices of hearing. The town commission shall hear and consider all facts material to the appeal and render a decision promptly. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.27), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-146. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, organization, society, association or corporation, or any agent or representative thereof, violating the provisions of any section of this division shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to the provisions of section 18-2 of the Code of Ordinances. The removal of each tree shall constitute a separate offense under this division. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and the conviction thereof shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of any permit granted for the construction or remodeling of any building or structure on the site so involved. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(2.28), 8-22-90) 
Secs. 20-147-20-180. - Reserved. 

Figure 2.18-A 

Figure 2.18-B 

Figure 2.18-C 

Figure 2.18-D 

Figure 2.18-E 
DIVISION 3. - LETHAL YELLOWING DISEASE 

Sec. 20-181. - Determination of threat to palm trees. 
    It has been found that lethal yellowing is a serious threat to the palm trees in the town to such an extent that many of the palm trees in the town may be threatened with extinction, requiring effective action. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(3.1), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-182. - Inoculation-Required. 
    All palm trees within the Town of Highland Beach susceptible to lethal yellowing shall be inoculated with an antibiotic approved and recommended by the Department of Agriculture of the State of Florida. The first inoculation shall be completed within sixty (60) days following the effective date of this article, and shall be repeated each one hundred and twenty (120) days thereafter until the danger and threat of infection by lethal yellowing is certified by the action of the town commission as past. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(3.2), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-183. - Same-Owner to bear costs; certification; securing antibiotic by town, waiver of liability of town. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of owners of properties to inoculate and to bear any and all costs relative thereto, and such costs shall not be borne by the town. 
(b)  If the inoculation is done by a licensed contractor, said contractor shall in turn certify to such inoculation by executing and filing within one week with the town a form certifying to that effect. The form to be used for such certification shall be supplied, upon request, by the town. If the inoculation is done by the owner, or his agent, the owner shall certify in the same manner as above provided to be done by a contractor, within one week. 
(c)  As long as the town can secure the antibiotic at a cost less than that amount available to nonmunicipalities, the town shall assist in procurement of the antibiotic for this purpose. Property owners and/or their designated agents may avail themselves of this service. In no event shall there be any liability on behalf of the town for the effectiveness and/or effects of the treatment with the antibiotic procured from the town. Further, at the time of procurement of the antibiotic from the town, each property owner and/or his designated agent shall execute a waiver of any town liability, so as to hold the Town of Highland Beach harmless. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(3.3), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-184. - Infected trees declared nuisance. 
    All palm trees infected with lethal yellowing are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. All species and varieties of palm trees that are dead or substantially dead, including the stumps thereof, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(3.4), 8-22-90) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 17. 
Sec. 20-185. - Removal of dead trees, stumps, at owner's expense. 
    No owner of any lot or parcel of land in the town shall permit to remain or maintain on any such lot or parcel any dead or substantially dead palm trees, including the stumps thereof, of any variety or species of palm tree susceptible to lethal yellowing, and the same shall be promptly removed by the owner at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(3.5), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-186. - Removal by town upon failure of owner to comply with notice to remove; costs to be a lien on affected premises. 
    Upon the failure of any property owner, after ten (10) days' notice, to remove dead or substantially dead palm trees, including the stumps thereof, as set forth in section 20-185 hereof, the forces of the town or private contractors hired by the town may enter the premises where such trees are located without any liability for trespass, and cause such trees to be removed at the expense of the property owner, with the cost thereof to be assessed against the owner and to become a lien upon the premises. In the removal of trees, or stumps, same must be cut so that no part of the stumps shall extend above the ground level. The notice referred to in this section shall be given either personally or by mail, addressed to the owner at the property, and another copy thereof shall be visibly posted upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(3.6), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-187. - Right of entry for purposes of inspection, treatment or removal of affected trees. 
    The town manager (or the designated party) is authorized and empowered to enter on any lot or parcel of land in the town at any reasonable hour, for the purpose of inspecting or treating any palm trees situated thereon and may remove such specimens from any such trees as are required to implement the purposes of this division. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to take any action to prevent the town manager (or the designated party) from entering upon any lot or parcel of land in the town for the purpose of such inspection or treatment of such trees or any other act constituting the performance of their duties under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(3.7), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-188. - Responsibility of town with respect to trees located on public property. 
    The town is hereby required to comply with the terms and provisions of this divisions with respect to trees located upon public property or public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(3.8), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-189. - Enumeration of susceptible varieties of trees; applicability of division. 
(a)  The varieties of palm trees presently known to be susceptible to lethal yellowing are as follows: 
(1)  Cocos nucifera L. (coconut palm), all varieties, including Malayan dwarf. 
(2)  Pritchardia spp. (all species). 
(3)  Veitchia merrillii. (Becc.) H. E. Moore, (Christmas pal or Adonidia). 
(4)  Arikuryroba spp. (Arikury palm). 
(5)  Phoenix reclinata Jacq. 
(6)  Pheonic canariensis Hort. ex Chab (Canary Island date). 
(7)  Phoenix dactylifera L. 
(8)  Trachycarpus fortenei (Wendl.) (windmill palm). 
(9)  Caryota mitis Lour. (cluster fish-tail palm). 
(10)  Mascarena verschaffeltii (Wendl.) Bailey (spindle palm). 
(11)  Borassus flabellifer L. 
(b)  This division shall apply to all of the above species and varieties of palm trees and to such others as may be found subsequently by the Department of Agriculture of the State of Florida or other competent authority to be susceptible to said disease. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(3.9), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-190. - Severability. 
    Should any part of this division be declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall not affect the validity of the division as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(3.10), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-191. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this division by failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(3.11), 8-22-90) 
Secs. 20-192-20-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LANDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Provisions to protect environmentally sensitive lands required, F.S. § 163.3202(2)(e). 

Sec. 20-201. - General provisions. 
(a)  Relationship to other requirements relating to the protection of environmentally sensitive lands. In addition to meeting the following protection of environmentally sensitive lands requirements, development plans shall comply with applicable federal, state and water management district regulations relating to environmentally sensitive lands. In all cases the strictest of the applicable standards shall apply. 
(b)  Compliance when subdividing land. Each lot of a proposed subdivision must include a site suitable for constructing a structure in conformity with the standard of these environmentally sensitive lands regulations. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(4.1), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-202. - Creation of protected environmentally sensitive zones. 
(a)  Coastal Protection Zone. 
(1)  There is hereby created the "Coastal Protection Zone" in which special restrictions on development apply. Such restrictions are those contained in the Palm Beach County Coastal Protection Ordinance and Appendix as adopted by the Palm Beach County Commission on February 2, 1990. Such ordinance is hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  The Coastal Protection Zone extends from the mean high water line of the Atlantic Ocean to a line twenty-five (25) feet landward of the crest of the dune or the State of Florida Coastal Construction Control Line, whichever is more landward. 
(b)  Wetlands Protection Zone. 
(1)  There is hereby created a "Wetlands Protection Zone" in which special restrictions on development apply. Such restrictions are are those contained in the Palm Beach County Wetlands Protection Ordinance as adopted by the Palm Beach County Commission on February 2, 1990. Such ordinance is hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  A wetland regulated by this section shall be a wetland meeting the definition appearing in Section (3)(v) of the Palm Beach County Wetlands Protection Ordinance. 
(c)  Request for determination of boundaries. A developer may obtain a determination of the boundaries of a protected environmentally sensitive zone by submitting to the town manager by certified mail or hand delivery a request for determination of boundaries. The request must, as a minimum, set forth an adequate description of the land the developer wishes to develop, the nature of the developer's right to ownership or control of the land, and other information needed to make the determination. The town manager shall make the determination within thirty (30) working days of receiving the needed information from the developer. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(4.2), 8-22-90) 
Secs. 20-203-20-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HABITAT OF ENDANGERED OR THREATENED SPECIES 

Sec. 20-251. - Generally. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this division to provide standards necessary to protect the habitats of species, both flora and fauna, of endangered, threatened, or special concern status in the town. It is the intent of this division to require that an appropriate amount of land shall be set aside to protect habitat of rare, endangered, or special concern plant and animal species. 
(b)  Applicability. Areas subject to the standards of this section shall be those identified in the conservation element of the town comprehensive plan as habitat for rare and endangered species, threatened species, or species of special concern. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(5.1), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-252. - Habitat management plan. 
(a)  When required. A habitat management plan shall be prepared as a prerequisite to the approval of any development proposed on a site containing areas subject to the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Contents. The habitat management plan shall be prepared by an ecologist, biologist or other related professional. The plan shall document the presence of affected species, the land needs of the species that may be met on the development site, and shall recommend appropriate habitat management plans and other measures to protect the subject wildlife. 
(c)  Conformity of final development plan. The final development plan approved for a development shall substantially conform to the recommendations in the habitat management plan. 
(d)  Preservation of land. Where land on a proposed development site is to be preserved as habitat of rare, endangered or special concern species, such land shall be adjacent to existing viable habitat, a significant wetland system, floodplain, or wildlife corridor. If such lands are not adjacent to the development site, land to be set aside shall be of such quantity and quality as to provide viable habitat, as documented in the study required in paragraph (b) above. 
(e)  Fee in lieu. As an alternative to preservation of land, the city/county may establish a fee-in-lieu-of-land program, whereby the city/county can purchase land which will provide a significant habitat. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1(5.2), 8-22-90) 
Secs. 20-253-20-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, adopted August 2, 2016 , repealed division 6, which pertained to floodplains and derived from Ord. No. 597, § 1(6.1-6.6), 8-22-90. 

Sec. 20-301-20-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSISTENCY AND CONCURRENCY DETERMINATIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 598, § 1, adopted Aug. 22, 1990, amended the 1972 Code by the addition of Ch. 32 and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included herein as Art. V, §§ 20-321-20-326. 
State Law reference- Concurrency, F.S. § 163.3180. 

Sec. 20-321. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to describe the requirements and procedures for determination of consistency of proposed development projects with the Town of Highland Beach Comprehensive Plan, including meeting the concurrency requirements of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1(1), 8-22-90) 
Cross reference- Adoption of comprehensive plan, § 20-3. 
Sec. 20-322. - Definitions. 
    Concurrency. A condition where specified facilities and services have or will have the available capacity to meet the adopted level of service standard at the time of impact of the development project. 
    Development order. Any order issued by the town which grants, denies or grants with conditions, an application for development permit. 
    Development permit. Any building permit, zoning permit, subdivision approval, rezoning, certification, special exception, variance, or any other official action of local government having the effect of permitting the development of land. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1(2), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-323. - Determination of consistency. 
    Development shall be planned and constructed in accordance with regulations and requirements of the Town of Highland Beach and Palm Beach County Traffic Performance Standards. Prior to the issuance of a development order a determination of consistency shall be issued by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1(3), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-324. - System for the management of concurrency. 
(a)  Generally. The following method of ensuring concurrency shall be known as the system for the management of concurrency (SYMCON). The SYMCON is based upon the Town of Highland Beach Comprehensive Plan, specifically the capital improvements element and adopted level of service standards. The system is designed to ensure that the issuance of a final development order will not result in a degradation of the adopted levels of service for specified public facilities and services. The SYMCON also includes a monitoring system for determination of the availability of adequate capacity of public facilities and services to meet the adopted level of service standards. 
(b)  Adopted levels of service shall not be degraded. 
(1)  General rule. 
a.  All applications for development orders shall demonstrate that the proposed development does not degrade adopted levels of service in the town. 
b.  An application for a development permit shall demonstrate that the proposed development does not degrade adopted levels of service if there exists no development order under which the permit is sought, and no development order is required prior to the issuance of the permit, e.g., a residence on a parcel of unplatted land. 
c.  The latest point at which concurrency is determined is the final development order. If no development order is required, the latest point to determine concurrency is the first development permit on a site. 
(2)  Exception. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the prescribed levels of service may be degraded during the actual construction of new facilities, if upon completion and issuance of a certificate of occupancy of the new facilities the prescribed levels of service will be met. 
(c)  Determination of available capacity. For purposes of these regulations the available capacity of a facility shall be determined by: 
(1)  Adding together. 
a.  The total capacity of existing facilities operating at the required level of service; and 
b.  The total capacity of new facilities, if any, that will become available on or before the date of occupancy of the development. The capacity of new facilities may be counted only if one or more of the following is shown: 
1.  Construction of the new facilities is under way at the time of issuance of the final development order. 
2.  The new facilities are the subject of a binding executed contract for the construction of the facilities or the provision of services at the time of issuance of the final development order. 
3.  The new facilities are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement. An enforceable development agreement may include, but is not limited to, development agreements pursuant to F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243, or an agreement or development order pursuant to F.S. ch. 380. Such facilities shall be consistent with the capital improvements element of the town comprehensive plan. The agreement must guarantee that the necessary facilities and services will be in place when the impacts of the development occur. 
(2)  Subtracting from the number determined in section 20-324(c)(1) above that number which is the sum of: 
a.  The demand for the service or facility created by existing development as documented in the town comprehensive plan; and 
b.  The demand for the service or facility created by the anticipated completion of other approved developments, redevelopment, or other development activity. 
(3)  Failure to show available capacity. Where available capacity cannot be shown, the following methods may be used to maintain adopted level of service: 
a.  The project owner or developer may provide the necessary improvements to maintain level of service. In such cases the application shall include appropriate plans for improvements, documentation that such improvements are designed to provide the capacity necessary to achieve or maintain the level of service, and recordable instruments guaranteeing the construction, consistent with calculations of available capacity determined above. 
b.  The proposed project may be altered such that projected level of service is not less than the adopted level of service. 
(4)  Burden of showing compliance on developer. The burden of showing compliance with these level of service requirements shall be upon the developer. In order to be approvable, applications for development approval shall provide sufficient information showing compliance with these standards. 
(5)  Initial determination of concurrency. The initial determination of concurrency occurs during the review of the preliminary site plan, and shall include compliance with the level of service standards adopted by the town. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1(4), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-325. - Annual report. 
(a)  Contents. The town will prepare an annual report on the SYMCON that includes: 
(1)  A summary of actual development activity, including a summary of certificates of occupancy, indicating quantity of development represented by type and square footage. 
(2)  A summary of building permit activity, indicating: 
a.  Those that expired without commencing construction; 
b.  Those that are active at the time of the report; 
c.  The quantity of development represented by the outstanding building permits; 
d.  Those that result from final development orders issued prior to the adoption of this Code; and 
e.  Those that result from final development orders issued pursuant to the requirements of this Code. 
(3)  A summary of preliminary development orders issued, indicating: 
a.  Those that expired without subsequent final development orders; 
b.  Those that are valid at the time of the report; and 
c.  The phases and quantity of development represented by the outstanding preliminary development orders. 
(4)  A summary of final development orders issued, indicating: 
a.  Those that expired without subsequent building permits; 
b.  Those that were completed during the reporting period; 
c.  Those that are valid at the time of the report but do have associated building permits or construction activity; and 
d.  The phases and quantity of development represented by the outstanding final development orders. 
(5)  An evaluation of each facility and service indicating: 
a.  The capacity available for each at the beginning of the reporting period and the end of the reporting period; 
b.  The portion of the available capacity held for valid preliminary and final development orders; 
c.  A comparison between the actual capacity and calculated capacity resulting from approved preliminary development orders and final development orders; 
d.  A comparison between actual capacity and levels of service to adopted levels of service from the town comprehensive plan. 
e.  A forecast of the capacity for each facility based upon the most recently updated schedule of capital improvements in the town capital improvements element. 
(b)  Use of the annual report. The SYMCON annual report shall constitute prima facie evidence of the capacity and levels of service of public facilities for the purpose of issuing development orders during the twelve (12) months following completion of the annual report. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1(5), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-326. - Adopted levels of service. 
(a)  Potable water. Development activity shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for potable water as established in the potable water subelement of the town comprehensive plan: 
Minimum design flow ..... 206 gpd/ 
capita 
Pressure ..... 35 psi to user 
(b)  Wastewater. Development activities shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for wastewater treatment as established in the sanitary sewer subelement of the town comprehensive plan: 
Type of Use LOS 
Average Flow Residential 68 gpd/capita  
(c)  Transportation system. 
(1)  Level of service. Development activities shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for transportation systems as established in the transportation circulation element of the town comprehensive plan: 
Facility Peak Hour Peak Season 
Level of Service Arterial (S.R. A1A) D  
(2)  Determination of project impact. The impact of proposed development activity on available capacity shall be determined for each project on the entire length of S.R. A1A lying within the town. 
(d)  Drainage system. Development activities shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for the drainage system as established in the drainage subelement of the town comprehensive plan: 
Types of Use LOS Residential Three-year design storm; 10-minute concentration with one foot freeboard below gutter elevation.  
(e)  Solid waste. Development activities shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for solid waste as established in the solid waste subelement of the town comprehensive plan: 
Types of Use LOS Residential 5 lbs per capita per day through 1993 3.5 lbs per capita per day beginning 1995  
(f)  Recreation. Development activities shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for the recreational facilities as established in the recreation and open space element of the town comprehensive plan by the year 1993: 
Facility/ 
Activity Standard Beach 1 mile/25,000 population Swimming 1 public ocean access/25,000 population Tennis 1 court/10,000 population Shuffleboard 1 court/10,000 population Exercise/ 
jogging trail 10 station or 1 mile/10,000 population Fishing (nonboat) 1 public ocean access/10,000 population Bicycle trail 1 mile/5,000 population Passive open space 1 acre/1,000 population  
(Ord. No. 598, § 1(6), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 20-327-20-339. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 20-340. - General. 
(a)  Title. These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the Town of Highland Beach, hereinafter referred to as "this article." 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(c)  Intent. The purposes of this article and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
(d)  Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This article is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this article and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this article. 
(f)  Disclaimer of liability. This article shall not create liability on the part of the town commission of the Town of Highland Beach or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
Sec. 20-341. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Areas to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the Town of Highland Beach, as established in subsection 20-341(c) of this article. 
(c)  Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The Flood Insurance Study for Palm Beach County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated October 5, 2017, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this section and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the Town Hall, 3614 South Ocean Boulevard, Highland Beach, Florida 33487. 
(1)  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to section 20-344 of this article the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
a.  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this article and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
b.  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(d)  Other laws. The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this article and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This article shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this article. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ; Ord. No. 17-001 , § 2, 8-1-17) 
Sec. 20-342. - Duties and powers of the floodplain administrator. 
(a)  Designation. The building official is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(b)  General. The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this article consistent with the intent and purpose of this article and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this article without the granting of a variance pursuant to section 20-346 of this article. 
(c)  Applications and permits. The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this article; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this article is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(d)  Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this article is required. 
(e)  Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to section 20-346 of this article. 
(f)  Notices and orders. The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this article. 
(g)  Inspections. The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in section 20-345 of this article for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(h)  Other duties of the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to subsection 20-342(d) of this article; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, state floodplain management office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six (6) months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this article and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the Town of Highland Beach are modified; and 
(6)  Advise applicants for new buildings and structures, including substantial improvements, that are located in any unit of the coastal barrier resources system established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) and the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-591) that federal flood insurance is not available on such construction; areas subject to this limitation are identified on flood insurance rate maps as "Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas" and "Otherwise Protected Areas." 
(i)  Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including flood insurance rate maps; letters of map change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this article; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at the Town of Highland Beach, Town Hall, 3614 S. Ocean Blvd., Highland Beach, FL 33487. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
Sec. 20-343. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this article, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(b)  Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this article for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(1)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this article: 
a.  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
b.  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in section 604.50, F.S. 
c.  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
d.  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
e.  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in section 366.02, F.S., which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
f.  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
g.  Family mausoleums not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
h.  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
i.  Structures identified in section 553.73(10)(k), F.S., are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
(c)  Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in section 20-344 of this article. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(d)  Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this article shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this article, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(e)  Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(f)  Suspension or revocation. The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this article or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
(g)  Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The South Florida Water Management District; section 373.036, F.S. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; section 381.0065, F.S. and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for construction, reconstruction, changes, or physical activities for shore protection or other activities seaward of the coastal construction control line; section 161.141, F.S. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; section 161.055, F.S. 
(5)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(6)  Federal permits and approvals. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
Sec. 20-344. - Site plans and construction documents. 
(a)  Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this article shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal high hazard areas, new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(3)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(4)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(5)  Delineation of the coastal construction control line or notation that the site is seaward of the coastal construction control line, if applicable. 
(6)  Extent of any proposed alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, provided such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(7)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
    The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this article but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this article. 
(b)  Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in section 20-344(c) of this article and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection 20-344(c) of this article. 
(4)  For activities that propose to alter sand dunes or mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), an engineering analysis that demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. 
(c)  Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
Sec. 20-345. - Inspections. 
(a)  General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(1)  Development other than buildings and structures. The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(2)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
a.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor. 
b.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in subsection 20-345(a)(2)a. of this article. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
Sec. 20-346. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  General. The Highland Beach Board of Adjustment and Appeals ("Board of Adjustment and Appeals") shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and shall hear and make recommendations on requests for variances from the strict application of this article. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the town commission shall hear and decide requests for variances and the board of adjustment and appeals shall hear and decide requests for appeals and make recommendations to the town commission on requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. This section does not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(b)  Appeals. The board of adjustment and appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this article. Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(c)  Limitations on authority to grant variances. The board of adjustment and appeals and the town commission shall base their recommendations and decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in subsection 20-346(e) of this article, the conditions of issuance set forth in section 20-346(f) of this article, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The board of adjustment and appeals and town commission have the right to attach such conditions as they deem necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this article. 
(1)  Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in subsection 20-344(b) of this article. 
(d)  Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the board of adjustment and appeals and town commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this article, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(f)  Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this article or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the town commission that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ; Ord. No. 18-008 , § 3, 10-2-18) 
Sec. 20-347. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this article, shall be deemed a violation of this article. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(b)  Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(c)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 20-348. - General. 
(a)  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(b)  Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this article and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(c)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this article or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
Sec. 20-349. - Definitions. 
    Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this [article]. 
    ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Base flood. A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "one-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202; see "Basement (for flood loads)".] 
    Coastal construction control line. The line established by the State of Florida pursuant to section 161.053, F.S., and recorded in the official records of the community, which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a 100-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions. 
    Coastal high hazard area. A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V Zones" and are designated on flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V. 
    Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two (2) areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.1 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two (2) feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
    Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before October 16, 1970. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.1 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before October 16, 1970. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.1 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two (2) areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this article (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this article. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings. 
    Letter of map change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at eight thousand five hundred (8,500) pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of forty-five (45) square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than twelve (12) persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and greater than four hundred (400) square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this article, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
    New construction. For the purposes of administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after October 16, 1970 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after October 16, 1970. 
    Sand dunes. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
    Start of construction. The date of issuance of permits for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
    Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this article, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this article or the Florida Building Code. 
    Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 20-350. - Buildings and structures. 
(a)  Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to subsection 20-343(b)(1) of this article, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of section 20-355 of this article. 
(b)  Buildings and structures seaward of the coastal construction control line. If extending, in whole or in part, seaward of the coastal construction control line and also located, in whole or in part, in a flood hazard area: 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed to comply with the more restrictive applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building Section 3109 and Section 1612 or Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
(2)  Minor structures and non-habitable major structures as defined in section 161.54, F.S., shall be designed and constructed to comply with the intent and applicable provisions of this article and ASCE 24. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
Sec. 20-351. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; and 
(2)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of section 20-352 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
Sec. 20-352. - Site improvement, utilities and limitations. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(c)  Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(d)  Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in subsection 20-344(b)(1) of this article demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(e)  Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this article, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(f)  Limitations on sites in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be permitted only if such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and only if the engineering analysis required by subsection 20-344(b)(4) of this article demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. Construction or restoration of dunes under or around elevated buildings and structures shall comply with subsection 20-355(h)(3) of this article. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
Sec. 20-353. - Manufactured homes. 
(a)  General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to section 320.8249, F.S., and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this article. If located seaward of the coastal construction control line, all manufactured homes shall comply with the more restrictive of the applicable requirements. 
(b)  Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that: 
(1)  In flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 and this article. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to subsection 20-353(d)(2) are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. 
(2)  In coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.3 and this article. 
(c)  Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(d)  Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with subsection 20-353(d)(1) or 20-353(d)(2) of this article, as applicable. 
(1)  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of subsection 20-353(d)(2) of this article, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V). 
(2)  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to subsection 20-353(d)(1) of this article, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
a.  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V); or 
b.  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(e)  Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 or R322.3 for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(f)  Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
Sec. 20-354. - Tanks. 
(a)  Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(b)  Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of subsection 20-354(c) of this article shall: 
(1)  Be permitted in flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(2)  Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
(c)  Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(d)  Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
Sec. 20-355. - Other development. 
(a)  General requirements for other development. All development, including manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this article or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of subsection 20-352(d) of this article if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(b)  Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of subsection 20-352(d) of this article. 
(c)  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection 20-352(d) of this article. 
(d)  Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection 20-352(d) of this article. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of subsection 20-344(b)(3) of this article. 
(e)  Concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be: 
(1)  Structurally independent of the foundation system of the building or structure; 
(2)  Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any structure; and 
(3)  Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four (4) inches. 
(f)  Decks and patios in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following: 
(1)  A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck. 
(2)  A deck or patio that is located below the design flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than twelve (12) inches or that is constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(4)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of twelve (12) inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection. 
(g)  Other development in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the appropriate federal, state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control structures; 
(2)  Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters; and 
(3)  On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems defined in 64E-6.002, F.A.C., as filled systems or mound systems. 
(h)  Nonstructural fill in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas: 
(1)  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings. 
(2)  Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than one unit vertical to five (5) units horizontal shall be permitted only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  Where authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the diversion of floodwater or wave runup and wave reflection if the scale and location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the lowest horizontal structural member of the building. 
( Ord. No. 16-009, § 3, 8-2-16 ) 
Chapter 21 - POLICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Police force authorized, § 2.01(29); police department, § 3.03; chief of police, policemen, § 4.03; arrests in hot pursuit, § 4.04. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Law enforcement and correctional officers, F.S. § 112.531 et seq.; obstructing justice, F.S. Ch. 843; minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers, F.S. § 943.10 et seq. 

Sec. 21-1. - Department authorized. 
    The town may have a police department. 
(Code 1972, § 20-1) 
Sec. 21-2. - Oath of office. 
    Prior to entering upon their duties, the chief of police and police officers shall swear the following oath to be administered either by the mayor or town clerk: 
    "I do solemnly swear that I will, to the best of my ability, enforce the ordinances of the Town of Highland Beach and the Laws of the State of Florida, and in so doing, I will comply with the ordinances of the Town of Highland Beach and the Laws of the State of Florida." 
(Code 1972, § 20-2) 
Sec. 21-3. - Duties. 
    The police department shall enforce federal, state and local laws and ordinances and shall operate in conformance with all applicable rules, regulations, policies, resolutions, ordinances and laws. 
(Code 1972, § 20-3) 
Sec. 21-4. - Powers of arrest. 
    The chief of police and police officers shall have those arrest powers provided for by this Code, the laws of the state and the charter of the town. 
(Code 1972, § 20-4) 
Charter reference- Power of police to make arrests without the limits of the town when in hot pursuit, § 4.04. 
State Law reference- Arrests, F.S. Ch. 901. 
Sec. 21-5. - Use of firearms. 
    Neither the chief of police nor police officers shall shoot or discharge firearms at any person charged with violation of any municipal ordinance in order to make an arrest, nor shall they do so in order to prevent the escape of an offender being arrested. Nothing in this section, however, shall prevent the chief of police or police officers from the use of firearms in self-defense, nor as may be authorized by the laws of the state in connection with arrests for felonies. 
(Code 1972, § 20-5) 
State Law reference- Use of force in making an arrest, F.S. § 776.05. 
Chapter 22 - SEWERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Town authorized to make appropriations to erect and keep in repair sewers, drains and gutters, § 2.01(12); town authorized to issue bonds for the purpose of constructing, extending or improving a system of sewers, § 6.01. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and structures, Ch. 6; health, Ch. 11; housing, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 17; planning and development, Ch. 20; solid waste, Ch. 24; subdivisions, Ch. 26; water system, Ch. 29; temporary toilet facilities at construction sites, § 6-154; wastewater from air conditioning systems, § 6-207. 
State Law reference- Municipal public works, F.S. Ch. 180. 

Sec. 22-1. - Compulsory connection. 
(a)  The owner, tenant or occupant of each lot or parcel of land within the town which abuts a public street, right-of-way or easement containing a sewerline and which property can be served by the town sewer system and upon which lot or parcel a building has been completed subsequent to February 2, 1971, shall connect such building with such sanitary sewer and shall cease to use any other method for disposal of sewage, sewage waste or other polluting matter. All such connections shall be made in accordance with rules and regulations which shall be adopted from time to time by the town commission, which rules and regulations provide that before any prospective users of the sewage system are issued a building permit from the town, they shall deposit with the town a residential connecting fee as established by resolution of the town commission for each dwelling unit. "Dwelling unit" as used herein includes any unit designed and intended for use as living quarters for a single family, whether it is a rental unit or a residential unit in any apartment, cooperative, condominium, motel or hotel. The fees thus collected are not refundable and shall be paid to the sewer connecting fee fund. Such funds shall be used for the purpose of capital improvement, operation, maintenance and/or payments upon indebtedness incurred for such costs. 
(b)  No person shall cause his property to be connected to the sewer system, nor shall he use such system, without first having: 
(1)  Presented plans for the proposed connection to the town; 
(2)  Paid the requisite connection fee; 
(3)  Obtained a permit for the connection; and 
(4)  Had the connection inspected and approved in writing by such person as the town manager may from time to time designate. 
(Code 1972, § 22-1; Ord. No. 571, 1-3-89; Ord. No. 16-008, § 2, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 22-2. - Service charges. 
    The rates, fees and charges for the use of and for the services and facilities furnished or to be furnished by the sewer system of the town, to be paid by the owner of each lot or parcel of land which is connected with the sewer system, shall be based on the apportioned costs of operating the sewer installations and facilities, including service charges, maintenance, necessary reserve and replacement funds, treatment and disposal costs, and shall be established as follows: 
(1)  The town commission shall from time to time, by resolution duly passed by the town commission, establish the charges for use of the sewer system operated by the town. 
(2)  In the case of nonresidential users, which include, but are not limited to, recreation rooms, recreation buildings, guard houses, construction trailers, sales trailers and sales buildings, the rate to be charged shall be the same as for residential rooms or units. Any charge for sewer service shall be made for not less than a full month. 
(3)  All such fees and charges shall be billed bimonthly. 
(Code 1972, § 22-2; Ord. No. 566, 10-5-88; Ord. No. 654, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 661, 12-3-96; Ord. No. 675, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 09-005, § 1, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 16-008, § 2, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 22-3. - Free service. 
    There shall be no free services rendered by the sewer system of the town, and all users of the services and facilities of the sewer system shall pay for the use of such services and facilities at the established rates. 
(Code 1972, § 22-4) 
Sec. 22-4. - Billing procedure; delinquency. 
    The town shall submit bills for sewer services on a bimonthly basis. No discount shall be allowed for prompt payment. If any bills for sewer service charges are not paid within thirty (30) days of the original date of billing, a delinquency fee as established by resolution of the town commission will be imposed. The town manager shall give notice in writing of the delinquency and, if not corrected within ten (10) days of such notice, shall discontinue furnishing water to such premises, and shall disconnect the same from the waterworks system of the town and shall proceed forthwith to recover the amount of such sewer service charges in such lawful manner as the town manager may deem advisable. 
(Code 1972, § 22-5; Ord. No. 558, 4-5-88; Ord. No. 629, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 09-005, § 2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 16-008, § 2, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 22-5. - Adjustment of rates based on character of sewage. 
    In cases where the character of sewage from any building or premises is such that it imposes a burden upon the sewer system of the town in addition to the burden imposed by the average sewage entering the sewer system, such additional charge shall be made therefor as the town shall, with the approval of the consulting engineers, deem to be fair and equitable to meet the additional cost of collection, treatment and disposal of such sewage; or the town commission may, if it deems it advisable, direct that the owner of such building or premises shall provide facilities for the adequate pretreatment of such burdensome sewage, to render it acceptable to the sewer system of the town. In cases where the character of sewage from any building or premises is such that it imposes a burden upon the sewer system of the town which is substantially less than the burden imposed by the average sewage entering the sewer system, the town commission may, with the approval of the consulting engineers, grant such reduction in the amount of the sewer service charges as it shall deem to be fair and equitable. 
(Code 1972, § 22-6) 
Sec. 22-6. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, swimming pool water, subsurface drainage, cooling water or any type or commercial process water into any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  No person shall, contrary to such provisions as may from time to time be made by the Sanitary Code of Florida, discharge or cause to be discharged any wastes or waters into the town's sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  In the event of the continued violation of the provisions of this chapter after warning from the town, the town shall disconnect the user from the waterworks system of the town and the town may then proceed to collect the additional and unusual cost of having collected, treated and disposed of such materials. In addition, the town may collect reasonable compensation for necessary repairs to the town's system occasioned by such misuse. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be cited. Violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 22-7) 
Chapter 23 - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, adopted July 1, 2014, repealed the former chapter 23, §§ 23-1-23-13, and enacted a new chapter 23 as set out herein. The former chapter 23 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; buildings and structures, Ch. 6; food and food services, Ch. 10; licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 16; planning and development, Ch. 20; streets, sidewalks and bicycle/walkway paths, Ch. 25; subdivisions, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Sign ordinances, F.S. §§ 163.3202(2)(f), 166.0425; outdoor advertising, F.S. ch. 479. 

Sec. 23-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Area of sign means the square foot area enclosed by the perimeter of the sign structure with each face contributing to the aggregate area. 
    Banner means a sign applied to cloth, paper or any animated rotating and/or fluttering devices used to attract attention (including colored or plain unadorned devices, i.e., flaps). 
    Double-faced sign means a sign with two (2) faces, mounted back to back, attached to a support, and/or a single sign with two (2) faces. 
    Electrical sign means a sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections and/or fixtures are used as part of the sign proper or used in an adjacent or nearby area to illuminate a sign. 
    Flag means a piece of cloth usually attached at one edge to a staff/pole or cord containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, identifying a government or political subdivision. 
    Intermittent lighting, animation, moving or rotating sign means a sign shall not involve intermittent lighting, animation, motion or rotation of any part of a sign structure or display; except for governmental traffic signals, traffic devices and traffic signs as required by law. 
    Nonconforming sign means a sign erected prior to June 2, 1987, which does not conform to this chapter. 
    Obscene sign means a sign exhibiting thereon any lewd, lascivious, or obscene, character, or illustration. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign that advertises an establishment, merchandise, a service, or entertainment which is sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at a place other than the premises on which the sign is located, however, non-commercial messages shall never be considered off-premises. 
    Permanent sign means a sign used to identify or name a residence, apartment or condominium building, motel or hotel. 
    Premises means the real property (as a unit) which is involved by the sign; includes the land or the land and the building(s). 
    Real estate sign means a sign advertising the premises for rent, for sale or for lease by an owner or his agent. 
    Roof sign means a sign erected on the roof, or above the roof line, or on the parapet. 
    Searchlight means a large light used to attract attention by lighting the sky for the purpose of advertising. 
    Sidewalk or sandwich sign means a movable sign, not secured or attached to the ground. 
    Sign. The term "sign" shall mean any surface, fabric, device or display which bears lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter, including forms shaped to resemble any human, animal or product designed to convey information to the public and is visible from an abutting property, from a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, or from a body of water. The term "sign" shall include all structural members. A sign shall be construed to form a single unit. In cases where matter is displayed in a random or unconnected manner without organized relationship of the components, each such component shall be considered a single sign. The term "sign" shall not include: artwork, holiday or seasonal decorations, cemetery markers, or machinery or equipment signs. 
    Temporary sign. The term "temporary sign" shall mean any sign that is not a permanent sign, and shall include a sign formerly or commonly known as a temporary election sign, a temporary political sign, a temporary free expression sign, a temporary real estate sign, a temporary directional sign, a temporary construction sign, a temporary grand opening sign, or any other temporary sign unless otherwise provided herein. The term "temporary sign" shall not include any substitution of message on an existing lawful sign or sign structure. 
    Traffic confusion sign means a sign or other advertising matter erected at the intersection of any streets or in any street right-of-way in a manner so as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape, or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, a traffic signal, or traffic device; or which makes use of the words "stop", "look", "drive-in", "danger", or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse vehicular traffic. 
    Vehicular sign means a sign placed on a vehicle or trailer that is parked on a street, public right-of-way or private property for the primary purpose of displaying the sign for advertising a commercial enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 16-011, § 2, 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 23-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to govern the number, size, location and character of all signs which may be permitted. No sign shall be erected or permitted in any location except in conformity with this chapter. This chapter is intended to prevent the random and indiscriminate erection of signs and to provide for the protection of the residential aspect of the town. 
(Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, 7-1-14) 
Sec. 23-3. - Permit-Required; application; exemptions; waiver. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, repair, change or erect a sign in the town without first obtaining a permit or registration, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section or in other provisions of this chapter or unless such permit is specifically waived in this chapter. When repair of an existing sign involves the expenditure of less than fifty (50) percent of its replacement value as determined by the building department, a permit may be waived. All application for sign or sign structure permits required in this section shall be filed by the sign or sign structure owner or his agent in the office of the building department. The application forms shall be supplied by the town. Applications will be reviewed by the building department as to conformance with this chapter. 
(b)  The following types of signs are exempt from permitting requirements: 
(1)  Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, including, but not limited to, traffic or similar regulatory devices, legal notices or warnings at railroad crossings. 
(2)  Flags, within all residential zoning districts, only one flagpole may be erected (the construction of the flagpole may require a permit) containing no more than two (2) flags. The maximum size of any flag is twenty-four (24) square feet. Flags attached to an angled pole attached to a building shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet. No flags of any commercial nature may be displayed within any residential districts. 
Within all parcels containing governmental institutions, including public or private schools, up to three (3) flagpoles may be erected per property owner containing one flag per pole only. If only one flagpole is erected, two (2) flags may be flown. The property owner can substitute the flagpole(s) and attach no more than two flags to the property owner's building. The maximum size of any one flag shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet. Flags attached to an angled pole attached to a building shall not exceed fifteen (15) square. 
These restrictions shall not affect the number of American flags displayed at any location for a period of seventy-two (72) hours encompassing any legal holiday, or any other event of a patriotic, memorial or celebratory nature as determined by federal, state, county or municipal policy. 
(3)  Memorial signs or tablets erected and authorized, in writing, by the town manager. 
(4)  Signs required to be maintained by law, governmental rule, order or regulation. 
(5)  Nonelectrical directional signs displayed for the public, including signs which identify restrooms, freight entrances, stairs, walkways, etc., with a total surface area not exceeding three (3) square feet per sign. 
(6)  Home number/nameplate signs, restricted to not more than one sign for each principal building or use on a premises and not exceeding three (3) square feet in surface area, and shall show only the numerical address designation on the premises upon which such sign is maintained. 
(7)  Nonelectrical instructional signs, with a total surface area not exceeding one square foot per sign, and not more than five (5) signs per commercial or multifamily residential parcel. 
(8)  Temporary signs as set forth in section 23-9. 
(Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 16-011, § 2, 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 23-4. - Permit-Issuance. 
(a)  Provided the provisions of this chapter have first been complied with, and the signs or advertising structures do not violate any of the terms conditions or provisions of this chapter, or any law or ordinance, the building department, or some other person so designated by the town manager, shall issue a permit for such sign or advertising structure, retaining a copy thereof for the records. Construction of the sign or sign structure shall be completed within ninety (90) days of issuance of the permit or the permit will expire. 
(b)  Permits for signs shall be on a form as promulgated by the building department and shall only be required for permanent signs. The application form and associated submission materials shall include the following: 
(1)  The type of sign and/or sign structure as set forth in this Code. 
(2)  The street address of the premises upon which the sign and/or sign structure is to be located along with identification of where on said premises the sign will be located. If there is no street address, another suitable method of identifying the location shall be provided. 
(3)  The area per sign face and the aggregate area of the sign and/or sign structure. 
(4)  The name and address of the owner or other person in control or possession of the real property upon which the sign or sign structure is to be located. 
(5)  Written consent of the owner, or his/her designated agent, granting permission for the construction, operation, maintenance, or displaying of the sign and/or sign structure. 
(6)  Two (2) copies of a blueprint, sketch, blue line print, or similar presentation, drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing elevations of the sign as proposed and its relationship to other existing or proposed signs or sign structures in the area. In the case of a free-standing sign, the representation shall include a sketch site plan showing the location of the sign. 
(7)  Appropriate exhibits showing the proposed location of the sign with respect to nearby structures and vegetation. 
(8)  A sign contractor shall provide a signed certificate stating that the sign and/or sign structure meets wind loading to withstand a pressure of fifty (50) pounds per square foot. 
(Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 16-011, § 2, 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 23-5. - Permitted signs. 
(a)  Generally. Signs are permitted only along the road frontage unless otherwise indicated. 
(b)  All zoning districts. 
(1)  In all zoning districts, one entrance (ingress) and one exit (egress) sign is permitted for directing traffic flow. Each sign may be single-faced or double-faced and shall meet Department of Transportation standards, and not exceed three (3) square feet in size. Each sign may be illuminated or non-illuminated as determined by the owner and police department. A permit is required. 
(c)  All zoning districts. 
(1)  Temporary signs. Shall be as set forth in section 23-9. 
(2)  Permanent signs: 
a.  One permanent single-faced or double-faced sign not to exceed ten (10) square feet per face may be permitted. Such sign must be illuminated, but not with intermittent or colored lights or animation. The building official shall review the sign application and a permit is then required. A permit fee shall be charged and will be based upon the construction cost of the sign. The sign may be erected on a base not to exceed one foot six (6) inches in height. The base shall not exceed the dimensions of the sign by more than one foot in any direction. Any person seeking to place a sign in the FDOT right-of-way must obtain written FDOT approval prior to permit issuance by the town. 
b.  A street address sign readily visible from the street is required. Installation of this street address sign is a condition for issuing the certificate of occupancy. No permit is required. 
c.  In the case of intracoastal property, one additional permanent sign identifying the development may be allowed. This additional sign may also be single-faced or double-faced, not to exceed ten (10) square feet per face. It may be illuminated, but not with intermittent or colored lights or animation. A permit is required. 
d.  Tow away signs conforming to state statutes are allowed on private property. 
e.  Whenever a sign requires a permit and is allowed within a setback area, easement, or right-of-way, the person erecting the sign shall be required to execute an agreement with the town. 
f.  Garishness: The overall effect of the lettering, configuration or color of a sign shall not be garish. "Garish" signs are those that are too bright or gaudy, showy, glaring, and/or cheaply brilliant or involving excessive ornamentation. Garish signs are not in harmony with and are not compatible with the building or adjacent surroundings. 
g.  Traffic safety: No sign shall be located in such a manner that it will become a hazard to automotive or pedestrian traffic nor shall any sign or lighting of a sign be so placed as to obstruct the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle where vision is necessary for safety. 
h.  Illumination: Signs may be illuminated directly or indirectly unless specifically prohibited elsewhere in this chapter. In residential zoning districts, all illumination shall be shielded so that the light is not directed toward adjacent residentially zoned property. 
(Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 15-003, § 3, 5-5-15; Ord. No. 16-011, § 2, 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 23-6. - Prohibited signs. 
    All other signs not permitted in section 23-5 are prohibited, with the exception of signs erected by a public authority for public purposes and temporary signs as permitted by section 23-9. The placement of public purpose signs by a public authority on the grounds of town hall may be approved at the discretion of the town manager. Prohibited signs include, but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Banners. 
(b)  Wind signs. 
(c)  Off-premise signs. 
(d)  Roof signs. 
(e)  Snipe signs. 
(f)  Traffic confusion signs. 
(g)  Vehicular signs. 
(h)  Commercial signs in public rights-of-way. 
(i)  Intermittent lighting, animation, moving or rotating signs. 
(j)  Noise-producing signs (a sign producing noise or sounds). 
(k)  Obscene signs. 
(l)  Smoke or odor-producing signs (a sign producing or emitting smoke, vapor, particles, or odor). 
    In addition to the foregoing, any sign not provided for, or expressly permitted by this chapter is also prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 16-011, § 2, 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 23-7. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  A permanent sign erected without obtaining a building permit shall be removed within five (5) working days from the date of a written notice from the building department or other person so designated by the town manager. If the sign is not removed by the end of the fifth day, or if there are any other violations of this ordinance, enforcement proceedings will be initiated pursuant to section 2-100, enforcement procedure, or the code enforcement board, as set forth in article V of chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  For those signs that do not require a permit and are temporary in nature the town finds that, in view of the inexpensive nature of these signs and the administrative burden which would be imposed by elaborate procedural prerequisites prior to removal, any procedure other than summary removal of these signs when unlawfully erected and maintained would defeat the purpose of regulating such signs. The town manager is hereby authorized to remove such signs when unlawfully erected and maintained, subject to the provisions contained below: 
(1)  After removal of a sign pursuant to this section, a notice will be sent, either by hand-delivery or by first-class postage, prepaid, to the occupant of the property from which the sign was removed, and if the sign identifies a party other than the occupant of the property, the party so identified. The notice shall advise that the sign has been removed and shall state that the sign may be retrieved within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, and that, if the sign is not retrieved within thirty (30) days, it will be disposed of by the town. 
(2)  The town shall dispose of all unclaimed signs after the expiration of the thirty-day period. 
(Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, 7-1-14) 
Sec. 23-8. - Appeals. 
    If a sign permit application is denied by the building official. The board of adjustment and appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, interpretation, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building official in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. A request for appeal must be filed with the town clerk within ten (10) business days of the date of the matter being appealed. 
(Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 15-003, § 4, 5-5-15; Ord. No. 16-011, § 2, 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 23-9. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Scope. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Town's code of ordinances, the provisions of this section shall govern the regulation of temporary signs, and take precedence over any other provisions that pertain to temporary signs unless specifically exempted or excepted herein. 
(b)  Findings of fact. The town commission finds that the location and maintenance of temporary signs affects the public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of this community, and that in order to preserve and enhance the Town as a desirable community in which to live and do business, a pleasing, visually attractive environment is of foremost importance. The town commission further finds that the regulation of temporary signs within the Town is a highly contributive means by which to achieve this desired end, and that uncontrolled and unlimited temporary signs would degrade the aesthetic attractiveness of the natural and manmade attributes of the community and thereby undermine the economic value of tourism, visitation and permanent economic growth. 
(c)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and general welfare through reasonable, consistent and non-discriminatory standards for temporary signs. The temporary sign regulations in this section are not intended to censor speech or to regulate viewpoints, but instead are intended to regulate the secondary effects of speech, and especially insofar as those secondary effects may adversely affect aesthetics and traffic and pedestrian safety. It is the intent of the town commission that the temporary sign regulations shall provide uniform sign criteria which regulate the size, height, number and placement of signs in a manner that is compatible to the residential, coastal and character of the Town, and which place the fewest possible restrictions on personal liberties, property rights, commerce, and the free exercise of constitutional rights while achieving the Town's goal of creating a healthy, safe and attractive environment that does not contain excessive clutter and visual distraction in rights-of-way and adjacent properties, the surrounding natural coastal environment, historic district and residential neighborhoods. These sign regulations have been prepared with the intent of enhancing the visual environment of the Town and promoting its continued well-being, consistent with the most recent pronouncements by the United States Supreme Court regarding the regulation of temporary signage, and are further intended to: 
(1)  Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the Town; 
(2)  Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the town's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; 
(3)  Improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
(4)  Minimize the possible adverse impact of temporary signs on nearby public and private property; 
(5)  Lessen the visual clutter that may otherwise be caused by the proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation, excessive height, and excessive size (area) of temporary signs which compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
(6)  Allow temporary signs that are compatible with their surroundings, while precluding the placement of temporary signs that contribute to sign clutter or that conceal or obstruct adjacent land uses or signs; 
(7)  Encourage and allow temporary signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in which they are located; 
(8)  Regulate temporary signs in a manner so as to not interfere with, obstruct the vision of or distract motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians; 
(9)  Preserve, conserve, protect, and enhance the aesthetic quality and scenic beauty of all zoning districts of the town; 
(10)  Protect property values by precluding to the maximum extent possible temporary signs that create a nuisance to the occupancy or use of other properties as a result of their size, height, illumination, brightness, or movement; and 
(11)  Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these temporary sign regulations. 
(d)  Criteria required for temporary signs. The criteria for temporary signs are set forth in the table below. A temporary sign is unlawful if it does not meet the criteria established for the zoning district in which the sign is located. 
Temporary Signs Design Standards and Limitations 
ZONING DISTRICTS RE,RS, RML,RMM,RMH Maximum Number of Signs Per Parcel 1 4 Maximum Sign Area 2 4 sf. Sign Height Maximum for a Freestanding Sign 3 5 ft. Sign Height Maximum for a Wall Sign (inclusive of a Window Sign) 15 ft. Minimum Spacing from any Other Sign (Temporary Sign or a Permanent Sign 4 ) 10 ft. Aggregate Maximum of Surface Area Allocated for All Sign Messages 5 32 sf.  
1 The number of temporary commercial signs per parcel shall be no more than two (2). 
2 The square footage limitation is per side for a back-to-back sign. For example, a six (6) square foot limitation means that there is a limit of six (6) square feet of surface area per side of a back-to-back sign, and an aggregate limit of twelve (12) square feet is allowed if the sign is a back-to-back temporary sign. 
3 Not applicable to signs displayed on flagpoles. 
4 Not applicable to signs displayed on flagpoles. 
5 There is no limit to the number of separate messages that may appear on the allowable surface(s) of any temporary sign. The aggregate maximum of surface area allowed is subject to the other limitations or circumstances that may reduce the aggregate maximum of surface area that can be allocated. 
(e)  Prohibition of temporary signs on public property. Other than government signs displaying government speech, temporary signs on public property and public rights of way are prohibited unless otherwise allowed within the code of ordinances. 
(f)  Duration for display of temporary sign. If a temporary sign pertains to an event, the temporary sign shall be removed within and by no later than three (3) days after the event is concluded. 
(g)  Display of temporary sign requires permission of real property owner. A temporary sign on any parcel shall not be maintained if the placement of the same does not have the permission of the owner of the real property. 
(h)  A temporary sign may not display any lighting and must remain static. A temporary sign may not display any lighting or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, or vary in intensity or color. 
(i)  A temporary sign may not incorporate fluorescent color or exhibit fluorescence. A temporary sign may not incorporate fluorescent color or exhibit fluorescence. 
(j)  A temporary sign may not obstruct a permanent sign or the vision between pedestrians and vehicles. A temporary sign may not obstruct the view of a permanent sign as viewed from any public road, street or highway or any public sidewalk, and may not obstruct the vision between pedestrians and vehicles using the public right-of-way, including but not restricted to, those meeting intersection visibility requirements. 
(l)  A temporary sign may display multiple messages. A temporary sign may display multiple independent messages on any portion of the sign surface of a temporary sign. 
(m)  A temporary sign is not subject to permitting. A temporary sign does not require a permit from the town. 
(Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 16-011, § 2, 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 23-10. - Non-commercial message. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, any sign erected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may, at the option of the applicant, contain either a non-commercial message unrelated to the business located on the premises where the sign is erected or a commercial message related to the business and located on the business premises. The non-commercial message may occupy the entire sign face or portion thereof. The sign face may be changed from commercial to non-commercial messages as frequently as desired by the owner of the sign, provided that the size and design criteria conform to the applicable portions of this chapter, the sign is allowed by this chapter, the sign conforms to the requirements of the zoning designation and the appropriate permits are obtained. Noncommercial copy may be substituted for commercial copy wherever commercial copy appears. For the purposes of this chapter, non-commercial messages, by their very nature, shall never be deemed off-premises. 
(Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 16-011, § 2, 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 23-11. - Severability. 
    If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect the following sections of this chapter: section 23-5 and section 23-11. 
(Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 16-011, § 2, 11-1-16 ) 
Chapter 24 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Town authorized to restrain the pollution of the soil, streets, sewers and streams of water within the town limits, § 2.01(21). 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and structures, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; food and food services, Ch. 10; health, Ch. 11; land clearance, Ch. 13; land filling, Ch. 14; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 16; nuisances, Ch. 17; sewers, Ch. 22; solid waste franchise, App. B; unlawful deposits in streets, § 25-5 et seq. 
State Law reference- Continuation of solid waste franchise in annexed area, F.S. § 171.062(4); Florida Litter Law, F.S. § 403.413; solid waste management, F.S. § 403.702 et seq.; local government solid waste responsibilities, F.S. § 403.706. 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means all household refuse such as kitchen accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable matter and other refuse such as cans, bottles and glass, paper and boxes, and other containers of foodstuffs, and such other refuse that may accumulate in the ordinary household. 
    Recycling means any process by which solid waste, or materials that would otherwise become solid waste, are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. Further, recyclable material are those materials that are capable of being recycled and that would otherwise be processed or disposed of as solid waste. 
    Trash means grass, leaves, flowers, shrubbery, trimmings, palm fronds, building materials and other nonhousehold refuse. 
(Code 1972, § 11-1; Ord. No. 09-001, § 1, 4-7-09) 
State Law reference- Definitions, F.S. §§ 403.703, 403,7031. 
Sec. 24-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 11-7) 
Sec. 24-3. - Storage and collection. 
(a)  All persons in the town keeping or offering garbage for collection shall provide for the storage of same in watertight receptacles provided with proper handles and a tight-fitting cover and to hold not less than twenty (20) gallons. Receptacles shall be kept in a place easily accessible to the garbage collector, but never upon any street or sidewalk, alley or public place. The receptacle shall be cleaned by the owner after it has been emptied by the garbage collector. The receptacle shall provide for the storage of all garbage as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  Trash, garbage, and recyclable items shall be placed near State Road A-1-A pavement edge but not before noon on the day preceding the morning pickup for the foregoing items and the empty containers shall be picked up by 8:00 p.m. on the day of the trash, garbage and recycling pickup. 
(Code 1972, § 11-2; Ord. No. 09-001, § 2, 4-7-09) 
Sec. 24-4. - Prohibited method of storage. 
    If any person shall permit his garbage to be so stored or kept in an exposed manner as to render the air or soil impure or unwholesome, such person responsible shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 11-3) 
Sec. 24-5. - Filth, trash, refuse in waters of Atlantic Ocean and Intracoastal Canal-Prohibited. 
    No person shall drop, throw or place in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean or Intracoastal Waterways Canal, within the town, any garbage, trash, refuse, filth or matter or anything whatever, or place, leave or deposit along the shores of such ocean or canal any trash, refuse, filth or matter or thing whatever where the same might be blown or washed into the waters of such ocean or canal or where the same might contaminate waters flowing or reaching such ocean or canal. 
(Code 1972, § 11-4) 
State Law reference- Florida Litter Law, F.S. § 403.413. 
Sec. 24-6. - Same-Penalty. 
    Any person found guilty of the violation of section 24-5 shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code, and the owner, lessee or other person in charge of the premises from which the trash or other matter is derived shall be subject to prosecution and conviction for the violation of any of the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 11-5) 
Sec. 24-7. - Refuse on public streets or places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to put, throw or deposit any decayed fruit or the peelings therefrom, wastepaper, handbills, shavings, dirt or trash of any kind on any sidewalk or street in the town or in any city park or public beach, parkway or on other public property. 
(Code 1972, § 11-6) 
State Law reference- Florida Litter Law, F.S. § 403.413. 
Sec. 24-8. - Landscape gardeners or architects-Prohibited from placing refuse in public streets. 
    All landscape gardeners or architects or other persons engaged in landscape gardening and landscape architecture on a fee or contractual basis within the town are hereby prohibited from piling trash, fronds, or other refuse on any public street or thoroughfare within the town. 
(Code 1972, § 11-8) 
State Law reference- Florida Litter Law, F.S. § 403.413. 
Sec. 24-9. - Same-Removal of refuse from premises. 
    Any of the trash and other refuse referred to in section 24-8 shall be removed the same day from the premises upon which the work is being performed and disposed of at some public or private dumping grounds beyond the limits of the town. 
(Code 1972, § 11-9) 
Sec. 24-10. - Same-Penalty for violation. 
    Any person adjudged and found guilty of the violation of any of the terms and conditions of sections 24-8 and 24-9 shall be subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisonment in the town jail not exceeding thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Code 1972, § 11-10) 
Sec. 24-11. - Apartments; provision of refuse containers. 
(a)  The term "owner" as used in this section means: 
(1)  In the case of a rental unit, the owner thereof. 
(2)  In the case of a condominium apartment building, the developer of the condominium or the condominium association, whichever controls the operation of the condominium. 
(3)  In the case of a cooperative, the cooperative association. 
(b)  Every owner of an apartment building containing more than forty (40) units shall provide such number of one-yard or larger refuse containers as will accommodate garbage collection for the apartment building in question. 
(Code 1972, § 11-11) 
Sec. 24-12. - Time restriction for loading and/or collection. 
    It shall be unlawful to have any loading or collection operations for garbage or trash in the town before 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1972, § 11-12) 
Sec. 24-13. - Collection charges. 
    There shall be a charge for the collection of garbage, trash and recyclables within the corporate limits of the town, which rates shall from time to time be set by resolution of the town commission. 
(Code 1972, § 11-13; Ord. No. 569, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 587, 10-3-89; Ord. No. 603, 12-4-90; Ord. No. 625, 11-4-92; Ord. No. 650, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 07-001, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 08-003, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 16-008 , § 4, 7-5-16) 
Chapter 25 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND BICYCLE/WALKWAY PATHS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Powers of town regarding streets, sidewalks, § 2.01(12); power of eminent domain, § 2.01(34); town authorized to issue bonds for opening, paving, etc., streets and sidewalks, § 6.01; streets, pavement and town lots, § 8.01 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and structures, Ch. 6; elevators, dumbwaiters and moving walks, Ch. 8; licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 16; planning and development, Ch. 20; sewers, Ch. 22; signs and advertising, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 26; trees, shrubs and vegetation, Ch. 28; water system, Ch. 29; franchises, App. A et seq.; paving specifications, § 26-46 et seq. 
State Law reference- Supplemental and alternative method of making local municipal improvements, F.S. Ch. 170; municipal public works, F.S. Ch. 180; state highway system, F.S. Ch. 335; city street system defined, F.S. § 334.03(3); uniform minimum standards for the design, construction and maintenance of all public streets, roads, highways, bridges, sidewalks, curbs and curb ramps, crosswalks, where feasible, bicycle ways, underpasses and overpasses used by the public for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, F.S. § 336.045. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Obstruction of streets, sidewalks-Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to obstruct or cause to be obstructed any sidewalk or crossing in any way. It shall be unlawful to erect, build, construct, deposit or place, or to procure or cause to be erected, built, constructed, deposited or placed upon or in any street, or any place where the public has a right of passage, any house, cellar, stable, shed, privy, fence, enclosure, walls, foundations or any other structure, or any obstruction of any kind whatsoever; or for the owner or occupant of any lots or part thereof abutting on a street to permit any obstruction to remain upon the sidewalk in front of such lot or part thereof, or for the owner or occupant of such lot or part thereof to permit any sidewalk in front of such lot or part thereof to remain in such condition as to prevent convenient and safe use thereof by the public. The provisions of this section shall not extend to canvas or wooden awnings placed in front of stores or other buildings, when such awnings are not less than eight (8) feet from the ground or sidewalk at the lowest point. 
(Code 1972, § 24-1) 
Sec. 25-2. - Same-Abatement. 
    Upon the trial of any person who is found guilty of violating section 25-1, the court shall direct such person to forthwith remove such obstruction, if it exists at the time of the trial, and each day's neglect to remove same shall be considered a new offense. The court shall have power to direct police to abate and remove such obstructions. 
(Code 1972, § 24-2) 
Sec. 25-3. - Suitable lights required at points of obstruction. 
    It shall be unlawful to leave any material, while building or repairing any house or doing other work, in such a condition as to endanger persons or vehicles in passing along any street, alley or other public way, and without keeping on same at night a suitable light at such points thereon as may be easily seen to warn the public of danger, and in no event occupy more than one-third of the pavement. 
(Code 1972, § 24-3) 
Sec. 25-4. - Storing building materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or cause to be stored, on the public streets any building material or materials used in the construction of buildings or additions to buildings, or any other material that affects the free and uninterrupted use of the streets by the public, unless it appears to the satisfaction of the town manager that no available space can be secured on lots adjacent to the proposed building on which to store the building material. 
(Code 1972, § 24-4) 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 25-5. - Unlawful deposits in streets-Offensive matter; gutter obstructions; excess drainage. 
    It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit offal or other offensive matter in any street or to discharge or permit to be discharged from any premises so much water or other liquids as may put any part of the streets in bad order or to obstruct the gutters or sewers with dirt, trash, wood, lumber, brick or other material. It shall also be unlawful for any property owner and/or any other person to disturb the natural ground condition in a manner that could cause additional rain or surface water to drain from the property onto any public street or highway. 
(Code 1972, § 24-5) 
Charter reference- Town may prohibit the dumping of garbage and trash upon any public street, highway or road right-of-way within the town, § 2.01(35). 
Cross reference- Solid waste, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Littering, F.S. §403.413. 
Sec. 25-6. - Same-Material injurious to vehicle tires. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to put or place or cause to be put or placed in or upon any street, sidewalk, lane, alley or other public place in the town any glass or crockery, scrap iron, nails, tacks or any other article which would be liable to injure or damage the tires or wheels of vehicles that have wheels with rubber or pneumatic tires. 
(Code 1972, § 24-6) 
State Law reference- Littering, F.S. §403.413. 
Sec. 25-7. - Disturbing surface of street or bicycle/walking path; restoration. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person having the privilege of disturbing the surface of any street or bicycle/walking path to fail to leave such street or bicycle/walking path in the condition which existed before the disturbance, by filling and packing the earth and other materials including paving so as to produce and leave a level surface at the end of each working day. Each day of omission shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 24-7) 
Sec. 25-8. - Obstructing or injuring pavement, curbing, gutter, sidewalk or bicycle/walking path. 
    It shall be unlawful to obstruct or injure in any way or manner any pavement, gutter, curbing, sidewalk or bicycle/walking path, and these shall be kept free from debris and construction materials and shall be usable at all times. 
(Code 1972, § 24-8) 
Sec. 25-9. - Destroying, injuring or defacing street signs. 
    It shall be unlawful to destroy, injure or deface the name on any street or traffic sign put up under the provisions of this Code or by any official. 
(Code 1972, § 24-9) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, F.S. § 806.13. 
Sec. 25-10. - Mixing concrete, mortar, etc., on street and/or bicycle/walking path. 
    It shall be unlawful to use any public street or bicycle/walking path within the corporate limits of the town or any part thereof for the purpose of mixing concrete, mortar or any other substance of like nature. 
(Code 1972, § 24-10) 
Sec. 25-11. - Disfiguring utility poles. 
    It shall be unlawful to cut, scratch or otherwise disfigure any telegraph, telephone, electric light, signal or other pole or post standing in the street. 
(Code 1972, § 24-11) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, F.S. § 806.13. 
Sec. 25-12. - Damaging or obstructing streetlight. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully break, deface, take down, carry away or interfere with any lamp or any electric light apparatus, or any part thereof, which is hung or fixed in any street or public place, or to extinguish the light thereon, except by proper authority. 
(Code 1972, § 24-12) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, F.S. § 806.13. 
Sec. 25-13. - Ingress, egress of vehicular traffic. 
    It shall be unlawful for any vehicular traffic to enter and/or exit from properties within the town except through designated driveways that have been approved by the town. 
(Code 1972, § 24-13) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 16. 
Secs. 25-14-25-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NEWSRACKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15. 

Sec. 25-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Advertising circular means any publication primarily designed for purposes of advertising rather than for the dissemination of news reports. 
    Bike path means that portion of a right-of-way improved, designed or ordinarily used for bicycle traffic. 
    Distributor means the person responsible for placing and maintaining a newsrack, the owner of the newsrack or the publisher of the newspaper vended therein. 
    Newspaper means a paper that is printed and distributed, usually daily or weekly, and contains primarily news, articles of opinion and features for which no fee has been charged for placement therein. 
    Newsrack means any coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, sale or distribution of newspapers or other news periodicals. 
    Right-of-way means all that area dedicated to public use or otherwise owned by a public agency for public street purposes and shall include roadways, swales, bike paths and sidewalks. 
    Roadway means that portion of a right-of-way improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Sidewalk means any surface within a right-of-way provided for the exclusive or primary use of pedestrians. 
    Swale means any area within a right-of-way which is not either a bike path, sidewalk or roadway. The term shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1972, § 24-30) 
Sec. 25-32. - Placement; location. 
    Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, or on any portion of a right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a right-of-way shall be relocated in accordance with the provisions of this section: 
(1)  No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or over any part of any roadway or bike path, or which rests wholly or in part upon or over any portion of any roadway or bike path. 
(2)  No newsrack shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any sidewalk or swale when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property; or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other government use; or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business, or any legally parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes permitted on or near such location; or when such newsrack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk. 
(3)  Newsracks located totally on private property shall be subject to and comply with the provisions of this Code and shall be placed upon the property only with the express written consent of the owner of the property. 
(4)  No more than one cluster of newsracks shall be located within the northerly limits of the town from the town hall north, or within the southerly limits of the town from the town hall south; the clusters shall not be closer than one mile apart. Neither shall any additional newsrack of any other publication be placed within this distance except immediately adjacent to permitted newsracks of other publications. 
(5)  No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
a.  Within fifteen (15) feet of any marked crosswalk. 
b.  Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of an unmarked crosswalk. 
c.  Within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility. 
d.  Within fifteen (15) feet of any driveway. 
e.  Within five (5) feet ahead of and fifteen (15) feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop. 
f.  Within five (5) feet of any bus bench. 
g.  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6) feet. 
h.  Within five (5) feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31) 
Sec. 25-33. - Contents; maintenance; identification of distributor. 
(a)  Newsracks shall be used for the sale and distribution of newspapers. Any other publications, including advertising circulars, will not be permitted. 
(b)  Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. Unsightliness will not be tolerated. The type and appearance, including colors, of the newsrack facilities shall blend with the surroundings of the particular location to the extent practicable. Standards shall be determined so as to permit a reasonably wide selection of newsrack facilities on the market. 
(c)  Each newsrack on the streets of the town shall have displayed on the newsrack the name, address and telephone number of the distributor in a place where such information may easily be seen. 
(Code 1972, § 24-32) 
Sec. 25-34. - Addition of newsracks to enclosures erected by town. 
    If the town, at its expense, decides to install and maintain a cover or supporting structure for the newsracks, additional newsracks shall not be added to the adjacent area without town commission approval. The expense of enlarging the supporting structure shall be borne by the owner of the newsrack requesting the addition. No advertising or signs shall be affixed to the supporting structure. 
(Code 1972, § 24-33) 
Sec. 25-35. - Abandonment. 
    If a newsrack remains empty for thirty (30) continuous days, it shall be deemed abandoned and may be treated in the same manner as provided in section 25-39 for newsracks in violation of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 24-34) 
Sec. 25-36. - Building permit, fee required. 
    A building permit with current applicable fees is required for a newsrack. The police department shall also review the plans with regard to safety. The permit holder shall pay a nonrefundable fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per calendar year; provided, however, that if the permit is issued during the calendar year, the fee for the permit shall be prorated for any full calendar month which has expired during the calendar year. 
(Code 1972, § 24-35) 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, Ch. 6; police, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 25-37. - Indemnification of town. 
    An application for a newsrack permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the town commission, and shall contain a written statement, signed by the applicant, whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the town, its officers, agents and employees, from any loss, liability or damages, including expenses and costs, for bodily injury and property damage sustained by any person as a result of the location, installation, use, maintenance, removal or storage of the applicant's newsracks within the town. 
(Code 1972, § 24-36) 
Sec. 25-38. - Bond; insurance. 
    Any accidents directly attributable to newsrack usage will be the responsibility of the permit holder, distributors and owners of newspapers. The applicant shall file with the town, along with the application for a newsrack permit, a bond issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with the town named as obligee, conditioned for the faithful performance of the provisions of this article. The applicant shall file with the application proof of general liability insurance in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per person, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence and fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in property damage, naming the town as coinsured. 
(Code 1972, § 24-37) 
Sec. 25-39. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon determination by the town manager that a newsrack has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article, a citation to correct the offending condition shall be issued to the distributor of the newsrack. Such citation shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested. The citation shall specifically describe the offending condition and suggest actions necessary to correct the condition. The citation shall contain the results and any data collected from any pedestrian and vehicular traffic study that may have been performed to ascertain the offending condition. In addition, where the owner of the offending newsrack is not known or identified, a copy of the citation shall be posted on the offending newsrack. 
(b)  Failure to properly correct the offending condition within twenty (20) days after the mailing or posting date of the citation, whichever is later, shall result in the offending newsrack being removed by the town. If the offending newsrack is not properly identified as to the distributor and the distributor is not otherwise known, the citation shall be posted as provided herein and if the offending condition is not corrected within twenty (20) days, it shall be removed by the town. Any newsrack removed by the town hereunder shall be stored at the distributor's expense for a period of ninety (90) days. The newsrack shall be released to the distributor upon a proper showing of ownership and payment of any and all storage charges. If the newsrack is not claimed within the ninety-day period, the newsrack may be sold at public auction and the proceeds applied first to storage charges and then paid into the general fund of the town. At least ten (10) days prior to the public auction, the town clerk shall publish a description of the newsrack, the location from which it was removed and notice of the auction in a newspaper of general circulation in the town and shall provide the distributor identified on the newsrack or if otherwise known, with written notification of the auction by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  If the distributor of the newsrack appeals the citation to correct the offending condition as provided in section 25-40, removal of the newsrack shall be stayed pending final disposition of the appeal, which final disposition shall include any judicial review. The town shall pay or reimburse to the distributor any storage charges paid pursuant to a citation to correct which is appealed as provided herein and the decision rendered favorable to the distributor. 
(Code 1972, § 24-38) 
Sec. 25-40. - Appeals. 
    Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice or action taken under the provisions of this article (hereinafter, an appellant) may appeal to the code enforcement board. An appeal must be perfected within the twenty (20) days after the mailing or posting of the notice of any protested decision or action by delivering to the office of the town manager a letter of appeal briefly stating the basis for the appeal. A hearing on the appeal shall be held on a date not more than sixty (60) days after receipt of the letter of appeal. The appellant shall be given at least seven (7) days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing. The board shall give the appellant and any other interested party a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the determination of the license inspector should not be upheld. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall make a final and conclusive determination. The determination shall be reduced to writing and signed by the chairman of the board and filed in the office of the town clerk within twenty (20) days of the hearing and a copy shall be sent to the appellant. The decision of the board shall be effective when rendered. The decision of the board may be appealed as provided for by law. 
(Code 1972, § 24-39) 
Cross reference- Code enforcement board, § 2-96 et seq. 
State Law reference- Aggrieved party may appeal a final administrative order of code enforcement board to circuit court, F.S. § 162.11. 
Chapter 26 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15; planning and development, Ch. 20; hurricane, storm, and flood damage protection, Ch. 30, Art. V, § 6. 
State Law reference- Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.; platting, F.S. § 177.011 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFICATIONS GOVERNING PLATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and bicycle/walkway paths, Ch. 25. 

Sec. 26-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission means the mayor and town commission. 
    Current, with reference to specifications, design standards, etc., means the time when a plat or development plan is presented for acceptance or approval. 
    Dead end means a road or street that terminates within the subdivision, as distinguished from one that terminates at the subdivision's boundary. 
    Developer's engineer means a professional engineer registered in the state and engaged by the developer of the subdivision to plan and supervise the construction of the work. 
    State department of transportation specifications means the latest current road and bridge specifications adopted as standard by the state department of transportation. 
    Surveyor means a land surveyor registered in the state and engaged by the developer to survey and plat the land proposed for subdivision. 
    Work means all construction, and facilities and features of every kind in, under and over the dedicated rights-of-way and drainage easements within, and furnished in connection with the plat, except gas, electric power, telephone and street lighting facilities and related facilities. 
(Code 1972, § 25-1) 
Sec. 26-27. - General information. 
(a)  Overall requirements and conditions. In order to file a plat for any purpose except merely to record the boundaries of an ownership, the roads, streets, alleys and publicly owned parking areas shall be paved according to the town's requirements, and all the requirements of this chapter shall be met. 
(b)  Town's jurisdiction. All facilities and construction of every kind built or performed within the public rights-of-way and drainage easements, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, earthwork, stabilization, bases, prime coats, seal coats, asphalt surface treatment, asphalt pavement, concrete bases and pavements, curbs, gutters, turnouts, sidewalks, sprigging, landscaping, culverts, storm sewers, side drains, inlets, catch basins, manholes, junction boxes, headwalls, endwalls, retaining walls, bridges and bridge work of all kinds, seepage wells, french drains, ditch paving, rip-rap and other erosion-control facilities, swales, ditches, canals and the like shall be subject to the town's requirements in full. In addition, the town shall have jurisdiction over the locations of poles, braces, guy wires, meter boxes, valve boxes, light standards, fire hydrants and the like, to the extent of requiring them to be in the area which would become the planting space in the ultimately complete construction of roads and streets, or within one foot of the sidewalk; jurisdiction over the locations and elevations of water piping, sanitary sewers, fire mains, underground cables and conduits, gas mains and the like, to the extent of requiring that none of them be located under present pavement areas, except where it is necessary to cross under the pavements, in which case the minimum cover from top of future pavement to top of the underground installation shall be at least thirty (30) inches; jurisdiction of the top elevations of meter boxes, inlets, catch basins, manholes, valve boxes and the like, to the extent of requiring that they be flush with the finished construction surrounding them; jurisdiction over the scope of utility installation to the extent of requiring that all water, sewer, gas, electric and communication stubs and the like, which cross under the pavement, be provided as part of the subdivision's development; and jurisdiction over the sequence of construction to the extent of requiring that all underground installations of every kind that come under the pavement to be currently constructed, or within eight (8) feet of its edges, shall be installed prior to the stabilization of subgrade and construction of pavement, to the end that the subgrade or pavement shall not be cut after it is built. 
(c)  Administration. The town manager shall administer this chapter under the direction of the commission. 
(Code 1972, § 25-2) 
Sec. 26-28. - General procedure for filing plats. 
(a)  Preparing plat and development plan. When land is to be subdivided, a plat and a development plan shall be prepared. The plat shall be prepared by a registered surveyor, and the development plan by a registered engineer, all in accordance with this chapter. To aid in avoiding unnecessary expense and delay, it is urged that the surveyor and the engineer furnish tentative plats and tentative development plans to the town engineer for review prior to the preparation of final plats and plans. As a further aid in the case of large tracts which are to be developed in two (2) or more increments, the town engineer will review and give tentative approval of proposed plats and proposed development plans of the whole of such tracts, whereupon the developer may proceed with final plats, plans and development of the increments one at a time. Tentative plats and tentative development plans will be reviewed by option holders, prospective buyers, etc., as well as for owners. 
(b)  Review of plat and development plan. The plat and two (2) white prints of the development plan shall be submitted to the town engineer who shall review them for conformity with this chapter. He shall furnish the developer's surveyor with a written tentative approval of the plat if it is found to comply, otherwise he shall furnish a written statement of its deficiencies. He shall furnish the developer's engineer with a written approval of the development plan if it is found to comply with this chapter, otherwise he shall furnish a written statement of its deficiencies. One white print of the development plan shall be submitted to the county health department. 
(c)  Construction work. After the development plan has been approved the developer shall proceed according to one of the following methods: 
(1)  The work shall thereupon be constructed under the supervision of the developer's engineer; 
(2)  The developer shall furnish a surety company bond guaranteeing the completion of the work within twelve (12) months; or 
(3)  The developer shall enter into engineering and construction contracts for completion of the work within a realistic time limit specified by the commission but not exceeding twelve (12) months, and place funds in escrow to finance such contracts. 
(d)  Filing the plat. 
(1)  Should the developer elect to construct the work without a bond or escrow agreement, in accordance with paragraph (c)(1) above, his engineer shall, upon completion of the work, furnish the town engineer with a written certificate of such completion, accompanied by certain records and plans as hereinafter prescribed, whereupon the town engineer shall recheck the plat and, if same is found to comply with this chapter, the commission shall, on the recommendation of the town engineer, accept the plat for filing. 
(2)  Should the developer elect to furnish a bond guaranteeing completion of the work within twelve (12) months, in accordance with paragraph (c)(2) above, the town engineer shall recheck the plat and, if same is found to comply with this chapter, the commission shall, on the recommendation of the town engineer, accept the plat for filing contingent on the approved bond being furnished within ten (10) calendar days. If the bond is not thus furnished, unless the time for filing bond is extended by the town commission, the acceptance of the plat shall automatically be voided, and the plat shall not be filed. On completion of the work the developer's engineer shall furnish the town engineer with a written certificate of such completion, certifying that all such work complies with this chapter and accompanied by certain records and plans as hereinafter prescribed, whereupon the commission, on the recommendation of the town engineer, shall accept the work and release the bond. 
(3)  Should the developer elect to enter into engineering and construction contracts for completion of the work within a realistic time limit specified by the commission but not exceeding twelve (12) months, and place funds in escrow to finance the contracts, in accordance with paragraph (c)(3) above, the town engineer, after the required contracts and escrow agreement have been made and approved, shall recheck the plat and, if same is found to comply with this chapter, the commission shall, on the recommendation of the town engineer, accept the plat for filing; and upon completion of the work the developer's engineer shall furnish the town engineer with a written certificate of such completion, accompanied by certain records and plans as hereinafter prescribed, whereupon the commission, on the recommendation of the town engineer, shall authorize final payments from escrow on the contract, release the escrow agreement, and shall accept the work, provided the developer's engineer and contractor have been paid in full. 
(Code 1972, § 25-3) 
Sec. 26-29. - Requirements pertaining to plats. 
(a)  Applicable laws. A plat shall be furnished, prepared by a registered surveyor. It shall comply with F.S. Ch. 177 and with the requirement that follows: The plat shall be drawn to a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch. 
(b)  Dedicator shall own land. The dedicator of the plat shall be the owner of record of the land at the time the plat is accepted for filing. 
(c)  Taxes paid. All due taxes shall have been paid at the time the plat is accepted for filing. 
(d)  Land suitable for development. The land shall be of such size, shape and nature that it is capable of being platted and developed in full accord with this chapter. Any elevations shown on the plat shall refer to United States Coast and Geodetic Survey datum, Mean Sea Level equals 0.00. 
(e)  Road, street and drainage construction. As a condition of accepting the plat for filing, the developer shall construct and drain the roads, streets, alleys and publicly owned parking areas in the subdivision, including his side of any unpaved roads, streets and alleys which bound the subdivision, and including his side of any roads, streets and alleys which he plats centering along or near the boundaries of the subdivision, for which he dedicates part of the right-of-way, all of this to be done in accordance with this chapter; except, the developer shall not be required to pave state-maintained highways. He shall also be required to regrade and otherwise modify the side ditches or roadside swales of paved town roads and state-maintained highways within or abutting the subdivision if necessary to properly accommodate subdivision drainage. 
(f)  Positive drainage required. The developer shall provide such facilities as may be needed to drain the subdivision to positive outlets that can be legally maintained in permanent use, or into a public drainage system of adequate capacity which discharges into such positive outlets, including all right-of-way, easements and necessary construction, at no expense to the town. Side ditches along public roads shall not necessarily be considered as such public drainage systems or positive outlets. 
(g)  Dedications to public. Rights-of-way for roads, streets and alleys, easements for utilities, and rights-of-way and easements for drainage shall be dedicated to the public. The following widths shall be required: 
(1)  State roads: Right-of-way width shall be determined separately in each case by the commission after coordination with the state department of transportation. 
(2)  Roads and streets: Right-of-way width shall be fifty (50) feet, twenty-five (25) feet each side of centerline. 
(3)  Alleys: Right-of-way width shall be twenty (20) feet, ten (10) feet each side of centerline. 
(4)  Utility easements: Utility easements shall be five (5) feet wide on each parcel, and shall be identified on the plat as utility easements. 
(5)  Drainage easements and rights-of-way: Easements and rights-of-way for drainage shall be of such widths as to adequately accommodate the drainage facilities to be put on them, plus fifteen (15) feet on one side of open ditches or swales to permit equipment to enter for maintenance by normal maintenance methods. 
(6)  Planting of shrubs and trees: Planting of shrubs and trees shall be prohibited in drainage swales within rights-of-way and easements. 
(h)  Existing roads and streets continued. Primary roads and streets on the plat shall be located so as to provide continuations and extensions of existing primary roads and streets in adjoining subdivision. 
(i)  Access. Roads and streets shall provide access to adjoining land at intervals of not over one-fourth mile unless blocked by natural obstacles other than drainage canals, lakes and natural watercourses. Every parcel of land in a subdivision shall have access to a public road or street. 
(j)  Alleys. Alleys shall be provided behind all property zoned, restricted or used for other than residences, and may be provided behind residences. 
(k)  Construction on easements. The plat shall contain a restriction prohibiting the placing of buildings on utility easements. It shall contain a restriction prohibiting buildings or any kind of construction, or the planting of trees or shrubs on drainage easements. 
(l)  Minimum lot size. Lots zoned, restricted, used or intended for use for residences shall have a width of not less than eighty (80) feet at the setback line and an area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(m)  Maximum block size. Maximum block size, as measured between centerlines of bounding roads and streets, shall be nominally one-fourth mile, in keeping with variations in size of sections and normal subdivision thereof. 
(n)  Minimum setbacks. All plats shall require minimum setbacks and such setbacks shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of the particular zoning district within which the property to be platted is situated. Such setbacks and other building site area regulations must be in accordance with the setbacks and building site area regulations set forth in Chapter 30 of this Code. 
(o)  Radii at intersection. Block corners at road and street intersections shall be rounded off if necessary to such radii as to enable adherence to the design standards of the American Association of State Highway Officials both currently and when the intersection is ultimately completed. 
(p)  Names of subdivisions, roads and streets. Names previously used for subdivisions in the town shall not be given to new subdivisions. Roads and streets which form extensions or are located along the general projections of existing roads and streets shall be named after the existing roads and streets; otherwise, new roads and streets shall not be named after existing roads and streets unless their post office addresses are in different towns or cities. 
(q)  Dead-end roads and streets. There shall be no dead-end alleys. Roads and streets, if dead-ended, shall terminate in a circle having a radius of not less than fifty (50) feet to the right-of-way line. The right-of-way around the circle shall be joined to the right-of-way along the street by curves having at least fifteen-foot radii. 
(Code 1972, § 25-4) 
State Law reference- Plats made for recording, F.S. § 177.091. 
Sec. 26-30. - Bulkheads. 
    The work covered under the specifications pertains to the design and construction of bulkheads within the corporate limits of the town, which shall comply with the provisions of Article V of Chapter 6 of this Code, and be subject to the regulations and restrictions therein contained. 
(Code 1972, § 25-69) 
Cross reference- Zoning, Ch. 30; coastal construction, § 6-76 et seq.; zoning of bulkheads, seawalls, and groins, Ch. 30, Art. V, § 3. 
Secs. 26-31-26-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIFICATIONS GOVERNING PAVING 

Sec. 26-46. - Scope. 
    The work covered by this article consists of performing all operations necessary for constructing a complete paving in strict accordance with these specifications and any applicable drawings. 
(Code 1972, § 25-16) 
Sec. 26-47. - Standard specifications. 
    The current Standard Specifications For Road and Bridge Construction, as approved by the state department of transportation and referred to hereinafter as the DOT Specifications, and cited by applicable section number, are hereby made a part of this article, including General Sections 4 and 5, except for the payment clauses thereof; and where reference is made to the department it shall be construed to refer to the owner or developer and further provided that all tests and inspections, as called for or required, shall be made at the expense of the owner or developer. 
(Code 1972, § 25-17) 
Sec. 26-48. - Development plans. 
    A development plan shall be prepared by an engineer, registered in the state. The development plans shall be in accordance with this article; three (3) white prints shall be submitted to the town engineer for his approval. The town engineer shall furnish the developer's engineer with written approval of the development plan if it is found to comply with this article; otherwise, he shall furnish a written statement listing the deficiencies. No construction work shall be begun before the written approval is received. Three (3) copies of storm drainage calculations shall be submitted with the development plan. 
(Code 1972, § 25-18) 
Sec. 26-49. - Excavation. 
    Excavation and earthwork shall be in accordance with section 23 of the DOT Specifications. All muck and organic matter shall be removed to a depth four (4) feet below the crown of the road for the full width of the right-of-way. Fill material shall be of an approved sand, shell, shell-marl conglomerate or rock of suitable size. 
(Code 1972, § 25-19) 
Sec. 26-50. - Stabilized subgrade. 
    A twelve-inch-thick stabilized subgrade shall be provided for the full width of the wearing surface plus four (4) feet (two (2) feet on each side). The stabilization material shall have a Florida Bearing Value of fifty (50). The work of stabilizing the subgrade shall be in accordance with Section 36 of the DOT Specifications. The stabilizing material shall be local shell or shell marl, as approved by the town engineer. 
(Code 1972, § 25-20) 
Sec. 26-51. - Stabilized shoulders. 
    The shoulders shall be stabilized to a depth of twelve (12) inches for an eight-foot-wide strip. Material and construction references in section 26-50 shall apply to this section. 
(Code 1972, § 25-21) 
Sec. 26-52. - Base course-Section 54 of specifications. 
    The base course shall be six (6) inches thick after compaction and shall consist of grade number two (2) Miami oolite formation lime rock, all in accordance with Section 54 of the state department of transportation specifications. The width of the base shall be two (2) feet wider (one foot on each side) than the width of the wearing course. 
(Code 1972, § 25-22) 
Sec. 26-53. - Same-Section 60 of specifications. 
    The base course shall be eight (8) inches thick after compaction. The width of the base shall be two (2) feet wider (one foot on each side) than the width of the wearing course. It shall consist of an approved local shell or shell marl conglomerate and shall be in strict accordance with Section 60 of the DOT Specifications. Not more than seventy (70) percent by weight (oven dry) of the shell shall pass a number four (4) sieve. 
(Code 1972, § 25-23) 
Sec. 26-54. - Prime and tack coating. 
    The previously prepared base course shall be primed and a tack coat applied in accordance with the provisions of Section 100 of the DOT Specifications. 
(Code 1972, § 25-24) 
Sec. 26-55. - Surface course. 
    The base, prepared according to section 26-54, shall be surfaced with an asphaltic concrete wearing course type II, having a minimum thickness of one inch, applied in one course, in accordance with the provisions of Section 129 of the DOT Specifications. The minimum width of the wearing surface shall be twenty-two (22) feet. 
(Code 1972, § 25-25) 
Sec. 26-56. - Crown elevation. 
    Minimum elevation of the road crown shall be United States Coast and Geodetic Survey elevation five and one-half (51/2) feet. For existing roads, the minimum elevation of the road crown shall be determined by the town engineer and approved by the town commission. 
(Code 1972, § 25-26) 
Sec. 26-57. - Radii at intersections. 
    Radii of wearing course at intersections shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(Code 1972, § 25-27) 
Sec. 26-58. - Concrete header. 
    Concrete headers shall be constructed at all intersections. Headers shall be twelve (12) inches wide, ten (10) inches deep with one number 5 reinforcing rod in center and shall be forty-eight (48) feet in length measured on the arc. All concrete shall conform to the requirements of Section 160 of the DOT Specifications with a compressive stress of two thousand five hundred (2,500) pounds per square inch at twenty-eight (28) days and shall have a maximum water-cement ratio of six (6) United States gallons per ninety-four-pound bag of cement. Headers shall be constructed at all turnarounds. 
(Code 1972, § 25-28) 
Sec. 26-59. - Raised concrete curbs. 
    Raised concrete curbs shall be seven and one-half (71/2) inches wide, seventeen (17) inches high, with one number 4 reinforcing bar top and bottom and shall extend six (6) inches above the gutter. 
(Code 1972, § 25-29) 
Sec. 26-60. - Sidewalks. 
    Concrete sidewalks, where required, shall be five (5) feet wide and four (4) inches thick (six (6) inches thick at driveways, etc.) with outside edge along the right-of-way line. The minimum elevation of the sidewalk at the right-of-way line shall be the same as the crown grade of the road and shall slope at least one inch down toward the centerline of the right-of-way. 
(Code 1972, § 25-30) 
Sec. 26-61. - Drainage. 
(a)  A storm drain system shall be provided and shall be designed by accepted engineering principles for rainstorms of the maximum intensity predicted for the county area at three-year intervals according to current DOT charts and data. Roadside ditches and swales shall have slopes not flatter than 0.001 feet per foot in the direction of flow. All swales shall be sodded. Ditch pavement or other adequate permanent protection against scour shall be provided where necessary. Runoff may be accumulated and carried in the swales or ditches in the right-of-way up to but not above the point where flooding of the wearing surface or flooding of roadside property occurs. Water in excess of this amount shall not be carried in the roadside swales or ditches in the rights-of-way, but shall instead be diverted therefrom and carried away in storm sewers, or in outfall ditches or by other approved means separate from the roads or streets. 
(b)  Open channels and outfall ditches shall be designed so they will not overflow their banks, and they shall be designed for flow velocities that will not cause scour. Where higher velocities must be used, ditch pavement or other adequate permanent protection against scour shall be provided. 
(c)  Drainage piping of all kinds shall be fitted with headwalls, endwalls, inlets or other appropriate terminating or intermediate structures; except, twelve-inch and smaller pipes under turnouts may be left with unprotected ends. The design of headwalls, endwalls, inlets, catch basins, manholes, ditch paving box culverts, and minor drainage and related structures in general, shall broadly follow current DOT practices. 
(d)  Metal pipe, if used, shall be asphalt coated conforming with DOT Specifications. 
(Code 1972, § 25-31) 
Sec. 26-62. - Construction methods. 
    Paving construction methods shall be those prescribed in state department of transportation specifications. 
(Code 1972, § 25-32) 
Sec. 26-63. - Supervision of construction. 
    The paving work shall be constructed under the supervision of an engineer registered in the state who shall be authorized to require and who shall require that the work be constructed in accordance with the submitted and approved plans and the owners' or developers' requirements. He shall have authority to make minor changes in the plans consistent with the owners' requirements, but major changes shall not be made without the prior approval of the town engineer. 
(Code 1972, § 25-33) 
Sec. 26-64. - Measurements and tests. 
    During construction the developer's engineer shall make or cause to be made such measurements, field tests and laboratory tests as may be needed to assure that the work and materials conform with the development plans and this article. The methods of testing shall be those prescribed by the DOT for use on its work. 
(Code 1972, § 25-34) 
Sec. 26-65. - Inspection by town engineer. 
    The town engineer shall make such inspections as may be needed before, during and after the construction of the work under this article to keep informed of the status of the development, and to generally assist all agencies involved in the work in maintaining the standards envisioned by this article. 
(Code 1972, § 25-35) 
Sec. 26-66. - Completion certificate. 
    On completion of the work under this article the developer's engineer shall furnish the town engineer with a certificate stating that the work has been entirely completed, that it was constructed under his supervision, and that it conforms to the approved plans and this article. 
(Code 1972, § 25-36) 
Secs. 26-67-26-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIFICATIONS GOVERNING WATER 

Sec. 26-86. - Generally. 
    All public water supply shall be from the town. Extensions, modifications or additions to the public water system shall conform with all requirements of the sanitary code of the state and shall be designed by the engineers of the town, and presented for approval of the town and the state division of health. Complete plans, specifications and typical details shall be prepared, submitted and approved prior to construction. 
(Code 1972, § 25-48) 
Sec. 26-87. - Standard specifications. 
    Federal Specifications, State Specifications, American Water Works Association Specifications, American Society for Testing and Materials Specifications and other specifications, standards and publications referred to hereinafter, of the issue in effect on the date of approval, shall form a part of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 25-49) 
Sec. 26-88. - Supervision and inspection. 
(a)  All construction under this article shall be performed under the direction and superintendence of the engineers of the town and to their entire satisfaction, approval and acceptance. 
(b)  All material to be incorporated in the work, all labor performed, and all appliances shall be subject to the inspection and approval or rejection by the town engineers. All construction shall be performed only in the presence of the town engineers' inspectors, unless otherwise directed, but presence and superintendence of the inspector shall in no way relieve responsibility for the work, or to warrant the use of inferior material and construction methods. 
(Code 1972, § 25-50) 
Sec. 26-89. - Materials. 
(a)  Cast-iron pipe. 
(1)  Pipe shall conform to the American Water Works Association (AWWA) Standard Specifications for Cast Iron and Special Fittings for Class C Water Works Pipe, or to the requirements of Federal Specifications WW-P-421a, Class 150, except that the pipe shall be furnished with mechanical joints. All pipes and fittings shall have a thin cement lining applied in accordance with Federal Specifications WW-P-421a. 
(2)  Joints in bell and spigot cast-iron pipe shall consist of a preformed fiber ring or treated paper, especially designed for water mains, and hot poured lead. The paper or fiber shall be properly lined, placed and rammed, leaving a space of two and one-fourth (21/4) inches in depth for lead. Lead for caulking shall be common desilvered lead, conforming to American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Specifications B-29-407. After the joint is poured and the lead has cooled to the temperature of the pipe, the lead shall be thoroughly compacted making watertight joints without overstraining the bells. 
(3)  Joints in mechanical joint pipe shall be bolted with high-strength, heat-treated, cast-iron bolts, and shall be gasketed with rubber gaskets conforming to tests as prescribed by Federal Specifications 22-R-601A, or the equivalent ASTM Specifications. 
(b)  Asbestos-cement pipe. 
(1)  Asbestos-cement pipe and couplings shall conform to the requirements of the current state building codes. Pipe and couplings shall be designed to withstand a working pressure of not less than one hundred and fifty (150) pounds per square inch. All pipe and fittings shall be tested in accordance with the standards of the American Water Works Association for Asbestos-Cement Pipe. Certified records of tests made by the pipe manufacturer, or by an approved commercial laboratory, or by both, as required by the town engineers, shall be submitted to the engineers with each shipment of pipe for that particular shipment of pipe. Pipe may be the type for either simplex joints or roll-on joints. 
(2)  Specials and fittings shall be Class D, cast iron, as specified herein, except that fittings shall have all bell connections of Standard American Water Works Association dimensions, or special dimensions, as required. Connections to cast-iron fittings on gate valves shall be made with jointing materials as specified herein. 
(3)  Asbestos-cement pipe, couplings and fittings shall be handled and installed as specified herein and in accordance with the recommendations of the pipe manufacturer. 
(c)  Copper pipe. Copper pipe shall conform with ASTM Specifications B-88-49. Pipe shall be Type K, seamless, and suitable for use as water service pipes. 
(d)  Hydrants. Hydrants shall be cast-iron body, fully bronze mounted, suitable for one hundred and fifty (150) pounds working pressure or three hundred (300) pounds hydrostatic test pressure and shall conform to the latest specifications of the American Water Works Association. Hydrants shall have a six-inch bell or mechanical joint connection as required, two (2) two-and-one-half-inch hose connections, and one pumper connection. The hydrant's valve opening shall have a minimum four-and-one-half-inch diameter opening; and the stand pipe shall have a minimum five-and-one-half-inch inside diameter. When shut, the valve shall be reasonably tight when upper portion of barrel is broken off. All hydrants shall open by turning the operating nut in a counterclockwise direction; and the direction of the opening shall be cast on the head of the hydrant. Hose nipples shall be bronze or noncorrosive metal, and threads shall be National Standard. Nipple caps shall be securely chained to the barrel. Hydrants shall be painted one coat of red lead paint and two (2) finish coats of approved paint of a color directed by the town engineers. The final coat shall be Sonneborn's Hydrant Enamel, or approved equal. 
(e)  Valve boxes. Adjustable cast-iron valve boxes of suitable length shall be provided and installed for subsurface valves, and as otherwise directed by the town engineers. Valve boxes shall conform to standard AWWA Specifications and include base, center section, adjustable top section and locking cover marked "Water." Boxes shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions with the box cover top flush with the pavement or ground surfaces. 
(f)  Gate valves. Gate valves shall be iron body, bronze mounted, solid wedge or double disk, nonrising stem gate valves, as indicated on the drawings. Gate valves shall conform to the current AWWA Standard Specifications for Gate Valves for Ordinary Water Works Service, as applicable. Gate valves shall be Class 125 flanged ends, bell ends, or mechanical joint ends, as required, with operating wheels or operating nuts as required. 
(g)  Corporation cocks. Corporation cocks shall be Mueller or equal. Cocks shall be provided with outlet threads for connecting copper service pipe. 
(h)  Curb stops. Curb stops shall be locking type, with galvanized steel square key. Curb stops shall be brass or bronze construction. 
(i)  Meter boxes. Each curb stop shall be provided with a precast reinforced concrete meter box of a type and size required for the service connection. Concrete meter box construction and design shall meet approval of the town engineers. 
(Code 1972, § 25-51) 
Sec. 26-90. - Water system construction. 
(a)  Specifications. All pipe and appurtenances shall be installed in strict accordance with latest American Water Works Association (AWWA) Specifications and directives of the manufacturer and town engineers. Any section of pipe found to be defective to these or reference specifications, either before or after laying, shall be replaced with new pipe without expense to the town. 
(b)  Cut-in operation. Prior to discontinuing water service to consumers for purposes of cutting into existing mains or otherwise making water system improvements desired, a written request shall be served to the town, advising of the time of cut-off and the expected time of return to service. Every advance preparation shall be made to expedite construction, and every attempt shall be made to complete the cut-in operation in minimum time. Water service shall be discontinued for such purposes only after approval of the town. 
(c)  Excavation. All excavation for water mains shall be made by open cut except as otherwise described herein. Cuts shall be of sufficient depth to provide a minimum pipe cover as required under these specifications, and of sufficient width to provide a nine-inch minimum clear space, each side of the pipe. The bottom of the trench shall be carefully and accurately formed and graded to provide uniform bearing to allow the pipe to rest its full length on the trench bottom. Bellholes shall be formed after the trench has been graded and shall be of ample room for constructing the pipe joint. 
Where rock is encountered in the trench, it shall be removed to a minimum of six (6) inches below the required depth and this space filled with clean sand, thoroughly compacted as directed by the town engineers. No section of pipe shall rest directly on rock. 
(d)  Laying pipe. While suspended in the sling and before lowering into the trench, the pipe shall be inspected for defects and tapped with a light hammer to detect cracks. Defective, damaged or unsound pipe shall be rejected. Deflections from a straight line or grade, as required by vertical curves, horizontal curves or offsets, shall not exceed 6/D inches per linear foot of pipe, where D represents the nominal diameter of the pipe expressed in inches, between the centerlines extended, of any two (2) connecting pipes. If the alignment required deflections in excess of the limitations, bends or a sufficient number of shorter lengths of pipe to provide angular deflections within the limit set forth shall be provided. 
Prior to lowering pipe into the trench, the pipe interior shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign material and the pipe shall be kept cleaned during construction operations by means of plugs or other approved methods. Pipe shall not be laid in water, or when trenches or weather conditions are unsuitable for the work proposed, except by permission of the town engineers. When work is not in progress, open ends of pipe and fittings shall be securely closed so that no trench water, earth or other material will enter the pipe or fittings. Prior to completing the joint, each section of pipe shall rest solidly upon the pipe bed, with recesses excavated to accommodate the bells and joints. Pipe shall be laid at locations shown on the approved engineering plans and shall be provided with a minimum of thirty (30) inches cover above the top of the crown, unless otherwise approved by the town engineers. 
(e)  Thrust blocks. Suitable concrete reaction or thrust backing shall be applied on all pressure pipes four (4) inches in diameter or larger; at all tees, plugs, caps and at bends affecting twenty-two and one-half (221/2) degrees or more. 
(f)  Backfill. After water mains have been tested and approved, pipe trenches shall be backfilled with loose earth, free from deleterious material, and carefully deposited on both sides of the pipe. The backfill shall be thoroughly tamped in six-inch layers, until sufficient fill has been replaced to provide a minimum of one foot over above the pipe crown. The remaining portion of the backfill shall then be placed in the trench and tamped so as to prevent further settlement and to prevent damage to the pipe. All excess material shall be disposed of in an approved manner and in no event shall the material be left on public property unless approved by the town engineers. 
(Code 1972, § 25-52) 
Cross reference- Water system, Ch. 29. 
Sec. 26-91. - Destructive or unstable soil. 
    Metallic or cement-asbestos pipe and appurtenances shall be installed so as to prevent contact with rock, muck or other excessively acid, alkaline or unstable soils, destructive to physical properties of the pipe. Where such soils are encountered, trench excavation shall be removed as required to obtain a firm supporting base and replaced with a minimum of six (6) inches sand backfill around the pipe exterior. Backfill sand shall be clean, free from deleterious material, and subject to approval of the town engineers. If tests indicate the water main can be relocated around local muck or other destructive soil pockets, rerouting may be employed without expense to the town, providing prior written approval is given by the town engineers. 
(Code 1972, § 25-53) 
Sec. 26-92. - Pavement cuts; restoration. 
    Water mains, appurtenances and service lines shall be installed in open trenches prior to street and sidewalk construction. Where special conditions warrant such construction prior to the installation of water mains and services or where permanent pavement exists, the water system shall be designed and constructed so as to minimize pavement cutting and replacement. To this end, the provision of parallel mains or use of an approved pipe jacking method may be required. Where water mains are installed by open cut methods across existing pavement, prior written approval shall be obtained from the town. In all streets or parts of streets that are paved, all backfill shall be well compacted and when so directed by the town engineers, the backfill shall be puddled. After compaction to the required height and shape, the pavement shall be relaid carefully and thoroughly in a manner adapted to its peculiar character and to the satisfaction and approval of the town engineers. 
(Code 1972, § 25-54) 
Sec. 26-93. - Pressure tests. 
(a)  All pipe shall be tested before backfilling around any fittings and all pressure tests shall be made under the supervision of the engineer. The tests shall be made between valves and so far as practical, in sections of approximately one thousand (1,000) feet in length. The leakage from the pipes and connections for each section tested, while the pressure is at eighty (80) pounds per square inch, shall not be greater than at the rate of one hundred (100) United States gallons per twenty-four (24) hours, per mile, per inch normal diameter, for pipe of twelve-foot lengths, seventy-five (75) United States gallons for sixteen-foot lengths, and correspondingly varied for other lengths of pipe. 
(b)  To determine the rate of leakage, there shall be furnished a suitable pump, pressure gauge and water tank for measuring the amount of water pumped. After expelling all air from the mains, the pressure shall be raised to one hundred and ten (110) pounds and it shall be so maintained for a period of not less than one hour. The pressure shall then be lowered to eighty (80) pounds per square inch and maintained for a period of not less than one hour. All visible leaks from exposed pipe, joints and appurtenances shall be made tight. If leakage is at a greater rate than specified, all pipe, joints and appurtenances shall be retightened or recaulked, and/or defective work replaced until the leakage is reduced to the allowable amount. 
(Code 1972, § 25-55) 
Sec. 26-94. - Sterilization. 
(a)  Each unit of completed supply line and distribution system shall be thoroughly flushed and then sterilized with chlorine. Chlorine may be applied by the following methods: liquid chlorine gas-water mixture or calcium hypochlorite and water mixture. 
(b)  Flushing shall be at sufficient velocity to remove dirt and other foreign matter through fire hydrants or other approved blow-offs and the amount of chlorine then applied shall be sufficient to provide a dosage of not less than fifty (50) parts per million. The chlorination material shall be introduced to the water lines and distribution systems in a manner approved by the engineer. After a contact period of not less than eighty (80) hours, the system shall be flushed with clean water until the residual chlorine content is not greater than two-tenths parts per million. All valves in the lines being sterilized shall be opened and closed not less than four (4) times during the contact period. 
(c)  All arrangements shall be made with the state division of health to take all water samples required for bacteriological tests; and the sterilization process shall continue until the state division of health approves the water lines and distribution system being sterilized. Sampling taps as required to take all necessary water samples shall be provided and all sterilization and state division of health approval shall be accomplished without expense to the town. 
(Code 1972, § 25-56) 
Sec. 26-95. - Service connections. 
(a)  Water service connections shall be provided to extend from the water main to the property line. Service connections shall be of sufficient size to furnish peak demands as determined in accordance with requirements of the Standard Plumbing Code. The minimum size service connection shall be three-fourths-inch diameter for single-family residences. 
(b)  Each service connection shall be provided with corporation stop, tapped coupling or tee; service line; curb stop, meter and box; and necessary fittings or adaptors. Service connections two (2) inches and smaller may be made by corporation cocks, tees or tapped coupling on a four-inch diameter and larger mains. Service connections on main diameters less than four (4) inches shall be made directly to tees installed in the main. 
(Code 1972, § 25-57) 
Chapter 27 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; licenses and license taxes, Ch. 15; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 16; water system, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference- Municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; taxation and finance generally, F.S. Ch. 192 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 27-1-27-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PURCHASE OF METERED, BOTTLED GAS, WATER SERVICE, AND LOCAL TELEPHONE SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Franchises, App. A et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal public service tax, F.S. § 166.231 et seq. 

Sec. 27-26. - Levy of tax. 
    There is hereby levied on each purchase in the town of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), water service, and local telephone service, a tax based upon the charge made by the seller thereof: 
(1)  Ten (10) percent on the first twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(2)  Five (5) percent on the next fifty dollars ($50.00) or fraction thereof. 
(3)  One percent on the balance of all charges over seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
Such tax shall, in every case, be paid by the purchaser, for the use of the town, to the seller of such electricity, gas, water or telephone service at the time of paying the charge therefor to the seller thereof, but not less often than monthly. 
(Code 1972, § 26-1) 
Sec. 27-27. - Telephone services tax. 
    The tax levied in this article on the purchase of telephone service shall apply only to purchases within the town of local telephone service as defined in F.S. § 203.012(3), excluding public telephone charges collected on site, access charges, and any customer access line charges paid to a local telephone company. 
(Code 1972, § 26-2) 
Sec. 27-28. - Coin-operated telephone services. 
    The tax levied by this article on purchase of telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local telephone service except local messages which are paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones, the total amount of the guaranteed charge on each bill rendered for semipublic coin box telephone service shall be subject to such tax. 
(Code 1972, § 26-2) 
State Law reference- Municipal fiscal year, F.S. § 166.241. 
Sec. 27-29. - Collection by seller. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), water service or local telephone service to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the town, the tax levied by this article, at the time of collecting the price charged for each transaction, and to report and pay over, on or before the twentieth day of each fiscal month, unto the town finance director, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding fiscal month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any purchase of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), water service or telephone service without at the same time collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such purchase. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any purchase shall be liable to the town for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same had been actually paid to the seller, and the town commission shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and to take all proceedings in the name of the town as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected bills. If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the seller, the seller's charge, and the tax hereby imposed and as hereby required, on account of the purchase for which such charge is made, or either, the seller shall have and is hereby vested with the right, power and authority to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill has been paid in full. 
(Code 1972, § 26-3) 
Sec. 27-30. - Records of seller; inspection by town. 
    Each and every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), water service and local telephone service shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the town of such commodities or service. Such records shall show the price charged upon each purchase, the date thereof, and the date of payment thereof, and the records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the town during business hours on all business days, and duly authorized agents of the town shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof, during such times as they may desire. 
(Code 1972, § 26-4) 
Sec. 27-31. - Exemptions from tax. 
    The United States, the state, political subdivisions and agencies thereof and purchases by churches for church purposes are hereby exempted from payment of the taxes levied by this article. The tax shall not apply to purchase of bottled water, or to long distance telephone service, or to coin box telephones, except as provided herein. 
(Code 1972, § 26-5) 
State Law reference- "Political subdivision" defined, F.S. § 1.01(9). 
Sec. 27-32. - Computation of tax. 
    In all cases where the seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), metered water or water service or local telephone service collects the price thereof at monthly periods, the tax levied by this article may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period, provided that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent of the amount computed. 
(Code 1972, § 26-6) 
Sec. 27-33. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any purchaser willfully failing or refusing to pay the tax imposed by this article, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller violating the provisions of this article or any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this article, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 26-7) 
Sec. 27-34. - Disposition of revenue. 
    All revenues received, collected and derived from the taxes levied by this article shall be deposited by the town finance director in the general fund and disbursed as other general funds of the town. 
(Code 1972, § 26-8; Ord. No. 688, 1-2-01) 
Chapter 28 - XERISCAPE-LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 595, § 1, adopted Aug. 22, 1990, repealed Code 1972, Ch. 281/2, relative to trees, shrubs and vegetation from which the substantive provisions of former Ch. 28, Arts. II and III derived. Section 2 of said Ord. No. 595 enacted a new Ch. 281/2 and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included in this Code as a new Ch. 28, §§ 28-1-28-19. The Code Comparative Table contains the specific disposition of the Code 1972, Ch. 281/2 provisions which were subsequently amended by Ord. No. 573, adopted Jan. 3, 1989; Ord. No. 579, adopted Aug. 15, 1989; and Ord. No. 588, adopted Oct. 3, 1989. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and structures, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; land clearance, Ch. 13; planning and development, Ch. 20; tree and understory preservation, § 20-121 et seq.; lethal yellowing disease, § 20-181 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 24; streets, sidewalks and bicycle/walkway paths, Ch. 25; subdivisions, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 30. 

Sec. 28-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the provision, installation, and maintenance of landscape in order to achieve a healthy, beautiful and safe community by the following means: 
(a)  Water conservation through xeriscape principles: Promote the conservation of potable and nonpotable water by encouraging the preservation of existing plant communities, encouraging the planting of natural or uncultivated areas, encouraging the use of site specific plant materials, and establishing techniques for the installation and maintenance of landscape materials and irrigation systems. 
(b)  Aesthetics: Improve the aesthetic appearance of all areas through the incorporation of open space into development in ways that harmonize and enhance the natural and built environment. 
(c)  Environmental quality: Improve environmental quality by recognizing the numerous beneficial effects of landscaping upon the environment, including: (1) improving air and water quality through such natural processes as photosynthesis and mineral uptake; (2) maintaining permeable land areas essential to surface water management and aquifer recharge; (3) reducing and reversing air, noise, heat and chemical pollution through the biological filtering capacities of trees and other vegetation; (4) promoting energy conservation through the creation of shade, reducing heat gain in or on buildings or paved areas, and (5) reducing the temperature of the microclimate through the process of evapotranspiration; and encouraging the conservation of limited fresh resources through the use of site specific plants and various planting and maintenance techniques. 
(d)  Land values: Maintain and increase the value of land by requiring landscaping to be incorporated into development, thus becoming by itself a valuable capital asset. 
(e)  Human values: Provide direct and important physical and psychological benefits to human beings through the use of landscaping to reduce noise and glare, and to break up the monotony and soften the harsher aspects of urban development. 
(f)  Preservation of vegetation: Preserve existing natural vegetation and the incorporation of native plants, plant communities, and ecosystems into landscape design, where possible. 
(g)  Removal of nuisance species: Eradicate or control certain exotic plant species which have become nuisances because of their tendency to damage public and private works, to have a negative effect upon public health, or to disrupt or destroy native ecosystems. 
(h)  Improved design: Promote innovative and cost-conscious approaches to the design, installation, and maintenance of landscaping, encouraging water and energy conservation. 
(i)  Improved administration and enforcement: Establish procedures and standards for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(1), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, in addition to the following terms or words, the definitions provided for in Chapter 30 shall apply. If definitions at any time conflict with definitions provided in other Chapters, the more restrictive interpretations shall apply. 
(a)  Anti-transpirant: A protective coating, generally applied to plant materials prior to or immediately after transplanting, that reduces water loss through the leaf surface. 
(b)  Buffer, perimeter landscape: A continuous area of land which is required to be set aside along the perimeter of a lot in which landscaping is used to provide a transition between and to reduce the environmental, aesthetic, and other impacts of one type of land use upon another. 
(c)  Cultivated landscape area: Planted areas that are frequently maintained by mowing, irrigating, pruning, fertilizing, etc. 
(d)  Development: Any proposed material change in the use or character of the land, including, but not limited to, land clearing or the placement of any structure or site improvements on the land. 
(e)  Drip line: A vertical line extending from the outermost branches of a tree to the ground. 
(f)  Ecosystem: A characteristic assemblage of plant and animal life within a specific physical environment, and all interactions among species, and between species and their environment. 
(g)  Ground cover: Plants, other than turf grass, normally reaching an average maximum height of not more than twenty-four (24) inches at maturity. 
(h)  Hedge: A landscape barrier consisting of a continuous, dense planting of shrubs. 
(i)  Incompatibility of land uses: Issue arising from the proximity or direct association of contradictory, incongruous, or discordant land uses or activities, including the impacts of noise, vibration, smoke, odors, toxic matter, radiation, and similar environmental conditions. 
(j)  Irrigation system: A permanent, artificial watering system designed to transport and distribute water to plants. 
(k)  Landscaping: Any combination of living plants (such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees) and nonliving landscape material (such as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, walls, fences or decorative paving materials). 
(l)  Mulch: Nonliving organic and synthetic materials customarily used in landscape design to retard erosion and retain moisture. 
(m)  Open space: shall be interpreted to mean: 
(1)  All areas of natural plant communities or area replanted with vegetation after construction, such as: revegetated natural areas, tree, shrub, hedge or ground cover planting areas; and lawns; and 
(2)  Other areas allowed to be counted as open space as per the Highland Beach Town Code. 
(n)  Plant community: A natural association of plants that are dominated by one or more prominent species, or a characteristic physical attribute. 
(o)  Plant species, controlled: Those plant species which tend to become nuisances because of their undesirable growth habits, but which, if properly cultivated, may be useful or functional as elements of landscape design. 
(p)  Plant species, prohibited: Those plant species which are demonstrably detrimental to native plants, native wildlife, ecosystems, or human health, safety, and welfare. 
(q)  Preserve areas: Vegetative areas required to be preserved by law. 
(r)  Shrub: A self supporting woody perennial plant of low to medium height characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from the base, usually not more than ten (10) feet in height at its maturity. 
(s)  Site specific planting: The selection of plant material that is particularly well suited to withstand the physical growing conditions which are normal for that location. 
(t)  Shade tree, small: A self-supporting woody plant or species normally growing to a mature height of at least twenty (20) feet and a mature spread of at least fifteen (15) feet in Highland Beach. Clusters of more than one tree may be used when it is demonstrated to the town's landscape consultant that the grouping of trees will, at maturity, surpass the fifteen-foot diameter requirement and that the grouping of trees is suitable for the proposed location. 
(u)  Substantial change in land use: Either: 
(1)  A change in land use that increases the intensity of land use; or 
(2)  A change in land use that creates an incompatibility or increases the incompatibility of adjacent land uses; or 
(3)  An increase in the total floor area of multiple dwellings or nonresidential buildings which results in increased traffic generation. 
(v)  Tree: Any self-supporting woody perennial plant which has a DBH of two (2) inches or more and which normally attains an overall height of at least fifteen (15) feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. It may appear to have several stems or trunks as in several varieties of oak. 
(w)  Understory: Assemblages of natural low-level woody, herbaceous, and ground cover species which exist in the area below the canopy of the trees. 
(x)  Vegetation, native: Any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to all or part of the State of Florida. Plant species which have been introduced by man are not native vegetation. 
(y)  Viable: When referring to a tree, shrub, or other type of plant, is a plant that in the judgement of the building official, is capable of sustaining its own life processes, unaided by man, for a reasonable period of time. 
(z)  Xeriscape: Landscape methods which conserve water through the use of drought tolerant plants and planting techniques. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(2), 8-22-90; Ord. No. 688, § 16, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 28-3. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to new property development or to any cumulative permitted landscaping renovation in excess of twenty (20) percent on existing individual lots. No department shall issue a permit provided for herein in violation of the regulations set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(3), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 28-4. - Conflicts. 
    If the provisions of this chapter conflict with other ordinances or regulations, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern or prevail to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(4), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 28-5. - Landscape design standards. 
    The following standards shall be considered the minimum requirements for the installation of all plant materials within Highland Beach: 
(a)  Minimum tree and shrub planting or preservation requirements: 
(1)  General: Trees shall not be placed where they interfere with site drainage or where they shall require frequent pruning in order to avoid interference with overhead power lines. A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of all required trees shall be shade trees. 
(2)  Standards for landscape materials: 
a.  Quality of plants: All plant materials shall be a minimum of Florida Number One as defined in Grades and Standards Revised, Part II, as published by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. Exceptions and substitutions from this regulation may be reviewed and approved by the town's landscape consultant in order to promote the use of slow growing or native plant materials. 
b.  Tree planting standards: Immediately upon planting, trees shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet in height and shall have a minimum caliper of three (3) inches. 
c.  Tree species mix: When more than ten (10) trees are to be planted to meet the requirements of this chapter, a mix of species shall be provided. The number of species to be planted shall vary according to the overall number of trees required to be planted. The minimum number of species to be planted are indicated in Table 28-1. Species shall be planted in proportion to the required mix. This species mix shall not apply to areas of vegetation required to be preserved by law. 
Table 
Required Species Mix 
A B Required 
Number 
of Trees Minimum 
Number 
of Species 11-20 2 21-30 3 31-40 4 41 +   5  
d.  Hedge planting standards: Hedges, where required, shall form a solid continuous visual screen of at least three (3) feet in height immediately upon planting and shall be spaced eighteen (18) inches on center. 
(3)  Landscaping the interior of off-street parking areas: 
a.  Landscaping the interior of off-street parking areas is required. 
b.  All rows of parking spaces shall be provided a terminal island to protect parked vehicles, provide visibility, confine moving traffic to aisles and driveways, and provide space for landscaping. 
In addition to providing such terminal islands, there shall be provided within each row of parking spaces, landscaped islands located so as to prevent more than five (5) vehicles from being parked side-by-side in an abutting configuration. Such islands shall measure not less than five (5) feet in width and fifteen (15) feet in length. Three (3) or four (4) spaces in excess of a multiple of five (5) spaces shall constitute a requirement for one additional island. 
A terminal island for a single row of parking spaces shall be landscaped with at least one tree and vegetative groundcover or grass. A terminal island for a double row of parking spaces shall contain not less than two (2) trees and vegetative groundcover or grass. 
c.  Off-street parking areas designed to provide double rows of abutting side-by-side spaces shall include a continuous landscaped divider strip centered on the dividing line between such rows of spaces. The divider strip shall have a width of not less than five (5) feet, shall be surrounded by a raised curb or wheel stops to prevent vehicular encroachment and shall be maintained in grass or other landscaping materials. Not less than one tree shall be installed in the landscaped divider strip for each five (5) abutting parking spaces counted on one side of the divider strip. Three (3) or four (4) spaces in excess of a multiple of five shall constitute a requirement for one additional tree. 
d.  Not less than ten (10) percent of the interior of off-street parking areas shall be landscaped and maintained with grass or other living vegetative materials. Landscaped divider strips, terminal islands and other islands as required in paragraphs b. and c. above may be included in computing the minimum landscaped area. 
e.  Additional landscape treatment: All interior landscaped areas not dedicated to trees or to preservation of existing vegetation shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, shrubs, or other appropriate landscape treatment. Sand or other pavement shall not be considered appropriate landscape treatment. 
f.  Curbing requirements: Mandatory terminal islands and islands required to separate each five (5) abutting parking spaces shall be surrounded with a continuous, raised curb which meets the standards established in subsection (c) below. Divider strips as required in paragraph c. above shall be protected from encroachment of motor vehicles as provided in subsection (c) below. 
(4)  Landscaping the perimeter of lots: Landscape strips shall be provided around the perimeter of lots, as follows: 
a.  Perimeter landscape strips separating vehicular use areas from abutting rights-of-way: 
1.  General requirements: Wherever a vehicular use area abuts a right-of-way, public or private, a perimeter landscape strip shall be created which meets the minimum standards established in the subsection. The perimeter strip shall extend along the length of the boundary between the right-of-way and the vehicular use area. A perimeter landscape strip may be pierced by accessways to the extent necessary to comply with the provisions of this Code, or other applicable ordinances. 
b.  Minimum dimensions of perimeter landscape strip: 
1.  Minimum width: Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the minimum width of the perimeter landscape strip separating a vehicular use area from abutting rights-of-way shall be: 
a.  Lots on the west side of SR A1A north of Lot 105 (Lots 106 to 124 inclusive)-5 feet. 
b.  Bel Lido Lots 11 through 19, Block 1; 1 through 7 and town lots 37, 39, 41, and 44 abutting SR A1A on the west side-10 feet. 
c.  All remaining lots with a depth of less than 50 feet-5 feet. 
d.  All remaining lots with a depth of 50 feet or more-5 feet on side property lines. 10 feet on front property lines or more if determined to be necessary to adequately buffer the parking at the discretion of the town's landscape consultant. 
e.  All rear lot lines: 10 feet or more if determined to be necessary to adequately buffer the parking at the discretion of the town's landscape consultant. 
f.  All publicly owned parking lots-25 feet. 
2.  Minimum length: The perimeter landscape strip shall extend along the length of the boundary between the vehicular use area and the abutting right-of-way. The landscape strip may be pierced by accessways as necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or other applicable ordinances. 
c.  Minimum planting requirements: One tree shall be planted for each thirty (30) lineal feet (or fraction thereof), or as may be determined by the town's landscape consultant, of a perimeter landscape strip separating a vehicular use area from an abutting right-of-way. The width of accessways which pierce the strip shall be included in the calculation of lineal dimensions: 
d.  Supplemental landscape requirements: 
1.  Spacing of trees: Trees in a perimeter landscape strip may be planted singly or in clusters. 
2.  Landscape barrier: 
a.  In general: A hedge, wall, fence, berm or other landscape barrier shall be located within the perimeter landscape strip. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the barrier shall be not less than three (3) feet in height. 
b.  Hedges: If a hedge is used as an element of the landscape barrier, plants shall be selected which comply with the requirements of section 28-5(a)(2)d. 
c.  Living and nonliving barriers: If walls, fences, or other nonliving barriers are used as elements of the landscape barrier, shrubs or vines shall be planted as determined by the town's landscape consultant to be required to meet the purposes of this chapter. 
d.  Earth berms: Earth berms may be used only when installed in conjunction with sufficient plant material to satisfy the provisions of the chapter. The slope of a berm shall not exceed a ratio of 3:1. 
3.  Additional landscape treatment: The remainder of the perimeter landscape strip shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, or other appropriate landscape treatment. Sand or pavement shall not be considered to be appropriate landscape treatment. 
4.  All parking garage apertures shall be provided with decorative, ventilated walls to effectively obscure automobile and interior lighting from the exterior, and further shall be screened along all sides by vegetation which shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in height and ten (10) feet on center at the time of planting and by continuous living shrubs and/or hedges, a minimum of three (3) feet in height and a maximum of six (6) feet in height, planted eighteen (18) inches on center and must not obstruct access to fire and other emergency vehicles. The roofs of garages which are accessory to multi-family dwellings but which are not used for parking or active recreation purposes shall be covered with artificial turf or other appropriate material approved by site plan review. 
(b)  Maintaining safe sight distance at intersections and points of access: 
(1)  Applicability: The regulations established for visibility triangles in Chapter 30, (Zoning) Section 30-68(o) shall apply. 
(2)  "Green Book" standards: Landscaping shall be located in accordance with the roadside recovery area provisions of the State of Florida Department of Transportation's Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction, and Maintenance of Streets and Highways, (commonly known as the "DOT Green Book") as amended. 
(c)  Curbing and encroachment of vehicles into landscape areas: 
(1)  Curbing requirements: Except as provided in subsection 28-5(c)(2), below, all landscape areas shall be separated from vehicular use areas by nonmountable, reinforced concrete curbing of the type characterized as "Type D" in the current edition of the "Roadway and Traffic Design Standards" Manual prepared by the State of Florida Department of Transportation, or curbing of comparable durability. Unreinforced extruded curbing shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Use of wheel stops: All landscaped areas at the front line of off-street parking spaces may be protected from encroachment or intrusion of vehicles through the use of wheel stops. Wheel stops shall have a minimum height of six (6) inches above finished grade of the parking area. Wheel stops shall be properly anchored and shall be continuously maintained in good condition. Where wheel stops are located two (2) feet from the front of a parking space, that two (2) feet need not be paved. However, the area between the wheel stop and the landscape area shall receive appropriate landscape treatment, including planting of grass or ground cover. Wheel stops shall not be placed in locations of anticipated intense pedestrian traffic in accordance with provisions of Chapter 30, (Zoning) Section 30-69. 
(3)  Width of curbing excluded from calculation of minimum dimensions of required landscape areas: The width of curbing shall be excluded from the calculation of the minimum dimensions of all required landscape areas. 
(d)  Use of site specific planting materials: Trees and other vegetation that are prohibited from use in meeting the landscape requirements of this chapter are so indicated in the Xeriscape Plant Guide and Pruning Manual maintained by the town. Trees and other vegetation shall be planted in soil and climatic conditions which are appropriate for their growth habits as set out in the Xeriscape Plant Guide and Pruning Manual maintained by the town. Plants used in the landscape design pursuant to this chapter shall to the greatest extent be: 
(1)  Appropriate to the conditions in which they are to be planted. 
(2)  Have noninvasive growth habits. 
(3)  Encourage low maintenance, high quality design. 
(4)  Be otherwise consistent with the intent of this chapter. 
(e)  Use of adapted plant materials: The use of plant materials adapted to the vicinity of the development is encouraged in order to reduce water consumption, general maintenance, and the dependence on fertilizers and insecticides. 
(f)  Replacement requirements: Vegetation which is required to be planted or preserved by this chapter shall be replaced with equivalent vegetation if it is not living within one year of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Preserved trees for which credit was awarded which subsequently die shall be replaced by the requisite number of living trees according to the standards established in section 28-5(a). 
(g)  Controlled plant species: The following plant species have a tendency to become nuisances if they are not properly cultivated. These species may be planted under controlled conditions provided that they are installed and maintained according to the following supplemental regulations: 
(1)  Non-native Acacia species, Grevillea robusta (Silk Oak), Bischofia javanica (Toog), and Dalbergia sissoo (sissoo): These species are commonly used in the landscape design because of their fast growth. They are, however, brittle wood species which break up under high velocity winds. These species may continue to be planted, but cannot be counted for more than ten (10) percent of the total number of trees required by any section of this chapter. 
(2)  Ficus species: Ficus species can be planted as individual trees provided that they are no closer than twelve (12) feet from any public improvement. Ficus species may be planted within twelve (12) feet of public improvements only if they are maintained as a hedge which is constantly cultivated and does not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
(h)  Selection of grass species: 
(1)  General: All lawn areas shall be planted with species suitable as permanent lawns in Highland Beach. Effective erosion control is mandatory in swales, rights-of-way, or other areas subject to erosion. In areas where grass seed is used, a nursegrass appropriate to the season of installation shall be sown for immediate effect, and maintenance shall be provided until coverage is complete. 
(2)  Primary grass types: The primary types of grass used for residential, commercial, and industrial areas in the Central and South Florida areas are St. Augustine and Bahia cutivars. Selection of grass types shall be made on a site specific basis. Selection of grass types shall be made while considering the long term economic and aesthetic effects of possible drought conditions upon the lawn areas. 
a.  Use of St. Augustine Grass: St. Augustine grass should be used adjacent to areas that accommodate significant pedestrian traffic or where the aesthetics of the immediate area are considered an important factor. 
b.  Use of Bahia Grass: Bahia grass should be used in large, nonmanicured, turf areas such as open fields, recreation areas, road rights-of-way, or other areas that are generally viewed from a distance or from a moving automobile. 
(3)  Other grass types: Nothing in this section is meant to negate the use of other appropriate grass types for their specific site uses in accordance with accepted horticultural practices. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(5), 8-22-90; Ord. No. 688, §§ 16, 17, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 28-6. - Xeriscape principles. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to assist the town in achieving conservation through proper plant selection, installation and maintenance practices. The following xeriscape principles serve as the primary means of achieving water conservation: 
(1)  Appropriate planning and design. 
(2)  Limiting turf areas to locations where it provides functional benefits. 
(3)  Efficient irrigation systems. 
(4)  The use of soil amendments to improve water holding capacity of the soil. 
(5)  The use of mulches, where appropriate. 
(6)  The use of drought-tolerant plants. 
(7)  Appropriate and timely maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(6), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 28-7. - Site design standards. 
(a)  Creative site development concepts for water conservation: Creative site development concepts shall be used in order to promote water conservation. Water requirements may be reduced by providing for: 
(1)  The preservation of existing plant communities. 
(2)  The reestablishment of native plant communities. 
(3)  Limited amount of lawn grass areas. 
(4)  The use of site specific plant materials (see definitions). 
(5)  The use of shade trees to reduce transpiration rates of lower story plant materials. 
(6)  Site development that retains stormwater runoff on site. 
(7)  The use of pervious paving materials. 
(8)  Site development that addresses the carrying capacity of the land in its present form. 
(9)  Other environmentally sensitive site development concepts. 
(b)  Minimum open space requirements: Minimum open space requirements shall be as required by Chapter 30 (Zoning). 
(c)  Preservation of existing plant communities: When existing natural plant communities occur on a parcel of land to be developed, at least twenty (20) percent of the required open space shall be in the form of preserved natural plant communities (see Xeriscape Plant Guide and Pruning Manual). If natural plant communities are present, a minimum of thirty-five (35) percent of required open space must be in the form of preserved natural plant communities. 
(d)  Lawn grass areas: 
(1)  General: A major portion of water demand used for landscape purposes is required for the irrigation of lawn areas. Portions of landscaped areas that have been customarily designed as lawns should be: 
a.  Preserved as natural plant communities. 
b.  Planted as redeveloped native areas. 
c.  Planted in traditional mixes of trees, shrubs and ground covers. Properly managed nongrass landscape developments of site specific plantings will typically be able to survive on a reduced water requirement and survive drought conditions better than lawn areas. 
(2)  Maximum use requirements for allowable lawn grass: No more than thirty-five (35) percent of the required green space area shall be planted in lawn grass. 
(e)  Required management plan: 
(1)  General: For all areas of preserved plant communities larger than one-half (1/2) acre in area, the owner shall submit for the approval of the town's landscape consultant, a narrative management plan indicating the manner in which the owner will preserve the native plant communities. The narrative shall include 
a.  Whether or not the existing vegetation is to be preserved in the existing species composition. 
b.  If applicable, the manner in which the composition of existing plant material is to be preserved (hand removal of invasion species, prescribed burning, etc.). 
c.  The maintenance schedule for the removal of exotic species. 
d.  The maintenance schedule for the removal of debris. 
e.  Other information that may be required by the town's landscape consultant that is reasonable and necessary to a determination that the management plan meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Requirement for owner's covenant with Highland Beach for the maintenance of preserved plant communities. The owner shall covenant with Highland Beach, in a form acceptable to Highland Beach that the preserved plant community will be maintained as per the accepted management plan. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(7), 8-22-90; Ord. No. 688, § 18, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 28-8. - Irrigation design standards. 
(a)  Irrigation systems: Irrigation systems can be beneficial in efficiently adding water to the cultivated landscape. The following practices shall be implemented by those developing or maintaining irrigation installations. 
(1)  Irrigation of existing plant communities: Existing plant communities and ecosystems, maintained in a natural state, do not require and shall not have any additional irrigation water added in any form. 
(2)  Re-established native plant areas: Native plant areas that are supplements to an existing plant community or newly installed by the developer may initially require additional water to become established. Where newly planted native areas have been installed in soils appropriate to the proposed native system, additional irrigation water (after the period of establishment) is unnecessary and probably harmful. The water required during the establishment period shall be applied from a temporary irrigation system, a water truck or by hand watering from a standard hose bib source. 
(3)  Cultivated landscape areas: Irrigation systems, either manual or automatic, may be used for the cultivated landscape areas. Application of water through a properly maintained and regulated irrigation system can be the most efficient method of watering the landscape. 
a.  Small irrigation systems: Small residential and commercial areas may be irrigated with a manually controlled irrigation system if sufficient time and labor is available for its operation. Landscape plantings and lawns shall be watered on an as needed basis only. 
b.  Large irrigation systems: When irrigated, cultivated areas in larger residential, commercial and industrial areas shall be irrigated by the use of an automatic irrigation system with controllers set to apply water as noted in this section. Wherever practical, high water and low water use areas shall be circuited as noted below. Rainfall or moisture sensing devices should be used to avoid operation of the system during periods of increased rainfall. 
(b)  Zoning of irrigation systems: The water demand of lawn areas is significantly greater than the water demand of most shrubbery or ground cover areas. Typical residential irrigation system design does not provide for the option of irrigating lawn or other high water demand areas on a separate schedule from that of shrubbery or other reduced areas on a separate schedule from that of shrubbery or other reduced water demand areas. This results in the irrigation of the entire controlled area at the rate that the most water demanding plant material requires. Therefore, the following standards shall be considered the minimum requirements for landscape irrigation design within the jurisdiction of the South Florida Water Management District. 
(1)  Sprinkler zoning: Wherever feasible, sprinkler head irrigating lawns or other high water demand landscape areas shall be circuited so that they are on a separate zone or zones from those irrigating trees, shrubbery or other reduced water requirement areas. 
(2)  Control systems: Automatically controlled irrigation systems shall be operated by an irrigation controller that is capable of watering high water requirement areas on a different schedule from low water requirement areas. 
(c)  Elimination of overthrow onto nonpervious areas: Landscape irrigation systems shall be designed so that, to the greatest extent practical, water being applied to nonpervious areas is eliminated. 
(1)  Impervious areas: Sprinkler heads shall be placed as required to reduce direct overthrow onto nonpervious areas. 
(2)  Wind control: The use of low trajectory spray nozzles is encouraged in order to reduce the effect of wind velocity on the spray system. 
(3)  Low volume systems: As technology for underground and low volume applicators of water is improved, their use is encouraged. 
(4)  Moisture sensing devices: As technology for moisture sensing devices is improved, their use is encouraged. 
(d)  Use of nonpotable water: Use of nonpotable water for use in the irrigation of lawn and plant material is required when determined to be available. 
(e)  Water application rates: Since deep watering promotes deep root growth and healthier plant material, water shall not be applied at a precipitation rate of less than one-half (1/2) inch per application. 
(f)  Requirements for irrigation systems: No significant overthrow shall be allowed onto nonpervious areas. Irrigation circuits shall be zoned to apply water onto lawn areas on a different schedule than those irrigating the planting beds. Low trajectory heads or low volume water distributing devices shall be used. Irrigation controllers shall be capable of irrigating grass and shrub/tree zones on separate schedules. Moisture sensing devices shall be installed to regulate the frequency of controller operation. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(8), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 28-9. - Plant material and installation standards. 
(a)  General: 
(1)  Minimum requirements: The following standards shall be considered the minimum requirements for the installation of all landscaping within Highland Beach. 
(2)  Standards and inspections: All landscaping shall be installed in a sound workmanlike manner and according to accepted and proper planting procedures with the quality of plant materials as hereinafter described. A representative of the town's landscape consultant shall inspect all landscaping and no certificate of occupancy will be issued unless the landscaping meets all requirements. 
(b)  Plant quality standards: Plants installed pursuant to this chapter shall conform to or exceed the minimum standards for Florida Number One as provided in the most current edition of "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Part I and II," prepared by the State of Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. Another accepted standard may be used if it equals or exceeds the quality of Florida Number One. 
(c)  Plant ball sizes: Ball sizes on all transplanted plant materials shall conform to or exceed the minimum standards as noted in the most current edition of "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Part I and II" prepared by the State of Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
(d)  Anti-transpirants: 
(1)  General: In order to reduce the transpiration rate of plant material during the installation process, anti-transpirants shall be used. Anti-transpirants reduce the amount of water loss through the leaves of plant material during installation, thereby reducing the amount of water required for the survival of the plants. 
Anti-transpirants shall be used on all permitted landscape installation projects. 
(e)  Use of planting soil: All required landscape materials shall be installed using planting soil of a type appropriate to the individual plant material and the soil conditions in which the planting is occurring. 
(f)  Use of organic mulches: 
(1)  General: The use of organic mulches reduce the growth of weeds and add nutrients to the soil as well as retain moisture over the root zones of plant materials. 
a.  Application specifications: When appropriate, a minimum of three (3) inches of organic mulch shall be placed over all newly installed tree, shrub, and ground cover planting areas. 
b.  Types of mulch: The use of melaleuca, rather than cypress (or other valuable species) mulch is encouraged. 
c.  Requirements for the installation of organic mulch: The required mulch layer shall be installed on all landscape projects. 
(g)  Amending existing soil prior to sodding or seeding: 
(1)  General: The organic content of the top four (4) inches of the lawn bed for all areas to be seeded or sodded shall be a minimum of five (5) percent. 
(2)  Requirements for the amending of existing soil prior to sodding or seeding: The required soil amendments for the lawn bed shall be provided on all landscape projects. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(9), 8-22-90; Ord. No. 688, § 18, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 28-10. - Maintenance standards for cultivated landscape areas. 
(a)  General: The owner, and/or lessee of land subject to this chapter shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping located on their property and on adjacent public rights-of-way, which shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly landscape area which shall include, but not be limited to, weeding, mulching, fertilizing, pruning, mowing, and edging as generally set forth in this section. 
(b)  Use requirements for maintenance of mulch layers: The required mulch layer shall be maintained on all landscape projects. 
(c)  Maintenance of plants, trees and landscaping; replacement: All required plants, trees and landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy, pest-free condition. Within six (6) months of a determination by the building official that a plant, tree or other landscaping is dead or severely damaged or diseased, the plant, tree or landscaping shall be replaced by the property owner or owners in accordance with the standards specified in this chapter. If the plant, tree or other landscpaing is located in the public right-of-way and the plant, tree or landscaping dies or is severely damaged or diseased, the adjacent property owner shall be required to replace the plant, tree or other landscaping. However, if the palm tree, that is dead, diseased or severely damaged, was initially installed by the town or the state, then the adjacent property owner shall not be required to replace the palm tree. 
(d)  Removal of dead, diseased or dangerous trees or shrubs: It shall be the responsibility of each private property owner to remove any dead, diseased or dangerous trees or shrubs, or parts thereof, which overhang or interfere with traffic control devices, public sidewalks, rights-of-way or property owned by the town. The town shall have the authority to order the removal of any such trees or shrubs. 
(e)  Pruning: 
(1)  General: All pruning should be accomplished according to good horticultural standards. 
(2)  Pruning of trees: Trees shall be pruned only as necessary to promote healthy growth. Unless special approval is provided by the town's landscape consultant, trees shall be allowed to attain their normal size and shall not be severely pruned or "hat-racked" in order to permanently maintain growth at a reduced height. Trees may be periodically pruned or thinned in order to reduce the leaf mass in preparation for tropical storms. All pruning shall be accomplished in accordance with the National Arborist's Standards as set forth in the Xeriscape Plant Guide and Pruning Manual maintained by the town. 
(f)  Mowing: Grass shall be mown as required in order to encourage deep root growth and therefore the preservation of irrigation water. 
(g)  Edging: All roadways, curbs and sidewalks shall be edged when necessary in order to prevent encroachment from the adjacent grassed areas. Do not use weed-eaters to trim lawn grasses around a tree since they will quickly remove bark causing the deterioration and eventual death of the tree. 
(h)  Watering: 
(1)  General: All watering of planted areas shall be managed so as to: 
a.  Maintain healthy flora. 
b.  Make plant material more drought tolerant. 
c.  Avoid excessive turf growth. 
d.  Minimize fungus growth. 
e.  Stimulate deep root growth. 
f.  Minimize leaching of fertilizer. 
g.  Minimize cold damage. 
(2)  Watering of St. Augustine grass lawns: All watering of St. Augustine grass lawn areas shall be accomplished on an as needed basis as indicated by turf wilt. The amount of water applied in each application shall be as indicated in section 28-8(e), so as to promote deep root growth. 
(3)  Watering of Bahia grass lawns: All watering of Bahia grass lawn areas shall be accomplished on an as needed basis. Bahia grass may not require watering even when wilting. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to preclude the withholding of water from grass beyond the stage of turf wilt. 
(4)  Promoting deep root growth of trees and shrubs: Watering of plants and trees should always be in a sufficient amount to thoroughly soak the root ball of the plant and the surrounding area, thereby promoting deep root growth and drought tolerance. 
(5)  Operation of automatic irrigation systems: Whenever possible, automatic irrigation systems should be operated between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., or as designated by the Town of Highland Beach. Irrigating during these hours reduces fungus growth and loss of water due to evaporation. 
(6)  Maintenance of irrigation systems: Irrigation systems shall be constantly maintained to eliminate waste of water due to loss of heads, broken pipes or misadjusted nozzles. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(10), 8-22-90; Ord. No. 688, § 18, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 14-005, § 2, 1-6-15) 
Sec. 28-11. - Maintenance of natural plant communities. 
(a)  General: All open space areas that are to be preserved as natural plant communities shall be trimmed a minimum of yearly of all exotic vegetation, lawn grasses, trash or other debris. 
(b)  Natural plant communities: All natural plant communities shall be managed in order to maintain the plant community for the purpose it was preserved. 
(1)  Required management plan: When applicable, the building department shall make periodic inspections of the natural areas to verify the owner's adherence to the approved management plan as specified in section 28-7(e). 
(2)  Mechanical equipment shall not be used: There shall be no use of mechanical equipment in accomplishing the maintenance of preserved plant communities unless specifically authorized in writing by the building department. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(11), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 28-12. - Landscape plan required. 
(a)  General: Prior to the issuance of any building permit, a landscape plan shall be submitted to, reviewed by, and approved by the town's landscape consultant. 
(b)  Nature of required plan: A landscape plan for each lot shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a landscape architect. 
(c)  Contents of landscape plans: The landscape plans shall: 
(1)  Be drawn to scale, including dimensions and distances. 
(2)  Delineate the existing and proposed parking spaces, or other vehicular areas, access aisles, driveways, and similar features. 
(3)  Indicate the location of sprinklers or water outlets. 
(4)  Designate by name and location the plant material to be installed or preserved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  Identify and describe the location and characteristics of all other landscape materials to be used. 
(6)  Show all landscape features, including areas of vegetation required to be preserved by law, in context with the location and outline of existing and proposed buildings and other improvements on the site, if any. 
(7)  Include a tabulation clearly displaying the relevant statistical information necessary for the town's landscape consultant to evaluate compliance with the provisions of this chapter. This includes gross acreage, area of preservation areas, number of trees to be planted or preserved, square footage of paved areas, and such other information as the town's landscape consultant may require. 
(8)  Contain such other information that may be required by the town's landscape consultant that is reasonable and necessary to determine that the landscape plan meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(12), 8-22-90; Ord. No. 688, § 18, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 28-13. - Vested rights. 
(a)  New development: This chapter shall not apply to a development which is governed by an approved and valid final site plan or a valid building permit issued prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(b)  Substantial changes in land use at existing developed sites: 
(1)  General: If a substantial change in land use occurs upon the site, the following sections of this chapter will apply. 
a.  Section 28-5(a) Minimum Tree Planting or Preservation Requirements. 
Section 28-5(a)(4) Landscaping the Perimeter of Lots. 
b.  Section 28-5(b) Maintaining Safe Distance at Intersections and Points of Access. 
Section [28-5(d)] Prohibited Plant Species. 
c.  Section 28-5(g) Controlled Plant Species. 
d.  Section 28-9 Plant Material and Installation Standards. 
e.  Section 28-10 Maintenance Standards for Cultivated Landscape Areas. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(13), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 28-14. - Enforcement. 
    The enforcement of provisions of this Code will be the responsibility of the building official, or his designee. Any violations of this chapter will be within the jurisdiction of the code enforcement board of the town. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(14), 8-22-90) 
Cross reference- Code enforcement board, § 2-96 et seq. 
Sec. 28-15. - Penalties. 
    The provisions of the controlling code enforcement board ordinance and the procedures and penalties contained therein are hereby adopted and incorporated into and made a part hereof by reference. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(15), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 28-16. - Appeals. 
    Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision by the town's landscape consultant to the town commission. Any aggrieved party, including the town commission, may appeal a final administrative order of the code enforcement board to the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(16), 8-22-90; Ord. No. 688, § 18, 1-2-01) 
Sec. 28-17. - Fees. 
    The town commission is authorized to set reasonable fees and charges to the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(17), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 28-18. - Administrative guidelines. 
    The town commission may adopt administrative guidelines in the form of rules or procedure and regulations for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(18), 8-22-90) 
Sec. 28-19. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, provision, or part of this chapter shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby, but shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 2(19), 8-22-90) 
Chapter 29 - WATER SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; planning and development, Ch. 20; sewers, Ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and bicycle/walkway paths, Ch. 25; subdivisions, Ch. 26; taxation, Ch. 27; water impact study on new buildings, § 6-57; installation of sprinklers, § 6-246; water system construction, § 26-90. 
State Law reference- Municipal public works, F.S. Ch. 180. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 29-1. - Application; type of service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use town water without first making application in writing to the town for service at least forty-eight (48) hours before the service is desired and paying all charges incident to such application. Such applications shall be made on forms furnished by the town and shall constitute an agreement by the consumer with the town to abide by the rules of the town in regard to its service of water. Applications for service requested by firms, partnerships, associations and corporations shall be tendered only by their duly authorized agents, and the official title of such agent shall be shown on the application. 
(b)  The town commission, or a designated person, shall have the authority to determine what type of service shall be rendered by the town to each consumer. 
(Code 1972, § 29-1) 
Sec. 29-2. - Connection charges; location of meters. 
(a)  Upon application for water service by the owner or consumer a charge is to be made that consists of the cost of the approved meter, installation, approved valves, labor and inspection as established by resolution of the town commission. 
(b)  All water meters shall be installed as close as practicable to the property line. 
(Code 1972, § 29-2; Ord. No. 16-008, § 3, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 29-3. - Temporary service. 
    Temporary water service, such as service for construction work, shall be rendered upon written application accompanied by a deposit sufficient to cover the town's estimate of the proper charge for water to be consumed, materials, labor and other expense incurred by the town in rendering such service as established by resolution of the town commission. Upon termination of this service, any balance of this deposit shall be returned to the consumer. 
(Code 1972, § 29-3; Ord. No. 16-008, § 3, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 29-4. - Easements; rights-of-way. 
    The consumer shall grant or cause to be granted to the town without cost, all rights, easements, permits and privileges which are necessary for the rendering of service. Duly authorized employees of the town shall have access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of reading meters, installing or removing any of its property, examining pipes or fixtures or for any purpose incidental to the rendering of service. 
(Code 1972, § 29-4) 
Sec. 29-5. - Fee to re-establish service. 
    If water service is turned off either because of delinquency or upon the request of the consumer for any purpose, a cut-in fee as established by resolution of the town commission shall be charged and paid when the water is turned on. 
(Code 1972, § 29-5; Ord. No. 16-008, § 3, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 29-6. - Testing of meters. 
    Upon written request of a consumer, the meter will be tested by the town. If the meter, when tested, is found to be not more than two (2) percent fast, the expense of the test, as established by resolution of the town commission, shall be paid by the consumer; otherwise, the expense of the test will be borne by the town, and billing adjustments for a period not to exceed six (6) months will be made. 
(Code 1972, § 29-6; Ord. No. 16-008, § 3, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 29-7. - Liability of consumer for charges. 
    Liability for water service shall begin on the day the consumer is connected to the town water main and shall continue thereafter until the service is disconnected for nonpayment or for other cause, after written notice is given to the town by the consumer of his desire to terminate the service. No allowance will be made for vacant houses unless a request in writing to have the water shut off is received by the town, nor will any allowance be made for any shutoff period less than thirty (30) days. 
(Code 1972, § 29-7) 
Sec. 29-8. - Basis for billing if meter malfunctions. 
    If any meter on a consumer's premises is destroyed by fire or other causes or fails to register, the consumer will be billed for the period involved on a basis of previous consumption. 
(Code 1972, § 29-8) 
Sec. 29-9. - Property owner responsible for charges. 
    The property owner shall at all times be responsible to the town for its proper charges for water service. 
(Code 1972, § 29-9) 
Sec. 29-10. - Charge for water service. 
    The reasonable rate, rental, fee and other charge for the use of the services and facilities of the town waterworks system shall be as established by resolution of the town commission. 
(Code 1972, § 29-10; Ord. No. 566, 10-5-88; Ord. No. 575, 2-7-89; Ord. No. 604, 1-2-91; Ord. No. 614, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 654, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 661, 12-3-96; Ord. No. 700, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 722, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 07-003, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 09-005, §§ 3, 5, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 16-008, § 3, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 29-11. - Billing dates; delinquent bills; disconnection. 
    Bills for water consumption will be rendered at the rates established by resolution of the town commission, but the rendering of bills is not an obligation on the part of the town, and failure of the consumer to receive such bill shall not release or diminish the obligation of the consumer with respect to payment thereof, or relieve the consumer of any obligation under this chapter. Such bills for service shall be due and payable on the date of billing and shall become delinquent thirty (30) days thereafter. For all accounts that do not pay their bill in full by the due date, a delinquency fee as established by resolution of the town commission will be imposed. The town manager shall give notice in writing of the delinquency and, if not corrected within ten (10) days of the date of such notice, shall order the immediate disconnection of all delinquent services. Services shall not be restored until the delinquent bill and a service charge, as established by resolution of the town commission, is paid. 
(Code 1972, § 29-11; Ord. No. 558, 4-5-88; Ord. No. 585, 10-3-89; Ord. No. 09-005, § 4, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 16-008, § 3, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 29-12. - Private fire protection. 
    Fire protection service charges, as established by resolution of the town commission, shall be billed annually in advance. Fire protection service, either private hydrants or sprinkler systems, shall be installed from the main inward and maintained and tested at the expense of the consumer. All such installations shall be made in strict accordance with the rules of the National Fire Protection Association. Fire protection services shall not be metered, and no charge shall be made by the town for water used through such services; however, no use of such services shall be made except for testing the equipment or fighting fire. 
(Code 1972, § 29-12; Ord. No. 16-008, § 3, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 29-13. - Apartment buildings over three stories; extra water line. 
    Concerning apartment houses over three (3) stories high, there are required two (2) separate water lines extending from the water mains to the building-One for fire service which shall not be metered, and one for domestic use which shall be metered. 
(Code 1972, § 29-13) 
Sec. 29-14. - Leaks on consumer side of meter. 
    No allowance on adjustment of any water bill shall be made for leaks of any nature occurring on the consumer's side of the meter. However, the town manager in his or her discretion will have the flexibility to allow up to four (4) installment payments of bills which are unusually high as measured by past bills for the property in question. The town manager's discretion will be on a case by case basis using his or her best judgment as each case arises. 
(Code 1972, § 29-14; Ord. No. 713, 6-7-05) 
Sec. 29-15. - Private water systems. 
    No person shall interconnect a privately owned water system to the town's water system. 
(Code 1972, § 29-15) 
Sec. 29-16. - Unlawful tapping, connecting or damaging town water supply system. 
    No person shall tap the town water mains or make any other connection to pipes on the supply side of any meter except those persons duly employed by the town for such purpose. No person shall connect or turn on any water service or tap or make any alteration to any main or distribution pipe of the town's water system or in any way interfere with or molest any of the wells, reservoirs, basins or water in the same, or permit any connection or tapping to be made to the town's water system on his premises or the premises occupied by him or knowingly use town water from unauthorized connections. 
(Code 1972, § 29-16) 
Sec. 29-17. - Service to multiple properties on single meter. 
    Properties owned or operated by different owners or operators shall not be supplied with water through one meter unless existing facilities make it impractical (as determined by the town commission as an exception) to establish separate meters for each property. In each case excepted by the town commission, the monthly minimum rate will be determined by combining the rates for each property, and likewise, the minimum charge for each property will be combined. 
(Code 1972, § 29-17) 
Sec. 29-18. - Plumbing approval prior to connection. 
    No water service shall be connected until the plumbing and connections incident thereto shall have been inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1972, § 29-18) 
Sec. 29-19. - Interruptions of service; imposition of restrictions. 
    The town shall not be liable for any damage resulting from bursting of any main, service pipe or cock, or by shutting off of water for repairs, extensions or connections, or from the accidental failure of the water supply from any cause whatsoever. In cases of emergency, the town shall have the right to restrict the use of water in any reasonable manner for the protection of the town and its water supply. 
(Code 1972, § 29-19) 
Sec. 29-20. - Subdivisions; application for service; deposit; private installation; surety bond. 
(a)  Any person subdividing or resubdividing any plot or tract of land shall apply to the town for water service. 
(b)  Upon approval of such application by the town commission, the applicant shall agree to deposit with the town the cost of such lines, mains, pipes, fire hydrants, valves, meters, engineering, etc., and shall cause to be prepared the necessary plans and specifications for the construction of such water lines, etc. 
(c)  When the estimated cost of such water lines has been determined, the applicant shall forthwith deposit with the town a sum of money equal to such estimate, or he may elect to install such water lines himself according to the plans and specifications and under the supervision of the town. He shall pay the cost of such engineering and shall provide such surety as the town commission may require. 
(Code 1972, § 29-20) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 29-21. - Extensions of water mains. 
    Any application for water service on a street right-of-way or easement existing or dedicated prior to January 1, 1968, requiring an extension in excess of one hundred (100) feet, shall be approved by the town commission. If the town commission finds that it is not economically feasible to construct such water line and the applicant provides the necessary funds to construct such line, the town and the applicant shall agree by written contract to the refunding to the applicant of such funds. The method and amount of refunding shall be negotiated between the applicant and the town. 
(Code 1972, § 29-21) 
Sec. 29-22. - Meter locations and types. 
    Applications for new water service shall be submitted to the town for approval of the officials in charge of public works or their designated authority and shall include a blueprint of location, accessibility, type of meter, meter enclosure, valves, shutoffs, and any other items necessary to insure the easing of servicing by the town or its service people. 
(Code 1972, § 29-22) 
Sec. 29-23. - New dwelling construction; fees; fund created. 
(a)  No permit or extension of a previous permit for the building of any dwelling unit shall be issued until there has been paid to the town a fee established by resolution of the town commission, which does not include the cost of water meter installation. 
(b)  The fees thus collected are not refundable and shall be paid to a reserve account within the water fund and such fees shall be used for the purpose of defraying the increased cost of maintaining, improving and expanding the water system. 
(c)  "Dwelling unit" as used in this section means any unit designed and intended for use as living quarters for a single family. 
(Code 1972, § 29-23; Ord. No. 571, 1-3-89; Ord. No. 16-008, § 3, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 29-24. - Use of water restricted during water shortage emergency. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Available water means water stored as surface water or groundwater which can be processed through the public water system for use. 
    Average daily consumption means the amount of water used in the base period divided by the number of days in the base period. 
    Base period means the time frame determined by the town commission from its records from which to calculate average daily consumption. 
    District means the South Florida Water Management District. 
    Emergency means a situation in which plans implemented in response to a water shortage are insufficient to protect the public health, safety or welfare, the health of animals, fish or aquatic life, a public water supply, or recreational, commercial, industrial, agricultural or other reasonable uses. 
    Public water system means a system for the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption. 
    Water means water taken from a public water system. 
    Water-saving devices means fixtures, attachments or inserts which require less water to accomplish the same task. 
    Water shortage occurs when sufficient water is not available to meet present or anticipated needs of persons using the water resource, or when conditions are such as to require temporary reduction in total water usage within a particular area to protect the water resource from serious harm, usually occurring due to drought; or, when it is determined that a public water system has become seriously affected by lack of plant capacity to treat water demanded, facility breakdown, salt water intrusion, lack of water pressure due to mechanical failure or lack of supply or any other manifestation of insufficient water availability. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons using water in the town-owned water system. 
(c)  Implementation. 
(1)  Authority to declare a water shortage emergency. The town manager may find that a water shortage condition exists under the following conditions: 
a.  The district determines and declares a water shortage or determines that a water shortage emergency exists affecting the town pursuant to Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code. 
b.  The town manager determines that a reduction in consumption would alleviate a local water shortage condition. 
(2)  Water uses. Upon a determination by the South Florida Water Management District that a water shortage condition exists pursuant to section 29-24(c)(1)a. above, then those restrictions as set out in Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, shall be implemented. Upon a determination that a water shortage condition exists under section 29-24(c)(1)b. above, the town commission may order the reduction or curtailment of the use of water to the extent necessary to alleviate the water shortage condition and may implement any or all of the following subsections: 
a.  Uses of water to be restricted or curtailed include but are not limited to the following: 
1.  The sprinkling, watering or irrigating of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, including the specification of certain days, hours or periods of time, as well as place limitations when lawns and shrubbery may be watered. 
2.  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, mobile homes, campers, boats or any other type of mobile equipment. 
3.  The washing of sidewalks, driveways, porches, exterior of homes, apartments or other outdoor surfaces. 
4.  The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure using water without a recirculating system. 
5.  The operation of air conditioning without a recirculating system. 
6.  Swimming and wading pools not using a filter and recirculating system. 
7.  The escape of water through defective plumbing, which means to knowingly allow water to escape through a system that is in disrepair. 
8.  Motels shall be restricted to the minimum amount of water necessary to conduct operations and shall curtail or prohibit any use of water including but not limited to: 
i.  The use of water to serve a customer in a restaurant unless requested by a customer. 
ii.  The use of water from hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills or any other purpose other than firefighting. 
iii.  The use of water for dust control. 
b.  Extension of water service. No applications to begin a new use or modify an existing use requiring water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains or other water service facilities of any kind shall be approved, while the water shortage is in effect, subject to exceptions specified in subsection (g). 
c.  Installation of water-saving devices for new construction. 
1.  Water supply faucets or valves shall be provided with water-saving devices approved by the building department, which limit flow to a maximum three (3) gallons per minute, with the following exceptions: 
i.  Hose bibs or valves not used for a designated fixture or equipment. 
ii.  Hose bibs, faucets or valves serving fixed demand, timing or water level control appliances, equipment or holding structures such as automatic washers and other similar equipment. 
iii.  Emergency showers. 
2.  Tank-type water closets discharging more than three and five-tenths (3.5) gallons per flush shall be provided with volume-limiting devices or methods approved by the building department, which will limit the discharge to three and five-tenths (3.5) gallons per flush. 
d.  The extent of reduction in water consumption includes but is not limited to the following factors: 
1.  The severity of the drought; 
2.  The percentage cutback required of the public water system by the district; 
3.  The extent that the public water system capacity is not supplying the demand of the service area; 
4.  The severity of the salt water intrusion; and 
5.  The availability of potable water. 
(d)  Enforcement. Upon declaration of a water shortage emergency by the South Florida Water Management District, the Highland Beach Police Department shall enforce those provisions and penalties as set out in Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code. Upon declaration of a water shortage emergency by the town, the Highland Beach Police Department, building department and utilities department shall be empowered to enforce the provisions of this section. The provisions of this section are subject to and under the jurisdiction of the code enforcement board of the town. 
(e)  Penalties. Violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Punishment as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(2)  Suspension of water service. Service so disconnected shall be restored only upon payment of a turn-on charge as established by resolution of the town commission during town hall hours of 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, or as otherwise specified by law. and any other costs incurred by the town in effectuating the discontinuance of service and the giving of suitable assurances to the town that the action causing the discontinuance will not be repeated during the continuance of the water shortage emergency situation. 
(3)  Installation of a water-saving device by the town, cost to be borne by the owner prior to restoration of water service. 
(f)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the provisions and enforcement of this section shall have the right to appeal the decision to the town commission. All records will be available and furnished upon request, to determine water usage restricted by this section. 
(g)  Exception to maintain sanitation. The town commission upon the recommendation of the town health officer, county health agency or department of environmental regulation or upon its own recognizance shall have the authority to permit a reasonable use in water in any case necessary to maintain adequate health and sanitation standards. 
(h)  Acceptance of provisions. No water service shall be furnished to any person in the town unless the person agrees to accept all the provisions contained in this section. The acceptance of water service from the town shall be in itself the acceptance of the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1972, § 29-24; Ord. No. 590, 3-6-90; Ord. No. 16-008, § 3, 7-5-16 ) 
ARTICLE II. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM 

Sec. 29-25. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the cross connection control program is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of those persons consuming potable water from the town's water system through preventing waterborne diseases and contaminants from entering the public water system. The program is intended to prevent water from private plumbing systems, which could contain waterborne diseases and contaminants, from entering the public water system through backflow or cross connection. 
(Ord. No. 12-007, § 2, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 29-26. - Cross connection control manual adopted. 
    In compliance with the rules of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Section 62-555.360, F.A.C., the recommended practices set forth therein and other applicable rules and regulations, the town hereby adopts a cross connection control manual ("manual") which is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein. The manual may be amended from time to time by the director of public works as technology, law or the town commission mandates and shall set forth procedures and policies to implement and enforce the provisions of this division. The director of public works or his/her designee shall maintain a copy of the most recent manual on file at the town. The manual sets forth potential cross connections between a consumer's water system and certain types of equipment, specialized installations, and water uses which afford opportunity for backflow into the public water system. All such facilities and systems as set forth in the manual shall have backflow prevention devices unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director of public works that no opportunity exists for backflow of water from the consumer's system into the public water supply. This requirement applies to new construction and existing structures, as well. In addition, backflow prevention devices shall be installed at the service connection on the consumer's side of the meter upon any premises where the nature and extent of the activities on the premises, or the materials used in connection with the activities or materials stored on the premises present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a cross-connection occur, even though such cross connection does not exist at the time the backflow prevention device is to be installed. Decisions regarding replacement of backflow prevention devices shall be made by the director of public works or his/her designee in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the manual. 
(Ord. No. 12-007, § 2, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 29-27. - Installation locations, expense, inspection, access and accidental contamination. 
(1)  Installation location. Approved backflow prevention devices, as described in the manual, shall be installed on the consumer's side of the water meter at the location designated by the director of public works or his/her designee. The device shall be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing, and where no part of the device will be submerged. 
(2)  Consumer's expense. Backflow prevention devices shall be installed by a certified backflow prevention device technician or licensed plumber at the consumer's expense. All installations will be completed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the director of public works or his/her designee. 
(3)  Annual inspection required. It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises where a backflow prevention device(s) is installed to have a certified inspection(s) and operational test(s) made at least once per year. In those instances where the director of public works or his/her designee deems the hazard to be great enough, certified inspections may be required at more frequent intervals. It shall be the duty of the consumer to submit copies of these certified inspections and operational tests to the director of public works or his/her designee. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the consumer and shall be performed by the backflow prevention device manufacturer's representative, or by a state certified backflow-prevention technician. All backflow prevention devices shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the applicable consumer whenever said devices are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs, and overhauls shall be kept and made available to the director of public works or his/her designee. Failure to maintain such records shall be a violation of this article. 
(4)  Access. As a condition of connection to the town's system, each user consents to town staff or town duly authorized representatives entering any building, structure, or property for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems on such property in order to determine compliance with this division. The refusal of such entry shall be deemed a violation of this article and grounds for immediate termination of service. 
(5)  Accidental contamination. In the event of accidental contamination of the public or customer's water supply system due to backflow from the customer's premises, the customer shall immediately take steps to confine further spread of the contamination with the customer's premises and shall immediately notify the town of the hazardous condition. 
(Ord. No. 12-007, § 2, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 29-28. - Cross connections prohibited. 
    All cross connections are hereby prohibited on existing installations and on new installations unless the cross connection is properly protected with a backflow prevention device approved by the town. 
(Ord. No. 12-007, § 2, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 29-29. - Violations and penalties. 
(1)  Failure to comply. Failure of the consumer to remove a cross connection or install, maintain, or permit the testing and inspection of backflow prevention devices as required in this article or as set forth in the manual shall be grounds for termination of the water service to the premises by the town. The town shall endeavor to provide at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the consumer before terminating the water service to the premises. In the case of an immediate hazard to the public health, the water service may be terminated immediately without notice to the consumer. Water service will not be restored until the cross connection is removed or the backflow prevention device is approved by the town. An administrative review before the director of public works may be requested by the consumer to determine whether the water service termination was just and appropriate. Consumer's request to the director of public works must be made in writing within three (3) days of termination or notice thereof. Failure to request a hearing within three (3) days shall waive the consumer's right to any further administrative review of the termination of service. 
(2)  Remedies. In addition to the right to terminate water service, the town may pursue any and all legal or equitable remedies against the consumer and/or owner of any premises receiving water service from the town to enforce the provisions of this article including, but not limited to, code enforcement; action for damages; and/or injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 12-007, § 2, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 29-30. - Interpretation. 
    This article shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out the purposes hereof in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article is not intended nor shall it be construed to supersede or conflict with any statutory provisions, rules or regulations of the state, but shall be construed as implementing and assisting the enforcement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 12-007, § 2, 10-2-12) 
Chapter 30 - ZONING CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 684, adopted July 25, 2000, enacted a new Zoning Code for the town, which has been included herein as replacing provisions formerly codified as Ch. 30, Zoning. Said prior provisions were derived from Code 1972, Ch. 30, §§ 1-9 and 11-17. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 30-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Code of the Town of Highland Beach, Florida." 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. I, § 1, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens, residents, and property owners of the Town of Highland Beach; to implement the town's comprehensive plan through the adoption of development standards, regulations, and criteria; and to exercise the planning and zoning authority granted to the town by F.S. ch. 163. The purpose and intent of this document is to achieve the benefits listed below: 
(a)  Comprehensive plan. Guide and encourage the orderly and beneficial development of future growth and development of the town consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Public safety. Provide for adequate light, air, and privacy; provide safety from fire, flood, and other dangers; and prevent the overcrowding of land. 
(c)  Aesthetics. Protect and enhance the aesthetics and character of all parts of the town. 
(d)  Value and land uses. Protect and conserve the value of land, buildings, and improvements, and minimize conflicts among uses of land and building. 
(e)  Zoning districts. Divide the town into zoning districts, and regulate construction, reconstruction, alteration, relocation, and use of buildings, structures, and land within such districts. 
(f)  Property development regulations. Establish property development regulations, including setbacks, height limits, finished floor elevations, lot coverage, lot area, lot width, and residential density. 
(g)  Open space. Provide for open spaces, recreation, and protection of environmentally sensitive lands. 
(h)  Vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Avoid traffic congestion on public and private streets, and eliminate conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. I, § 2, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-3. - Authority 
    This zoning code is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the town by article VIII, section 1(f), Florida Constitution; by the "Florida Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act", as amended (F.S. § 163.2511 et seq.); Rule 9J-5 and Rule 9J-24, Florida Administrative Code; and such other authority as may be granted to the town by the statutory or common law of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. I, § 3, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-4. - Comprehensive plan. 
    Adoption of the zoning code will implement and be in furtherance of the town's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. I, § 4, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-5. - Application. 
    Within the Town of Highland Beach, buildings, structures, or lands shall not be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which such buildings or uses are located. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. I, § 5, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-6. - Establishment of districts. 
    The town is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. I, § 6, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-7. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  Official zoning map. The official zoning map shall be adopted, and amended as necessary, by the town commission. The map shall be signed by the mayor, whose signature shall be attested by the town clerk. The map shall bear the official seal of the Town of Highland Beach. The official zoning map of the Town of Highland Beach, last adopted or amended by Ordinance No. 594 on dated August 22, 1990, is hereby adopted by reference and without change, and is made a part of this chapter. 
(b)  Replacement of official zoning map: 
(1)  Map damaged or lost. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the town commission may by ordinance adopt a new official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map. The replacement map shall be signed and attested as indicated herein. 
(2)  Preservation of map and records. Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(c)  Interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the standards listed below shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Platted lot lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Town limits. Boundaries indicated as approximately following town limits shall be construed as following such town limits. 
(4)  Shorelines. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines. 
a.  In the event of change in the shoreline, the boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. 
b.  If the shoreline change would change the zoning status of a lot or parcel, the boundary shall be interpreted so as to avoid changing the zoning status of any lot or parcel. 
(5)  Bodies of water. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines and to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the town, unless otherwise indicated. 
(6)  Extensions. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the legal description of the property. 
(7)  Interpretations. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by this section, the board of adjustment and appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(8)  Divided lots. If a zoning district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of adoption of the zoning district, the town commission may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. The extension of regulations shall be reviewed as a special exception, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. I, § 7, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-8. - Fees, charges, and expenses. 
    The town commission shall establish a schedule of fees for development order applications, building and related permits, charges, expenses, and other matters pertaining to the administration of this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be available in the Town Hall. The schedule of fees may be amended only by the town commission. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, the town shall take no action regarding any development order application, building permit, or appeal. Fees collected are not refundable, unless authorized by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. I, § 8, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-9. - General provisions. 
(a)  Annexations. In accordance with F.S. ch. 171, all territory annexed to the town shall retain the future land use plan and zoning designations applied by Palm Beach County at the time of annexation. The Town of Highland Beach shall adopt future land use plan and zoning designations for areas annexed consistent with the requirements of F.S. ch. 163. 
(b)  Construction of words For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall be constructed as indicated below. 
(1)  Person. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual. 
(2)  Shall and may. The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  Structure. The word "structure" includes the word building as well as other things constructed or erected on the ground, attached to something having location on the ground, or requiring construction or erection on the ground. 
(4)  Tense and number. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
(5)  Minimum requirements. The provisions of this chapter are the minimum requirements applicable to land, structures, and uses within the Town of Highland Beach. This chapter is adopted for promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this chapter conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted requirement, rule, regulation, or ordinance, excluding the comprehensive plan, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. I, § 9, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-10. - Settlement of litigation. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the town commission shall have sole and exclusive jurisdiction to enter into settlement agreements to end pending litigation arising out of the interpretation or application of chapter 30. The town commission jurisdiction shall apply as indicated below. Settlement of litigation shall be consistent with the criteria listed below: 
(a)  Public interest. The town commission determines that the proposed settlement agreement is in the public interest and in the best interest of the residents and citizens of the town. 
(b)  Consistency with comprehensive plan. The proposed use of the property which is the subject of the settlement agreement is determined by the town commission to be: 
(1)  Consistent with the land use element of the comprehensive plan for the town; or 
(2)  Consistent with any comprehensive plan amendment contained within a settlement agreement, and that adequate provision to amend the plan is included within the agreement to ensure the proposed property use is consistent with the plan; or 
(3)  The plan shall be amended to be in conformance with the settlement agreement as a part of the town's normal comprehensive plan amendment process as provided in F.S. ch. 163, pt. II (F.S. 163.2511 et seq.).; or 
(4)  Unless a court of competent jurisdiction or the town commission determines that the land owner has vested rights which take priority over the existing comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Public hearing. Prior to any approval of the proposed settlement agreement a public hearing shall be held by the town commission. The title of the resolution approving the settlement agreement and indicating the property's location shall be duly advertised once in a newspaper of general circulation together with notice of the public hearing before adoption by the town commission. 
(d)  Settlement agreement. The proposed settlement agreement shall include either explicitly or in plans, specifications, or guidelines attached thereto, the nature of the proposed project and the specific differences between the settlement plan and any existing town developmental standards that are to be affected by such settlement agreements and plan. Failure to list all such differences shall not invalidate the action taken by the town commission. 
(e)  Affected persons. Any person substantially affected by the settlement agreement approved by the town commission may seek review thereof in the circuit court by the filing of notice of appeal or petition for writ of certiorari within the time limits as prescribed by the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure for the review of the rulings of any commission, board or other administrative agency. Judicial review shall not commence until exhaustion of the administrative remedy of objecting on the record before the town commission at the public hearing noted above. 
(f)  Effect of approved of settlement agreement: 
(1)  Upon approval of the proposed settlement agreement by the town commission and approval by a court having jurisdiction over the controversy if the action is still pending, the plan or plans contained within the agreement shall have been deemed to have received all requisite town approvals. 
(2)  The plans shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The plans are subject solely to review and recommendations by the planning board, unless otherwise provided for in the settlement agreement. 
(3)  Requests for building permits that are in compliance with the approved plan shall be granted in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. I, § 10, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-11. - Representation at public hearings. 
    Any party may appear in person and speak at any public hearing held by the town pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or be represented by a duly authorized agent or attorney. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. I, § 11, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-12. - Use and payment of outside experts. 
    In order to more thoroughly review site plans, landscape plans, architectural plans and elevations, traffic impact studies, shared parking studies, drainage plans, paving and grading plans, surveys, building and structural plans, or any similar professional document submitted as part of an application for development approval, the town manager may authorize the use of one or more outside experts to review such studies or documents. 
(a)  Selection of outside experts. Outside experts shall be selected in accordance with applicable state law and town policy. 
(b)  Payment. An applicant for development approval shall provide an agreement, in a form acceptable to the town manager and town attorney, to guarantee payment of all reasonable expenses incurred by experts employed by the town. The agreement shall include payment or surety in an agreed-upon amount to meet such reasonable expenses. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. I, § 12, 7-25-00) 
Secs. 30-13-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DECISION MAKING AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 30-21. - Town commission. 
    In addition to any authority granted the town commission by general or special law, the town commission shall have the powers and duties listed below: 
(a)  Comprehensive plan. To initiate, hear, consider, approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application to amend the text or the future land use map of the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Applications for development order approval. To initiate, hear, consider, approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application for development order approval for special exceptions, multifamily site plans, or changes in nonconforming use. 
(c)  Rezoning. To initiate, hear, consider, approve, or deny any application for rezoning of property. 
(d)  Text amendment. To initiate, hear, consider, approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application for amending the text of this chapter. 
(e)  Other development orders. To initiate, hear, consider, approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application for any other type of development order approval as provided herein. 
(f)  Other powers and duties. To exercise all powers, duties, and functions as set forth in F.S. ch. 163, pt. II (F.S. 163.2511 et seq.). 
(g)  Time limitations for development approvals and compliance with development orders. The town commission or planning board, as appropriate, for specified development orders, shall establish a time limitation for commencement of construction and compliance with conditions or terms of a development order. 
(1)  Specified development orders. For the purposes of this section, the following are defined as specified development orders: 
a.  Rezoning by a property owner or party other than the town; 
b.  Special exception; 
c.  Amendment to a residential planned unit development; 
d.  Site plan-multifamily and nonresidential; 
e.  Site plan-single-family, located on a single lot; 
f.  Site plan-single-family, located within a larger project; and 
g.  Site plan review, major modification. 
(2)  Time limit established: 
a.  For each specified development order, commencement of construction of the approved improvements shall be initiated within two (2) years following the date of approval by the town commission, or such other body as may be provided by this chapter. 
b.  For each specified development order, completion of all conditions of approval shall occur within two (2) years following the date of approval by the town commission, or as may be otherwise provided in the development order approval. 
(3)  Extension of time limits. The town commission may grant one or more extensions of time for a specified development order. Each time extension shall not exceed twelve (12) months. The town commission shall consider good faith efforts to commence construction or comply with conditions of approval, and may consider one or more of the following items: 
a.  Consistency with the town's comprehensive plan; 
b.  Consistency with the requirements of this chapter; 
c.  Status of any requests for further development orders, including building permits; 
d.  The number of time extensions previously granted; 
e.  Attempts to secure other permits needed to initiate construction or comply with conditions; 
f.  Marketing practices utilized to obtain financing, buyers, or otherwise initiate construction or comply with conditions; 
g.  Reasonable development completion standards consistent with the nature and size of the affected project; 
h.  Expenditures of funds to initiate development or comply with conditions; 
i.  Efforts to comply with or complete any or all conditions of approval. 
j.  Actions by other governmental agencies which adversely affect the ability of the owner to commence construction or comply with conditions; 
k.  Actions by other parties which adversely affect the ability of the owner to commence construction or comply with conditions; 
l.  Changed circumstances, including economic factors, which adversely affect the ability of the owner to commence construction or comply with conditions; 
m.  Payment of required impact fees, utility fees, or dedication of land as required by the Town code or this chapter; and 
n.  Other factors which have affected the ability of the property owner to initiate construction or comply with conditions. 
(4)  Requests. Requests for extension of time limits for specified development orders shall be submitted in writing to the building official. 
a.  Each request shall indicate the name of the approved project, the property owner, and the number of months for which an extension is requested. 
b.  Each request shall include payment of such fees as are established by the town commission. 
c.  Each request shall document the good faith efforts of the property owner to initiate construction or to comply with the conditions of approval. 
d.  Each request may include additional mitigating factors which affect the ability of a property owner to initiate construction or to comply with the conditions of approval. 
(5)  Documentation. The building official may require such documentation as deemed necessary to substantiate the request of time extension. 
(6)  Planning board review. Prior to a decision by the town commission, the planning board shall consider the request, and recommend that approval, denial, or approval with conditions be granted. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. II, § 1, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-22. - Planning board. 
(a)  Powers and duties. The planning board shall consider all applications as provided in Table 30-1, all matters of aesthetics of the community as provided in this chapter or in this Code, or as otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  Advisory capacity. When acting in an advisory capacity, the planning board shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of an application for development approval to be considered by the town commission. 
(c)  Decision-making capacity. When acting in a decision-making capacity, the planning board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny applications for development approval. 
(d)  Local planning agency. The planning board shall serve as the local planning agency, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3161. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. II, § 2, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-23. - Board of adjustment and appeals. 
(a)  Powers and duties. The board of adjustment and appeals shall consider all applications as provided in Table 30-1, or as otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, interpretation, requirement, decision, or determination made by administrative officials in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Variances. Make recommendations to the town commission on variance requests pursuant to section 30-40 of this chapter and article VI of chapter 20. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. II, § 3, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 16-009, § 4, 8-2-16 ; Ord. No. 18-008 , § 4, 10-2-18) 
Sec. 30-24. - Building official. 
(a)  Duties. The building official or designee shall administer, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Additional duties. The building official or designee shall perform the duties set forth in Table 30-1, and the duties listed below: 
(1)  Ensure all applications for a building permit are consistent with the comprehensive plan, consistent with the requirements of this code, consistent with any decisions by the town commission or other town decision-making bodies, and consistent with any other applicable federal, state, county, or town requirement; 
(2)  Ensure all applications for development order approval are consistent with the concurrency requirements of the comprehensive plan and this chapter; 
(3)  Maintain all approved plans and documents necessary for issuance of building permits; 
(4)  Issue certificates of occupancy; 
(5)  Administer, review, and process all applications for development order approval, including rezonings, variances, interpretations, special exceptions, site plan reviews, and any other procedures described in this chapter; 
(6)  Present applications and plans to the appropriate development review board for action, and when applicable, compiling and transmitting the recommendations of such boards to the town commission for final review and approval; 
(7)  Provide the town commission and other development review boards with a written or oral staff report relating to each application for development approval, and such other documentation as may be necessary, indicating conformance with this code and other applicable requirements; 
(8)  Enforce, as appropriate, the provisions of this chapter, including performance of necessary inspections, investigating promptly all complaints, reporting the findings and actions to the complainants, preventing violations when possible, and obtaining the correction of violations; 
(9)  Cooperate, as appropriate, with the code enforcement board to achieve the correction of any violation; 
(10)  Order the discontinuance of illegal use of land or structures; 
(11)  Order the removal of illegal structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; 
(12)  Ensure discontinuance of work or construction occurring in an illegal manner; 
(13)  Take, or cause to be taken, any other action authorized by this chapter or other laws of the town or the State of Florida to ensure compliance with, and prevent violations of, the provisions of this chapter; 
(14)  Maintain records in the building department of all official actions, and of all complaints and actions taken with regard thereto, and of all violations discovered with remedial action taken and disposition of cases, and 
(15)  Perform such other duties as may be assigned by this Code or this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. II, § 4, 7-25-00) 
Secs. 30-25-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW 

Sec. 30-31. - Development review established. 
    For the purpose of review of development applications within the town, development procedures are established in this article, as summarized in Table 30-1. 
Table 30-1 
Development Application Review (1) 
Development 
Application Building 
Official Planning 
Board B of A Town 
Commission Comprehensive Plan-Text Change C A  Comprehensive Plan-Future Land Use Plan Change C A  Rezoning C A  Zoning Code Text Change C A  Residential Planned Unit Development (Amendment) C A  Special Exception C A  Site Plan-Multifamily & Nonresidential C A  Site Plan-Single Family C  Variance C A Site Plan Review, Major Modifications (1) C (2) (2) (2) Site Plan Review, Minor Modifications C/ DO Change, Nonadministrative C (2) (2) (2) DO Change, Administrative C/ Subdivision of Land C A   
NOTES. 
 = Decision Making Authority 
C = Completeness Review 
A = Advisory Review 
B of A = Board of Adjustment and Appeals 
Blank = Not Applicable 
(1) In the event of a conflict between this table and the text of the zoning code, the text of the zoning code shall prevail. 
(2) Approved in same manner as original application. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 18-008 , § 5, 10-2-18) 
Sec. 30-32. - General provisions. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all applications for development approval submitted to the Town of Highland Beach, including, but not limited to, the following: future land use plan map amendment, comprehensive plan text change, special exception, rezoning, zoning code text change, site plan-multifamily and nonresidential, site plan-single-family, site plan-major modifications, site plan-minor modifications, development order change-nonadministrative, development order change-administrative, variance, and subdivision of land. For applications not included above, the town may establish a miscellaneous development review application and procedure. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 2, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-33. - Application requirements. 
    Requirements for applications for development order approval are described below. The building official shall determine the information required for each application and number of copies to be submitted. 
(a)  Application. Application forms as provided by the building department. 
(b)  Aerial photograph. An aerial photograph of the appropriate section, township and range of the town, outlining the subject property and delineating all contiguous zoning districts. 
(c)  Architectural elevations of buildings. Illustrations of major architectural elevations of all sides of all buildings for style of architecture, height in stories, type of materials, unusual features, entries, windows, roof line, and other elements as may be required by the town. 
(d)  Area location map. Vicinity map of the area within one-half mile surrounding the site, including the following: 
(1)  Principal roadway network, including mass transit routes; 
(2)  Major public facilities such as public schools, town and county parks and recreation areas, hospitals, public buildings, etc.; and 
(3)  Municipal boundary lines. 
(e)  Authority. A statement of the applicant's interest in the property and: 
(1)  If joint and several ownership, a written consent to petition by all owners of record; 
(2)  If a contract purchase, written consent of the seller or owner; 
(3)  If an authorized agent, a copy of the agency agreement or written consent of the owner; 
(4)  If a lessee, a copy of the lease agreement and written consent of the owner; 
(5)  If a corporation, partnership, or other business entity, the name of the officer or person responsible for the application and written proof that the representative has authority to represent the corporation, partnership, or business entity or, in lieu thereof, written proof that such person is in fact an officer of the corporation; or 
(6)  If a group of contiguous property owners, all the owners of the property described in the petition must provide written consent. 
(f)  Certified boundary survey. A certified boundary survey by a surveyor licensed by the State of Florida. The survey shall have been completed within one year of the date the application is submitted. The survey shall be prepared at a scale of not less than one inch equals two hundred (200) feet, or as required by the building official, containing the following: 
(1)  An accurate legal description of the property affected by the development order application; and 
(2)  A computation of the total acreage of the parcel. 
(g)  Concurrency: 
(1)  New projects. Written confirmation from the town and other service providers of the availability of all necessary facilities and systems, including: stormwater management, potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste disposal, fire protection, recreational and park areas, and road capacity. 
a.  Utility statement. A statement from the town, or other lawful service provider, that the proposed development will be able to connect to the central system and that there is sufficient capacity available to meet adopted levels of service for potable water and sanitary sewer. 
b.  Drainage statement. A drainage statement by the applicant's engineer that the site drainage system will be designed to meet the stormwater management requirements of the South Florida Water Management District and the town's regulations. The statement also will demonstrate provision of legal positive outfall meeting the adopted level of service. Additional supporting calculations for larger projects may also be required by the building official. 
c.  Park services statement. A statement from the town that the proposed project will not exceed the levels of service for public parks. 
d.  Fire protection. A statement from the town's fire service provider that the proposed project will not exceed the levels of service for fire protection. 
e.  Solid waste. A statement from the Solid Waste Authority of Palm Beach County that the proposed project will not exceed the adopted levels of service standards for solid waste disposal. 
f.  Traffic statement. A traffic statement as indicated below. 
g.  201 or more trips per day (TPD). A statement from the county engineering department that the project, if generating two hundred one (201) or more average daily trips, conforms to the countywide traffic performance standards, as amended, and that the project-generated trips are reserved. A statement from the town's engineering consultant that the proposed project complies with the town's level of service standards. 
h.  200 or less TPD. A statement from the town's consulting engineer that the proposed project, if generating less than two hundred (200) average daily trips, conforms to the traffic performance standards adopted by both the county and the town, and that the project-generated trips are reserved. 
i.  Less than 200 trips. For projects less than two hundred (200) trips, a traffic statement may be submitted for review, rather than a complete traffic impact study. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following are exempt from the concurrency requirements of this Code: 
a.  Properties possessing a development order approval by virtue of a judicial settlement; 
b.  Properties with an unexpired development order approval that was granted prior to the approval of town or county concurrency requirements; 
c.  Single-family lots platted prior to the approval of town or county concurrency requirements; 
d.  Lots of record existing prior to the approval of town or county concurrency requirements; and 
e.  Redevelopment of existing lots provided the nature of development remains the same. 
(h)  Environmentally sensitive lands. Environmental assessment addressing the requirements of all applicable environmental ordinances. 
(i)  Filing fee. The applicant shall pay the official filing fee, as required by the town, at the time of application filing. 
(j)  Landscape plan. A landscape plan which is consistent with the requirements of this Code. 
(k)  Other documentation. Other documentation or professional studies necessary to permit satisfactory review of a development order application consistent with the following: the policies of the town's comprehensive plan and the requirements of this code. The determination of the need for such other documentation shall be made by the building official. 
(l)  Property owners' list. A complete list of all property owners and mailing addresses for all property within three hundred (300) feet of the subject parcel as recorded in the latest official tax roll in Palm Beach County. An affidavit must be furnished regarding the completeness and correctness of the list. 
(m)  Signs. A sign plan illustrating the architectural elevations of all signs on the site indicating the location, size, landscaping, design lettering, types of materials, colors, and other features. 
(n)  Site plan. A site plan illustrating the proposed site improvements, structures, etc., including the information listed below. 
(1)  Name, address and proposed nature of project. 
(2)  Names, dimensions, and pavement elevations of adjacent road rights-of-way. 
(3)  Location of driveways, streets, and intersections adjacent to and across from site. 
(4)  Proposed points of ingress and egress, and fire lanes. 
(5)  Easements, if any. 
(6)  Vicinity sketch illustrating the approximate footprint of buildings, perimeter landscaping, fences or walls, driveways, and similar features of all adjacent properties. The sketch shall be prepared within one year of submission of the application. 
(7)  Lot size, site area, and dimensions. 
(8)  All proposed and existing building locations, dimensions, setbacks, and building heights, including accessory structures. 
(9)  Number of gross square feet of all principal and accessory structures that are air conditioned. 
(10)  Gross floor area, minimum habitable floor area, and floor area of all principal and accessory structures that are under roof. 
(11)  Proposed minimum finished floor elevation, based on National Geographic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
(12)  Actual dimensions on parking stalls, and aisle width, where required. 
(13)  Location of off-street loading spaces, including accessibility, buffering, and screening. 
(14)  Refuse service areas, including dumpsters, recycling containers, and compacting equipment, and proposed buffering and screening. 
(15)  Signs, including permanent signs, directional signs, and other accessory signs, consistent with the requirements of chapter 23. 
(16)  Number of units and density per gross acre. 
(17)  Size, location, and types of open space and recreation areas. 
(18)  Future land use plan and zoning designations of the site and all abutting properties. 
(19)  Architectural drawings of the proposed structures including the roof, front, sides, and rear elevations, including elevations of roof-top mounted equipment and proposed screening for such equipment; 
(20)  Statement regarding availability of potable water, wastewater and drainage services, and conceptual location of utilities. 
(21)  Landscape plan, including trees, shrubs, and vegetation, consistent with the requirements of chapter 28 of this Code. 
(22)  Exterior lighting plan, including building mounted and freestanding light standards. Plan to include fixture types and bulb intensities. 
(o)  Statements. Statements of plan consistency, planning assumptions, and use, as indicated below. 
(1)  A statement of special reasons or basis of the application for development order approval for the property, including the intended use. 
(2)  A narrative describing how the intended plan of development complies with the Town of Highland Beach comprehensive plan. 
(3)  A statement by the applicant of the major planning assumptions and objectives of the development project, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Proposed ownership and form of organization to maintain common open space facilities; and 
b.  Proposed density and land use for each parcel within the project, if applicable. 
(p)  Warranty deed. A warranty deed with an affidavit from the applicant that the deed represents the current ownership. 
(q)  Survey. A survey of the property containing the information listed below: 
(1)  Prepared within one year prior to submission to the town, signed and sealed by a surveyor licensed by the State of Florida. 
(2)  The survey shall include the information listed below: 
a.  Property lines and dimensions; 
b.  Property elevation or elevations; 
c.  Public or private easements of record; 
d.  Rights-of-way, public or private; 
e.  Existing improvements, including dimensions and setbacks; 
f.  The elevation of the dune crest line; 
g.  The dune vegetation line; 
h.  The state coastal construction control line; 
i.  The shoreline of the Intracoastal Waterway; 
j.  Elevation of adjacent rights-of-way; and 
k.  Such other information as may be required by the town staff. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 3, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-34. - Complete applications. 
(a)  Completeness review. All development order applications shall be reviewed for completeness by the building official prior to being processed for development review. If an application is deemed incomplete, the applicant shall be notified in writing of all deficiencies. An application may be deemed incomplete for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to submit all required information; 
(2)  Failure to submit the required number of copies; 
(3)  Failure to provide required information, including construction plans, supporting documents, other plans, or professional studies that are prepared in a professionally acceptable manner; 
(4)  Failure to comply with all town concurrency requirements; and 
(5)  Failure to pay all necessary fees. 
(b)  Failure to complete. If an applicant fails to remedy an incomplete application within ninety (90) days following written notification by the building official, the application shall be considered null and void. The fee shall not be reimbursed. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 4, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-35. - Development approvals. 
    The town commission, town manager, or building official may withhold issuance of a development approval, building permit, administrative approval, site plan approval, occupational license, or similar forms of approval if costs incurred by a town expert have not been fully reimbursed by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 5, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-36. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  Special exceptions. The town commission shall be the final authority to grant a development order application for special exception approval. The town commission, following an advisory recommendation by the planning board, may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for special exception approval. 
(b)  Application. An application for special exception approval shall be filed with the building official, including all fees and information as required in this article. 
(c)  Planning board public hearing. The planning board shall hold a public hearing for each request for special exception approval. At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning board shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application. 
(d)  Town commission public hearing. After receiving the planning board's recommendation, the town commission shall hold a public hearing on the application for special exception approval. 
(1)  At the public hearing, any party may appear in person, or be represented by an agent or attorney. 
(2)  Town commission approval of an application for special exception shall be based on a determination the request is consistent with the criteria listed below: 
a.  Comprehensive plan. The proposed use is consistent with the town's comprehensive plan. 
b.  Code requirements. The proposed use is consistent with all applicable requirements of this Code. 
c.  Permitted and conditional use standards. The proposed use is consistent with the permitted and conditional use standards as provided in section 30-63. 
d.  Public welfare. The proposed use provides for the public health, safety, and welfare by: 
1.  Providing for a safe and effective means of pedestrian access; 
2.  Providing for a safe and effective means of vehicular ingress and egress; 
3.  Providing for an adequate roadway system adjacent to and in front of the site; 
4.  Providing for safe and efficient onsite traffic circulation, parking, and overall control; and 
5.  Providing adequate access for public safety purposes, including fire and police protection. 
e.  Screening and buffering. The proposed use utilizes such techniques as landscaping, screening, buffering, site or building design, or business operation procedures to mitigate impacts on surrounding properties, including such impacts as: 
1.  Noise; 
2.  Glare; 
3.  Odor; 
4.  Perimeter, interior, and security lighting; 
5.  Signs; 
6.  Waste disposal and recycling; 
7.  Outdoor storage of merchandise and vehicles; 
8.  Visual impact; and 
9.  Hours of operation. 
f.  Utilities. The proposed use minimizes or eliminates the impact of utility installation, including underground and overhead utilities, on adjacent properties. 
g.  Dimensional standards. The proposed use meets or exceeds all dimensional requirements required by the Code. 
h.  Compatibility. The overall compatibility of the proposed development with adjacent and area uses, character of area development, and density and intensity of adjacent uses, including such items as the following: 
1.  Off-street parking and loading areas; 
2.  Location of refuse collection, recycling, and related service areas; 
3.  Signs; 
4.  Proposed lighting; 
5.  Ingress and egress to the property and structures; 
6.  Pedestrian circulation, safety and convenience; 
7.  Overall traffic flow; and 
8.  Public safety access in case of fire or catastrophe. 
i.  Purpose and intent. The proposed use will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Code and the goals, objectives, and policies of the town. 
j.  Adverse impact. The design of the proposed use and structures will minimize any adverse visual impacts or impacts caused by the intensity of the use. 
k.  Environmental impact. The design of the proposed use minimizes any adverse impacts that may be created, including impacts on environmental and natural resources including air, water, stormwater management, wildlife, vegetation, and wetlands. 
(e)  Findings. The town commission shall adopt a resolution which shall include, but is not limited to, the following: a statement that it is empowered to grant the special exception; one or more findings as to how the application is consistent with applicable comprehensive plan and zoning code requirements; the reasons for approval of the special exception; and any conditions or limitations placed upon the approval. 
(f)  Time limitations. Among other conditions and safeguards, the town commission may prescribe reasonable time limits as provided in section 30-21. The town commission also may prescribe reasonable time limits within which an approved use of property shall commence. Failure to establish an approved use of property within such time limits shall render such approval null and void. 
(g)  Violations. Violation of any conditions, limits, or safeguards, when made part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this code. 
(h)  Public notice. Public notice for special exception public hearings shall be provided as required in section 30-46 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 6, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-37. - Multifamily and nonresidential structures. 
(a)  Site plan review. Site plan review of all multifamily dwelling units and all nonresidential structures shall be processed be processed as indicated below. 
(1)  An application for development order approval shall be filed with the building official. The application shall be consistent with the requirements of section 30-33. 
(2)  Receipt of permits and approvals from other governmental agencies does not guarantee town approval of a development order application. 
(3)  Review, as applicable, of proposed site plans and related documents by the building official, town staff, police department, fire service provider, and other agencies as deemed necessary by the town. 
(4)  Review of application by planning board. 
(5)  Recommendations to town commission for approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application from the planning board, and building official. 
(6)  Town commission approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application for site plan review. 
(7)  Following town commission approval, building permits may be issued. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the building official may require an applicant to submit revised site plans. The revised site plans shall include all changes or amendments approved by the town commission. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 7, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-38. - Single-family dwellings. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. Site plan review of all single-family dwellings and certain other uses as defined herein shall be processed as indicated below. 
(1)  An application for development order approval shall be filed with the building official. The application shall be consistent with the requirements of section 30-33. 
(2)  All federal, state, county, and other governmental approvals and permits must be obtained before submitting plans to the building department. Alternatively, phasing of building plans and permits may be allowed, when dependent upon permits or approvals issued by other governmental agencies. 
(3)  Receipt of permits and approvals from other governmental agencies does not guarantee town approval of a development order application. 
(4)  Review, as applicable, of proposed site plans and related documents by the building official, town staff, police department, fire service provider, and other agencies as deemed necessary by the town. 
(5)  Review of application by planning board. 
(6)  The planning board approve or deny the site plan application. The approval may include conditions which clarify, but do not exceed, the requirements of this code. 
(7)  After receiving approval from the planning board, the building official shall issue the site plan approval. Following site plan approval, a building permit may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 8, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-39. - Modifications to existing buildings. 
(a)  Major and minor building modifications. Modifications to existing single-family, multifamily, and nonresidential structures shall be processed as indicated below. 
(1)  Major modifications that alter existing principal or accessory structures, including but not limited to the building footprint, number of square feet, building height, number of dwelling units, parking requirements, change in exterior facade, change of use, change of roof line, change of elevation, all exterior walls, balconies, foundations, accessory structures, and similar substantial improvements as determined by the building official. 
(2)  Minor building modifications are alterations or improvements that are not considered major building modifications, such as the following: 
a.  Interior alterations; 
b.  Changes to windows and doors; 
c.  Changes that do not affect existing building setbacks; and 
d.  Similar changes that do not affect the intensity or density of an existing use. 
(b)  Review: 
(1)  Major building modifications are to be reviewed in the same manner as an original structure or use as required by this chapter. 
(2)  Minor building modifications shall be approved by the building official. The building official may determine that a proposed modification or the cumulative effect of prior modifications should be reviewed in the same manner as the original structure or use. 
(3)  All federal, state, county, and other governmental approvals and permits must be obtained before submitting plans to the building department. Alternatively, phasing of building plans and permits may be allowed, when dependent upon permits or approvals issued by other governmental agencies. 
(4)  Receipt of permits and approvals from other governmental agencies does not guarantee town approval of a development order or building permit application. 
(5)  The town may require modification of an approved site plan, subdivision plan, or similar document, prior to issuance of a building permit for an approved alteration. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 9, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-40. - Variances and interpretations. 
    Applications for variance approval shall be reviewed as provided herein. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a variance is to grant a reduction in the dimensional requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, lot width, lot depth, lot size, size or percentage of open space, building coverage, building height, building setbacks, or required number of parking spaces. 
(b)  Board of adjustment and appeals/town commission. Requests for approval of some variances shall be considered by the board of adjustment and appeals in order to make a recommendation to the town commission. The town commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for a variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Applications. Applications shall contain the information as may be required by and shall comply with the requirements of section 30-33. 
(d)  Public notice. Public notice for public hearings to consider variance applications shall be provided as required in section 30-46 of this Code. 
(e)  Consideration of applications. As a basis for consideration of an application for variance approval, the town commission must determine an application is consistent with the criteria listed below: 
(1)  Special conditions. Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district. 
(2)  Hardship. The special conditions and circumstances truly represent a hardship, and are not created by any actions of the applicant. 
(3)  Literal interpretation. Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of this chapter and would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant. 
(4)  Special privileges. The grant of a variance will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege denied to any other owner of land, buildings, or structures located in the same zoning district. 
(5)  Minimum variance. The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the use of the land, building, or structure. 
(6)  Purpose and intent. The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(7)  Financial hardship. Financial hardship is not to be considered as sufficient evidence of a hardship in granting a variance. 
(8)  Public welfare. The grant of the variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(f)  Approvals. In granting a variance, the town commission may approve such conditions and safeguards deemed necessary to conform to the intent and purpose of this Code. Violations of such conditions shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The town commission may also prescribe a reasonable time limit to initiate the action granted by the variance and to complete such action. Failure to initiate and complete an approved variance shall render such approval null and void, and the approval shall expire. 
(g)  Required vote. The vote of a majority of the town commission is necessary to grant a variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(h)  Run with the land. A variance, when implemented in accordance with the approval granted by the town commission, shall run with the land in perpetuity. Unless a lesser time is approved by the town commission, a variance that is not implemented shall expire eighteen (18) months following approval. Extensions of variance approvals shall not be granted by the town commission. 
(i)  Variance null and void. A variance granted by the town commission shall automatically be null and void in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Demolition of structure which was granted a variance; 
(2)  Removal of a structure which was granted a variance; or 
(3)  Other similar action which eliminates the reason for granting the variance. 
(j)  Use variances prohibited. The town commission or any other body, unless specifically authorized by this chapter, shall not grant a variance to establish or expand a use not allowed as a permitted use or special exception use in any zoning district, or a use not allowed within a residential planned unit development. 
(k)  Other lands and uses. Evidence of nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district or the permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other zoning districts shall not be considered grounds for the authorization of a variance. 
(l)  Variance from development standards prohibited. The town commission, unless specifically authorized by this Code, shall not grant a variance from the development standards regarding uses as set forth in Table 30-4. 
(m)  Findings: 
(1)  The town commission shall make findings that an application for variance approval has complied with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  The town commission shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
(3)  The town commission shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(n)  Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the town commission, regarding variances, shall be filed with the Fifteenth Circuit Court in and for Palm Beach County. Appeals shall be filed within thirty (30) calendar days following the decision by the town commission. 
(o)  Limitations. Whenever the board of adjustment and appeals/town commission has acted on a request for administrative review or variance, the board and town commission shall not consider any request for substantially the same action for a period of one year from the date of the initial decision. 
(p)  Interpretations, decisions, and appeals: 
(1)  Appeals of a decision, order, requirement, determination, or interpretation of the building official or other town official regarding the provisions of this chapter shall be filed with the board of adjustment and appeals. 
(2)  Appeals shall be filed on an application established by the building official. 
(3)  The appeal shall be considered by the board of adjustment and appeals not more than thirty (30) days following receipt of a complete application by the building official. 
(4)  The vote of at least four (4) members of the board of adjustment and appeals is necessary to grant an appeal or to reverse the decision, order, requirement, determination, or interpretation of the building official or other town official. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 10, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 18-008 , § 6, 10-2-18) 
Sec. 30-41. - Administration of existing residential planned unit developments. 
    Administration of residential planned unit developments (RPUDs) existing or approved as of the effective date of this chapter shall be governed as provided below: 
(a)  Town commission approval. During the existence of any RPUD previously approved by the Town of Highland Beach, any agreements, contracts, deed restrictions, sureties, or other documents or actions related to, required by, or affecting land use in the RPUD shall be submitted by the owner and approved by the town commission. 
(b)  Site plan review: 
(1)  The site plan review procedure in section 30-46 is required for all RPUDs. 
(2)  Building permits or certificates of occupancy shall not be issued for any construction within an RPUD zoning district unless and until final plans and reports have been submitted, in such detail as is necessary for determination of compliance with RPUD regulations and requirements, and such plans have been approved by appropriate officials as complying with such regulations and requirements, as applying generally at the time of adoption of the RPUD ordinance and amendments thereto. Such final plans and reports shall be for the development as a whole or for stages and priorities approved by the town commission in its amend-ing action. No structure or use other than as indicated in approved final plans or reports shall be permitted. 
(c)  Amendments to existing RPUDs: 
(1)  The planning board may approve amendments to an existing, approved RPUD, subject to the limitations listed below: 
a.  The proposed amendments are consistent with comprehensive plan and zoning code requirements in effect at the time the requested is submitted to the town. 
b.  The proposed amendments do not: 
1.  Increase the number of dwelling units granted by the current RPUD approval; 
2.  Increase the number of square feet granted by the current RPUD approval; 
3.  Relocate more than five (5) percent of the building footprint as contained in the current RPUD approval; 
4.  Increase the height of the building contained in the current RPUD approval; 
5.  Change the nature of the original intended use or uses as provided in the current RPUD approval; or 
6.  Propose a change deemed to be significant by the building official. 
(2)  Any amendments not included in subsection (b) above shall require approval by the town commission, subject to an advisory recommendation by the planning board. 
(d)  Appeal of time limits: 
(1)  Appeals from the original RPUD time limits as set by the town commission shall be considered by the planning board. The planning board shall review the appeal, and recommend to the town commission one of the following: 
a.  RPUD zoning for the entire area should be continued with revised time limits; 
b.  RPUD zoning should be continued for part of the area with revised time limits, and the remainder rezoned to an appropriate category; or 
c.  The entire area should be rezoned from RPUD to another zoning district, consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  In any cases where legislative intent concerning administration of any particular RPUD is unclear, reference may be made to Ordinance No. 253 (Zoning Ordinance of November 15, 1974). 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 11, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-42. - Building permits. 
(a)  Building and site plan review procedures. Buildings and site plans shall be reviewed as provided below: 
(1)  A building or other structure requiring a permit shall not be erected, moved, demolished, expanded, or structurally altered without approval of the applicable development order and issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  A building permit shall be issued only for one specific building or improvement. The issuance of a permit for one building or improvement on a lot shall not grant permission for construction of any other building or improvement, even an identical building or improvement on the same lot. 
(3)  Separate piling or foundation permits shall not be issued. 
(4)  Demolition permits will not be construed as building permits for the purpose of this section. Issuance of a demolition permit does not guarantee issuance of a building permit to construct a replacement structure or other improvement. 
(5)  All federal, state, county, and other applicable governmental approvals and permits must be obtained before submitting final building permit plans to the building department. 
a.  Phasing of building plans and permits may be allowed, when dependent upon permits or approvals issued by other governmental agencies. 
b.  Building permits shall not be issued until all required federal, state, county, or other applicable governmental approvals and permits have been obtained. 
(b)  Time of issuance. For the purposes of administration, a building permit shall be considered to be issued forty-eight (48) hours after the applicant has been notified by the building department that the permit has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 12, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-43. - Official zoning map amendment (rezoning). 
    The town commission may amend the official zoning map, subject to the requirements and procedures listed below: 
(a)  Proposed amendments. Proposed amendments may be suggested by the town commission, by the planning board, or by petition of the owners of more than fifty (50) percent of the area involved in the proposed change. 
(b)  Public notice. Public notice of planning board and town commission public hearings to consider proposed official zoning map amendments shall be provided as required in section 30-46. 
(c)  Planning board. The planning board shall hold one or more public hearings to consider a request for official zoning map amendments. The recommendation of the planning board shall be provided to the town commission within ninety (90) days after completion of the required public hearing. 
(d)  Town commission. Within ninety (90) days following adoption of the planning board recommendation, the town commission shall hold one or more public hearings to consider the request. The town commission may approve or deny the request for official zoning map amendments. The town commission, in any decision, shall comply with the requirements listed below: 
(1)  Only the land area advertised in the public notice may be rezoned to a different zoning district. 
(2)  Land affected by the request may not be rezoned to a less restrictive zoning district than advertised in the public notice. 
(3)  Any change to the proposed amendment which is substantially different from the advertised amendment shall not be considered. Public notice of the substantial change must be provided consistent with section 30-46, including a properly advertised planning board public hearing. 
(4)  Any request for an official zoning map amendment shall be consistent with the criteria listed below: 
a.  The proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
b.  The proposed amendment is consistent with the requirements of this code. 
c.  The proposed amendment will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
d.  The proposed amendment is compatible with, and will protect the property values of adjacent properties. 
e.  A change in the zoning classification of land shall not be considered which involves less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area and two hundred (200) feet of street frontage. This limitation shall not apply to a request to extend the boundary of an existing zoning district, or unless otherwise provided for herein. 
f.  Approval of a request to amend the official zoning map shall not contain conditions, limitations, or requirements not applicable to all other property in the district to which the particular property is rezoned. 
(e)  Planning board recommendation for denial. If the planning board recommends denial of any proposed official zoning map amendment, such amendment shall not become effective except by the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire membership of the town commission. 
(f)  Reconsideration: 
(1)  Whenever the town commission has changed the zoning classification of property, the town shall not accept or consider petition for rezoning of all or any part of the same property for a period of one year from the effective date of the amendment changing the zoning classification. 
(2)  Whenever the town commission has denied a petition for rezoning of property, the town commission shall not thereafter: 
a.  Accept or consider any further petition for substantially the same rezoning of all or any part of the same property for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date of such denial; or 
b.  Accept or consider any petition for any other kind of rezoning on all or any part of the same property for a period of one year from the date of such action. 
(3)  The limitations of this section shall not prevent the initiation of official zoning map amendments by the town commission or the planning board. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 13, 7-25-00) 
State Law reference- Ordinance adoption procedures, F.S. § 166.041. 
Sec. 30-44. - Zoning code text amendments. 
    The town commission may amend the text of the zoning code, subject to the requirements and procedures listed below: 
(a)  Proposed amendments. Proposed text amendments may be suggested by the town commission, by the planning board, or by request of any member of the public. 
(b)  Public notice. Public notice of planning board and town commission public hearings to consider proposed text amendments shall be provided as required in section 30-46. 
(c)  Planning board. The planning board shall hold one or more public hearings to consider a request for zoning code text amendment. The recommendation of the planning board shall be provided to the town commission within ninety (90) days after completion of the required public hearing. 
(d)  Consistency with comprehensive plan. The planning board, sitting as the local planning agency, shall determine any proposed amendment to the zoning code is consistent with the comprehensive plan, as required by F.S. § 163.3194. 
(e)  Town commission. Within ninety (90) days following adoption of the planning board recommendation, the town commission shall hold one or more public hearings to consider the request. The town commission may approve, modify, or deny the request for an amendment to the zoning code text. The town commission, in any decision, shall comply with the requirements listed below: 
(1)  The proposed text amendment shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The proposed text amendment is consistent with the zoning code. 
(3)  Any change to the proposed zoning code text amendment which is substantially different from the advertised text amendment shall not be considered. Public notice of the substantial change must be provided consistently with section 30-46, including a properly advertised planning board public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 14, 7-25-00) 
State Law reference- Ordinance adoption procedures, F.S. § 166.041. 
Sec. 30-45. - Subdivisions. 
    Subdivisions of property shall be approved by the town commission subject to the site plan approval process as provided in section 30-33. 
(a)  Compliance. Applications for subdivision approval shall comply with the minimum requirements of F.S. ch. 177 and chapter 26 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 15, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-46. - Public notice. 
(a)  Public hearings for zoning matters: 
(1)  Public notice for public hearings for the development applications listed below shall comply with the requirements of this section: 
a.  Official zoning map amendment (rezoning); 
b.  Special exception; 
c.  Variance; 
d.  Amendment to an approved RPUD; 
e.  Zoning code text changes; and 
f.  Any other action requiring public notice as provided herein. 
(2)  Written notice of the public hearings shall be provided as follows: 
a.  At least fifteen (15) days before the planning board or board of adjustment and appeals public hearing; and 
b.  At least ten (10) days before the first town commission public hearing, and if two (2) public hearings are required, at least five (5) days before the second town commission public hearing. Written notice for zoning map amendments (rezonings) initiated by the town shall be provided as required by F.S. § 166.041, as amended. 
(3)  Written notice shall be provided to the owner of each parcel of property located within three hundred (300) feet of the affected property, excluding parcels of property owned by the applicant. Notification distances shall be measured on an arc from the corners of the property. If a parcel of property located within three hundred (300) feet of the affected property is subject to, or owned by, a condominium association, written notice is not required to each unit owner; rather, written notice may be provided only to the association president and the association's registered agent, who shall post the notice on the association's bulletin board or other places of public notification. 
(4)  Written notice shall include a description of the development approval requested, the location of the property affected, the body to be conducting the public hearing, and the date, time, and location of the public hearing. 
(5)  Written notice shall be sent by certified mail with return receipt requested. The applicant for development order approval shall be responsible for obtaining the property owner's list and for all expenses associated with the written notice. The property owner (or applicant) shall be responsible for providing the town at least forty-five (45) calendar days before the scheduled hearing date with a list of all property owners that fall within the arc identified in item (3) above. The list shall be in electronic format, and must be obtained from a database provided by the Palm Beach County Property Appraisers' Office; the town will administer the process of mailing. 
(6)  Newspaper advertising, in a newspaper of general circulation, of the public hearings shall be provided as follows: 
a.  At least ten (10) days before the planning board or board of adjustment and appeals public hearing; 
b.  At least ten (10) days before the town commission public hearing for a special exception or an amendment to an RPUD; and 
(7)  Newspaper public notice advertisements for planning board or town commission public hearings to consider official zoning map amendments (rezonings) and zoning code text changes shall comply with the requirements of F.S. § 166.041, as amended. 
(8)  Public notice for planning board or town commission public hearings to consider multifamily and nonresidential site plan approvals, single-family site plan approvals, subdivisions or plats, or similar development orders shall be provided as may be required by the town commission. 
(b)  Comprehensive plan amendments: 
(1)  Public notice of amendments to comprehensive plans shall comply with the requirements of F.S. § 163.3174, as amended, for local planning agency hearings and F.S. § 163.3184, as amended, for town commission hearings. 
(2)  Unless otherwise provided herein, public notice for planning board or town commission public hearings to consider amendments to the text of the comprehensive plan or to the future land use map shall be provided in a newspaper of general circulation. The public notice shall contain the following information, and such other information as required by state law: 
a.  Date, time, and location of meeting; 
b.  Location of property affected by the development order application; and 
c.  The nature of the proposed comprehensive plan text amendment or change to the future land use map. 
(3)  Newspaper advertising of the public hearings shall be provided as required by state law. 
(4)  Public hearings for comprehensive plan amendments shall be held on a weekday. 
(5)  An applicant requesting a comprehensive plan amendment shall be responsible for all public notice and advertising costs association with such application. 
(6)  Written notice of public hearings to consider changes to the future land use map of the comprehensive plan shall be provided as follows: 
a.  At least fifteen (15) days before the planning board public hearing; 
b.  At least fifteen (15) days before the first town commission public hearing, or as otherwise required by F.S. § 163.3184 and F.S. § 163.3187, as amended; and 
c.  At least ten (10) days before the second town commission public hearing, or as otherwise required by F.S. § 163.3184 and F.S. § 163.3187, as amended. 
(7)  Written notice shall be provided to the owner of each parcel of property located within three hundred (300) feet of the affected property, excluding parcels of property owned by the applicant. If a parcel of property located within three hundred (300) feet of the affected property is subject to, or owned by, a condominium association, written notice is not required to each unit owner; rather, written notice may be provided only to the association president and the association's registered agent, who shall post the notice of the associations' bulletin board or other places of public notification. 
(8)  Written notice shall include a description of the nature of the proposed comprehensive plan amendment requested, the location of the property affected, the body to be conducting the public hearing, and the date, time, and location of the public hearing. 
(9)  Written notice shall be sent by certified mail with return receipt requested. The applicant for a comprehensive plan amendment shall be responsible for obtaining the property owner's list and for all expenses associated with the written notice. The property owner (or applicant) shall be responsible for providing the town at least forty-five (45) calendar days before the scheduled hearing date with a list of all property owners that fall within the arc identified in item (3) above. The list shall be in electronic format, and must be obtained from a database provided by the Palm Beach County Property Appraisers' Office; the town will administer the process of mailing. 
(c)  Withdrawals and postponements: 
(1)  A development order or comprehensive plan amendment application may be withdrawn at any time by an applicant. If withdrawn, any subsequent application shall be considered a new application, subject to the public hearing and public notice requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  A development order or comprehensive plan amendment application may be postponed at the request of the applicant or by action of the town commission. If a postponement is requested, the town commission may: 
a.  Require additional written and advertised public notice, to be provided at the applicant's expense; or 
b.  Schedule the postponed matter for a public hearing at a specific date, time, and location. 
(d)  Posting of property. The town, for items listed in subsections (a) and (b) above and for site plans and site plans involving major modifications, shall post notice on the affected property by placing one placard visible from each adjoining right-of-way or on each street block face, at least seven (7) days before the scheduled hearing. The placard shall be prepared by the town and shall identify the action to be considered and state the time and place of the hearing(s). Applicants shall be responsible for the costs associated with posting. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. III, § 16, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 10-002, Exh. A, 6-1-10; Ord. No. 13-002, § 2, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 16-002, § 2, 3-1-16 ) 
Secs. 30-47-30-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 30-61. - Application of district regulations. 
    The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum or maximum limitations, as appropriate, and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. IV, § 1, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-62. - Zoning districts established. 
    For the purposes of this code, the zoning districts listed below are established for the Town of Highland Beach: 
(a)  Residential Single-Family Estate Zoning District (RE)-Purpose. It is the purpose of this district to provide for areas of the town that shall be exclusively used for single-family homes. 
(b)  Residential Single-Family Zoning District (RS)-Purpose. It is the purpose of this district to provide for areas of the town that shall be exclusively used for single-family homes. 
(c)  Residential Multiple-Family Low-Density Zoning District (RML)-Purpose. It is the purpose of this residential zoning district to encourage alternative housing styles, such as townhouses and patio house, at low densities and to allow compatible special exception uses. 
(d)  Residential Multiple-Family Medium-Density Zoning District (RMM)-Purpose. It is the purpose of this residential district to promote the development of multiple-family structures to medium densities and to allow compatible special exception uses. 
(e)  Residential Multiple-Family High-Density Zoning District (RMH)-Purpose. It is the purpose of this residential district to promote the development of multiple-family structures at high densities and to allow compatible special exception uses. 
(f)  Government Service Zoning District (GSD)-Purpose. It is the purpose of this zoning district to provide for public service areas and to protect the special nature of public services and activities. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. IV, § 2, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-63. - Conformance with zoning code and zoning district regulations. 
    Buildings, structures, or land shall not be used or occupied except in conformity with the regulations specified for the zoning district in which located. A building, structure, improvement, or part thereof shall not be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations specified for the zoning district in which located. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. IV, § 13, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-64. - Property development regulations. 
    Dimensional requirements for all zoning districts, including standards for lots, setbacks, building height, building width, building length, and maximum lot coverage are established in Table 30-2. 
(a)  Compliance. All buildings and structures shall comply with the requirements of Table 30-2. 
TABLE 30-2. 
Property Development Regulations 
ZONING 
DISTRICT Residential Estate (RE) Residential Single-Family (RS) Multiple- 
Family-Low Density (RML) Multiple- 
Family-Medium Density (RMM) Multiple- 
Family-High Density (RMH) Government Service 
District (GSD) Maximum Density 1.45 units/acre 4.35 units/acre 6.0 units/acre 12 units/acre 16 units/acre N/A Minimum Lot Area TBD SFD 30,000 sq. ft. per unit 10,000 sq. ft. per unit 8,000 sq. ft. per unit 8,000 sq. ft. per unit 8,000 sq. ft. per unit N/A 2FD N/A N/A 6,000 sq. ft. per unit 6,000 sq. ft. per unit 6,000 sq. ft. per unit N/A MFD N/A N/A 7,260 sq. ft. per unit 3,630 sq. ft. per unit 2,722 sq. ft. per unit N/A Minimum Lot Width TBD SFD 80 feet 80 feet 80 feet 80 feet 80 feet N/A 2FD N/A N/A 80 feet 80 feet 80 feet N/A MFD N/A N/A 100 feet 100 feet 100 feet N/A Minimum Front 
Setback TBD 1 Story 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet TBD 2 Story 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet TBD >2 Story 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet See Highrise Setback See Highrise Setback TBD A-1-A 25 feet 25 feet 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet TBD Minimum Side 
Setback TBD 1 Story 12 feet 12 feet 12 feet 12 feet 12 feet TBD 2 Story 12 feet 12 feet 12 feet 20 feet 20 feet TBD >2 Story 12 feet 12 feet 12 feet See Highrise Setback See Highrise Setback TBD Minimum Rear 
Setback TBD 1 Story >20 feet or Ocean 
Setback >20 feet or Ocean 
Setback >20 feet or Ocean 
Setback 20 feet 20 feet Ocean 
Setback 2 Story >20 feet or Ocean 
Setback >20 feet or Ocean 
Setback >20 feet or Ocean 
Setback 25 feet 25 feet TBD >2 Story >20 feet or Ocean 
Setback >20 feet or Ocean 
Setback >20 feet or Ocean 
Setback >25 feet or Highrise 
Setback >25 feet or Highrise 
Setback TBD Ocean 
Setback (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) High-Rise Setback N/A N/A N/A See § 30-65 See § 30-65 TBD Maximum Lot Coverage None None 30% 40% 40% None Maximum Building Height 35 feet (2) 35 feet (2) 35 feet (2) 40 feet (2) 50 feet (2) 35 feet (3) Maximum Building Width None None 100 feet See § 30-66 See § 30-66 None Maximum Building Length None None None See § 30-66 See § 30-66 None  
NOTES. 
> means greater than. 
N/A means not applicable. 
TBD means to be determined by town commission. 
(1)  Ocean setback to be determined by DEP pursuant to coastal construction control line requirements. 
(2)  Maximum building height does not include permitted area for nonusable space permitted below finished floor elevation. 
(3)  Water towers and related structures shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(b)  Variance from requirements. Any variance from the requirements of Table 30-2 may occur only upon approval of the town commission. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. IV, § 4, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 10-002, Exh. A, 6-1-10; Ord. No. 18-008 , § 7, 10-2-18) 
Sec. 30-65. - Other minimum development standards. 
    Other minimum development standards, including minimum floor space per dwelling unit, and minimum ceiling height are established in Table 30-3. All dwelling units shall comply with the requirements of this Section unless reduction is size is granted by the board of adjustment and appeals pursuant to section 30-40. 
Table 30-3. 
Other Minimum Dwelling Unit Standards Standard 
Standard RE RS RML RMM RMH GSD Minimum Dwelling Size 2,500 square feet 1,600 square feet N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 Bedroom Unit N/A N/A 1,400 square feet 1,400 square feet 1,400 square feet N/A 2 Bedroom Unit N/A N/A 1,600 square feet 1,600 square feet 1,600 square feet N/A 3 Bedroom Unit N/A N/A 1,800 square feet 1,800 square feet 1,800 square feet N/A Minimum Ceiling Height 8 feet 
(1) 8 feet 
(1) 8 feet 
(1) 8 feet 
(1) 8 feet 
(1) 8 feet 
(1)  
NOTE. 
(1)  Ceiling height may be reduced by drop ceilings or other installations necessary for utilities. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. IV, § 5, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-66. - Other requirements. 
(a)  High-rise setbacks: 
(1)  High-rise setbacks in the RMM and RMH zoning districts are established below and illustrated in Figure 30-1. 

High-Rise Setback 
(2)  Buildings. All portions of a high-rise building less than thirty (30) feet in height shall comply with the front, side, and rear setbacks as provided in Table 30-2. 
(3)  All portions of a high-rise building thirty (30) feet or more in height, in addition to the setbacks required above, shall provide additional front, side and rear setbacks. The additional setback shall be provided as follows: one additional foot of setback for each additional two (2) feet in height above twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  If applicable, the required rear setback provided herein shall be pre-empted by the setback established by the coastal construction line, pursuant to applicable state law. Additional setback may be required by the town to provided protection to natural resources, preserve dune vegetation, and preserve a uniform building line. 
(5)  Garage structures shall comply with the required setbacks for a two-story building. 
(6)  Any fractional portion of a foot shall require the additional setback provided herein. 
(b)  Maximum building width. The maximum building width in the RMM and RMH zoning districts is established below and as indicated in Figure 30-2. Maximum building width must conform to required side setbacks. 
(1)  The maximum building width is one hundred ten (110) feet, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(2)  The maximum building width may be increased to one hundred forty (140) feet. However, building widths in excess of one hundred ten (110) shall provide additional side yard setbacks. The additional setback shall be provided as follows: for each additional foot of building width the side setback shall be increased four (4) feet. The additional setback may be applied on either or both sides of the building. 
(3)  The maximum width shall not apply to parking garages or other attached accessory buildings less than twenty-five (25) feet in height. 
(4)  Any fractional portion of a foot shall require the additional setback provided herein. 
(5)  The maximum building length in the RMM and RMH zoning districts shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) feet (see Figure 30-3). The maximum length shall not apply to parking garages and attached accessory structures less that twenty-five (25) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. IV, § 6, 7-25-00) 

Maximum Building Width-Setbacks 

Maximum Building Width 
Sec. 30-67. - Uses permitted, special exception, and prohibited uses. 
(a)  Permitted, special exception, and prohibited uses. Uses permitted, uses permitted as special exceptions, or uses prohibited within the Town of Highland Beach are indicated in Table 30-4. Additional standards applicable to certain uses are established in Table 30-4. 
(1)  Permitted uses may be established as indicated in Table 30-4, subject to the requirements of this code. 
(2)  Uses permitted as special exceptions as indicated in Table 30-4, may be allowed subject to the requirements of article III. 
(3)  Uses permitted subject to site plan review as indicated in Table 30-4 may be allowed subject to the requirements of article III. 
(4)  Uses prohibited shall not be established in the Town of Highland Beach. 
(b)  Uses not listed. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, uses not listed in Table 30-4 are prohibited in the Town of Highland Beach. 
Table 30-4. 
PERMITTED USES 
Legend 
SP = Site Plan Approval Required X = Prohibited SE = Special Exception Approval Required P = Permitted  
USE CATEGORY RE RS RML RMM RMH RPUD GSD Additional 
Standards 
(See Notes) RESIDENTIAL Dwelling, Single-family, Detached SP SP SP SP SP SP X Dwelling, Single-family, Attached X X SP SP SP SP X Dwelling, Single-Family, Zero Lot Line X X SE SE SE SE X (1) Dwelling, Multiple-Family X X SP SP SP SP X Dwelling, Patio or Villa X X SP SP SP SP X Dwelling, Three-Family (Triplex) X X SP SP SP SP X Dwelling, Townhouse X X SP SP SP SP X Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex) X X SP SP SP SP X Dwelling, Mobile Home X X X X X X X Accessory Dwellings P P P P P P P (2) Guardhouse, Residential P P P P P P X (3) Home Occupation P P P P P P X (4) Timeshare Residence X X X X X X X Accessory Uses P P P P P P P COMMERCIAL Club, Private X X X X X X X Day Care, Adult or Child X X X X X X X Hotels X X X X X X X Lounges X X X X X X X Motels X X X X X X X Offices, Business X X X X X X X Offices, Professional X X X X X X X Personal Services X X X X X X X Recreation, Commercial X X X X X X X Recreational Vehicle Parks X X X X X X X Restaurants X X X X X X X Retail, General X X X X X X X Nonresidential Change of Nonconforming Use SE SE SE SE SE SE SE (5) Off-Premises Parking SE SE SE SE SE SE SE Parking Lots, Public X X X X X X X Temporary Structures and Uses SP SP SP SP SP SP SP (10) Marine Boat Basins SE SE SE SE SE SE SE (6) Boat Lifts P P P P P P P (7) Perpendicular Docking of Boats SE SE SE SE SE SE SE (8) Bulkheads, Sea Walls, and Retaining Walls P P P P P P P Docks, Residential P P P P P P P Marinas, Commercial X X X X X X X Civic Houses of Worship X X SE SE SE X X Essential Public Service Structures SE SE SE SE SE SE P Essential Public Services, Minor SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Government Offices or Uses X X X X X X P Post Offices X X X X X X SE Recreation Facilities, Public X X X X X X SE (9) Schools, Public and Private X X X X X X X Utility Facilities X X X X X X SE  
NOTES. ADDITIONAL STANDARDS 
(1)  Zero lot line dwelling. Zero lot line dwellings shall comply with the standards listed below. 
a.  Applications for development order approval of zero lot line homes shall be approved as a special exception, and subject to all standards applicable to a special exception request. 
b.  At least fifty (50) percent of the length of the side of the dwelling shall be located along the zero setback line. 
c.  Openings such as windows and doors shall not be located on the side of the dwelling which is located on the zero setback line. However, glass block or similar translucent material may be allowed, subject to the following: 
1.  Such material does not exceed ten (10) percent of total wall area; 
2.  Such material complies with all applicable building and safety codes; 
3.  Use is limited only to new construction; and 
4.  Such material permits not more than sixty (60) percent transmission of exterior light. 
d.  Residential developments containing zero lot line dwellings shall be subdivided and platted pursuant to the requirements of this code, this chapter, and F.S. ch. 177. 
e.  A maintenance easement of not less than two (2) feet shall be provided along the side of the structure constructed on the property line. 
f.  Roof eaves and foundations located along the zero setback side of a dwelling may encroach not more than eighteen (18) inches into the abutting lot or property. 
g.  The side of the dwelling not located [on a] zero setback side shall conform to the side setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
h.  The size of lots for a zero lot line development shall conform to the requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
i.  Excluding the side located along the zero setback, a zero lot line dwelling shall comply with all setbacks required in the underlying zoning district. 
j.  An opaque masonry privacy wall or solid translucent privacy wall shall be installed along the zero setback side, extending to the rear at least ten (10) feet from the end of the dwelling. The first ten (10) feet of privacy wall shall be not less that six (6) or not more than eight (8) feet in height. Any portion of the privacy wall extending more than ten (10) feet shall be not more than six (6) feet in height. The town commission may require additional length to provide privacy between zero lot line units or other dwelling units. 
k.  Screen enclosures for pools, patios, or yards may be installed along the rear portion of a zero setback side of a dwelling unit. The town commission may require an opaque masonry wall to provide privacy between adjacent zero lot line units or other dwelling units. 
l.  A residential development project may contain zero lot line homes and other forms of attached or detached residential dwellings. However, the inclusion of zero lot line homes within such project shall require the entire project to be considered for approval as a special exception. 
m.  Gutters shall be placed along all portions of the wall located on the side of the structure without a building setback. 
n.  Zero lot line dwellings shall not share common fences and walls attached to more than one dwelling. 
(2)  Accessory dwelling. A second structure, either attached to, detached from, or located within a principal and providing habitable area for one or more persons. Accessory dwellings shall comply with the requirements listed below: 
a.  The dwelling shall not be for rent. 
b.  The dwelling shall be utilized by guests or domestic employees of the owners or residents of the principal dwelling. 
c.  If detached from the principal structure, the accessory structure shall be located within all required setbacks. 
d.  The structure shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) gross square feet of living area, excluding non-air conditioned spaces such as covered or screened porches and garages. 
(3)  Guardhouse, accessory: 
a.  Shall be limited to a maximum of one hundred (150) square feet. 
b.  Shall be used only for security purposes and shall not be used for any other function. 
c.  The town commission shall require adequate stacking depth for each guardhouse. 
d.  The town commission may require installation of dedicated turn lanes to ensure the safe flow of traffic. 
e.  Sanitary facilities may be provided within guardhouses. 
f.  Guardhouses existing on the effective date of this chapter shall be considered legal, conforming accessory structures. As legal, conforming structures, such guardhouses may be repaired, maintained, or otherwise expanded consistent with the requirements of this code. 
g.  Guardhouses may be constructed in association with residential development projects containing two (2) or more dwelling units. 
(4)  Home occupation. Home occupation means a commercial or business use performed in a residential dwelling by a resident or family member. A home occupation use shall comply with the standards listed below: 
a.  Only resident family members or residents of the dwelling unit shall be engaged in the occupation. 
b.  Provision of services to clients within a dwelling is prohibited. 
c.  The use of the premises for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants. The use shall not change the residential character of the premises. 
d.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation. 
e.  Home occupations shall not be conducted in any accessory building or structure, or any open porch, garage, or carport. 
f.  Home occupation shall not occupy more than fifteen (15) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit or accessory dwelling. Home occupations shall not be conducted within any open porch, attached garage, or similar space not suited or intended for occupancy as living quarters. 
g.  Traffic shall not be generated by the home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. 
h.  Vehicle parking shall be located on the lot or premise of the home occupation. 
i.  Equipment or processes which create noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses at any lot line shall not be used in the home occupation. In addition, equipment or processes shall not be used which create any interference for neighboring properties in receiving radio, television, or other wireless devices, or which cause fluctuations in electrical service to such properties. 
j.  Private instructions or other lessons shall be limited to not more than one person and shall be limited to academic, artistic, and musical subjects. 
k.  Manufacture or fabrication of articles such as are commonly classified under the terms of arts and handicrafts may be deemed a home occupation, subject to the other terms and conditions of this definition. 
l.  On-premises sales of stock, supplies, or products is prohibited. 
m.  On-premises use or storage of hazardous materials is prohibited. 
n.  On-premises signs or other advertising of home occupations is prohibited. 
o.  Employees, other than family members or residents of the dwelling, are prohibited. 
p.  Owners or operators of home occupations may obtain an occupational license from Palm Beach County. 
(5)  Change of nonconforming use. A change from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use may be permitted as a special exception, subject to the standards listed below: 
a.  Structural alterations to the existing structure which would expand the area or size of the nonconforming use are prohibited. 
b.  The proposed use is equally or more appropriate in the location than the existing nonconforming use, based on such factors as: 
1.  Reduction in hours of operation; 
2.  Reduction in the amount of traffic generated; 
3.  Reduction in demand for water and sewer services; 
4.  Increase in buffering, screening, and landscaping to protect adjacent property owners; 
5.  Reduction in overall impact of the proposed new use on adjacent properties; and 
6.  Increase in conformity with applicable provisions of this code, including but not limited to landscaping, off-street parking, and signage. 
(6)  Boat basins. See section 30-67 of this article regarding accessory marine facilities. 
(7)  Boat lifting and mooring devices. See subsection 30-68(g) of this article regarding accessory marine facilities. 
(8)  Perpendicular docking of boats. See subsection 30-68(g)(7) of this article regarding perpendicular docking of boats. 
(9)  Public recreation facilities. Public recreation facilities established as a principal use shall comply with the requirements listed below: 
a.  The facilities, structure, site, and all principal or accessory uses shall be owned and operated by a public agency. 
b.  The site shall possess a governmental service district (GSD) zoning designation. 
c.  The facility shall be approved as a special exception. 
d.  Evidence of adequate parking to accommodate expected demand at the facility shall be provided as part of the development order application. 
e.  At a minimum, park facilities shall be closed at sunset and shall not reopen until sunrise. 
f.  Park facilities shall be gated, and gates shall be closed between sunset and sunrise. 
g.  Security lighting shall not spill over onto adjacent properties. 
h.  Special exception approval, if granted, may require an interlocal agreement between the town and the owner of the site regarding the provision of public safety services to the site. 
i.  Unless otherwise approved by the town commission, only parking and open-air fresh water rinsing facilities shall be located on the west side of SR A1A. Bathroom, picnic, play ground, and related equipment shall be located on the east side of SR A1A. 
j.  A landscape strip, with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet, shall be provided along the perimeter of the entire property abutting a residential zoning district. 
k.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of environmentally sensitive land shall be retained on site. 
l.  To the maximum extent possible, existing native vegetation shall be retained on site. 
m.  The town commission may require an opaque fence, berming, fencing, landscaping, or any combination thereof, to screen and buffer residential uses immediately abutting the site. Screening and buffering shall be at least six (6) feet in height, unless otherwise reduced by the town commission. 
n.  Native, salt tolerant vegetation shall be utilized in all areas where landscaping is installed. 
o.  Landscaping located in parking areas and other public use areas shall be irrigated, unless the requirement is waived by the town commission. 
p.  All exotic vegetation shall be removed from the park prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
q.  The use of dumpsters in the park for trash and debris prohibited, unless otherwise permitted by the town commission. 
r.  All receptacles for waste collection and disposal shall be consistent with the overall design, materials, and colors of the park, and shall be designed and installed to compatible with other facilities. 
s.  Waste collection shall occur in a manner established by the town or as provided by agreement with the firm or organization providing waste collection services. 
(10)  Temporary structures. Temporary structures shall undergo site plan review as set forth in subsection 30-68(m) of this article. 
(c)  Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities. Pursuant to F.S. § 381.986(11)(b)1, medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities are prohibited from being located anywhere within the boundaries of the town. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. IV, § 7, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 14-004, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. 14-008, § 2, 10-7-14; Ord. No. 17-002 , § 2, 9-5-17) 
Sec. 30-68. - Supplemental district regulations. 
(a)  Applicability. Unless provided elsewhere in this chapter, the provisions of this section shall apply throughout the Town of Highland Beach. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of this section and the requirements of another section, the more stringent shall prevail. 
(b)  Principal structures. In any zoning district, more than one structure housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot. However, each structure must comply with all property development and other applicable regulations of this chapter. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures shall be located on the same lot as the principal use or structure or on a contiguous lot under the same ownership. However, if lots or portions of lots under the same ownership are divided by a street, and are immediately opposite to each other, the town commission may permit accessory uses or structures on such noncontiguous lots or portions of lots. The use of noncontiguous lots for accessory structures or uses must be approved as a special exception, pursuant to section 30-33. 
(1)  Separation. A freestanding accessory structure shall not be located within five (5) feet of any other principal or accessory building. 
(2)  Encroachments. Fences, walls, vegetation, poles, and other customary yard accessories, pool decks, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and visibility requirements. 
(3)  Unity of title. A unity of title for all lots or portions of lots divided by a street shall be approved by the town attorney and recorded prior to issuance of a building permit. The unity of title shall be consistent with the requirements of section 30-67 of this article. 
(d)  Creation of conforming lots. A conforming lot shall be created as follows: 
(1)  A single lot of record, duly platted, approved, and filed with the Palm Beach County Clerk of the Circuit Court; or 
(2)  A combination of complete lots of record, duly bound by an approved unity of title. 
(e)  Fences, walls, and hedges. All fences, walls, and hedges shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Height limits. Fences and walls in residential zoning districts shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. Hedges are not subject to the height requirements established herein. Hedges shall be maintained in a manner consistent with good horticultural practices and the requirements of chapter 28 of the Town Code. 
a.  The height of a fence or wall shall be measured from the lowest elevation adjoining either side of the structure or landscape material. 
b.  When installed on the west side of SR A1A, a fence, wall, or hedge shall be located at least two and one-half (21/2) feet from the westerly portion of the pedestrian/bicycle path, either side. 
c.  Pilasters, columns, gate supports, and similar features may exceed the six-foot height limit, provided such features are of an appropriate scale and style with the architectural design and appearance of such wall, and do not result in a fence or wall with the overall appearance of a height in excess of six (6) feet. 
(2)  Visibility triangle. A fence, wall, or hedge shall not encroach into the visibility triangle as defined by section 30-68 of this article. 
(3)  Prohibited fences. Chainlink fences without vinyl coating are prohibited, unless screened by a living hedge which substantially screens the fence. Unscreened black or dark green vinyl-coated chain link fences are permitted. The barbs of all chainlink fences shall be crimped or otherwise turned down. 
(4)  Tennis court fences. Tennis court fences shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, and be concealed from public view. Such fences shall be at least ten (10) feet from the front property line. Landscaping to screen tennis fences shall be planted five (5) feet from front property line. 
(5)  Coastal construction control line. Fences and walls constructed east of SR A1A shall comply with the requirements of F.S. ch. 161. 
(f)  Swimming pools: 
(1)  Required setbacks. Swimming pools, as measured from the edge of the pool, shall meet the setbacks established below. 
a.  Swimming pools must be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line and ten (10) feet from rear or side lot lines. 
b.  Swimming pool decks must be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the front property line and at least four (4) feet from rear or side lot lines. 
c.  If the rear property line borders a public body of water, the pool deck or decks or screen enclosures may extend to not less than five (5) feet from the right-of-way line or bulkhead line, whichever is further landward. 
d.  Alternate setbacks and clearances for pool decks or decks are permitted, subject to approval of the building official and the Planning Board. The building official is permitted to reguire an investigation and recommendation of a registered design professional to demonstrate that the intent of this section and the code has been satisfied. Such an investigation shall include consideration of material, height of slope, slope gradient, load intensity and erosion characteristic of the slope material. 
(2)  Buffering. Swimming pools in front yards shall be concealed from the view of the public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Cabanas. Cabanas associated with swimming pools, or ocean bathing, shall comply with the following limitations: 
a.  Single story; 
b.  Not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet; 
c.  Facilities for independent living, cooking, eating, or sleeping are prohibited; and 
d.  Water, electricity, and facilities for sanitation are permitted. 
(4)  Prohibited swimming pools. Swimming pools not installed in the ground as a permanent structure or installed above ground as part of a multifamily dwelling are prohibited. Pools with a capacity of two hundred (200) gallons or less are excluded. 
(5)  Protection of swimming pools. Swimming pools shall have the required state approved barriers installed as per Florida Building Code, as updated. 
(g)  Accessory marine facilities: 
(1)  Accessory use. Accessory marine facilities, including docks, piers, launching facilities, and lifting and mooring devices are permitted as an accessory use in all residential zoning districts. 
a.  Accessory marine facilities shall not be used for commercial purposes. 
b.  Accessory marine facilities shall be used only by residents or their guests, and shall not be rented or leased to nonresidents or any other person other than owners or residents of the principal dwelling or dwellings. For the purpose of this section, the term guest shall mean a person or persons residing in a dwelling unit for a limited period of time, not to exceed a period of sixty (60) days within one calendar year, at the invitation of the owner or resident of the dwelling. 
c.  Accessory marine facilities shall not be a hazard to navigation. 
(2)  Boat basins. Boat basins may be permitted, as provided herein: 
a.  Boat basins in all zoning districts on lots of one acre or more may be permitted as an accessory use. 
b.  Boat basins in all zoning districts on lots of less than one acre shall be a special exception, subject to the standards listed below: 
1.  The edge of any improvements associated with a boat basin shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from side property lines. 
2.  The total length of improvements associated with a boat basin shall not exceed one-third (33.3%) of the length of the property line in which the basin is located. 
3.  Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of any boat moored in a boat basin may extend waterward of property line in which the basin is located. 
4.  The town, at the expense of the applicant, may utilize appropriate marine, engineering, construction, and related professionals to review all aspects of such application. Such professionals shall be utilized to ensure compliance with the requirements herein, to ensure a proposed basin will not be a hazard to navigation, and to ensure a proposed boat basin will not pose a potential hazard, via erosion or other action, to the stability of neighboring properties. 
(3)  Lifting devices. For those lots in RS zoning districts with less than fifty (50) feet abutting the water, the Town Commission may grant a special exception for the installation of lifting devices or other means of securing boats (but not a boat dock) after being satisfied as to protection of neighboring property and noninfringement of standard navigational practices. 
(4)  Boats and setbacks. When moored, any portion of a boat shall not extend beyond any property line, as extended waterward. 
(5)  Enclosures. Marine facilities shall not be enclosed with walls, roofs, or any other structures or improvements. 
(6)  Installation. Marine facilities shall comply with the installation standards listed below: 
a.  In waterways not regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, docks and mooring structures shall not extend into any waterway more than five (5) feet. 
b.  In waterways regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, docks and mooring structures may extend to that distance allowed by said agency. 
c.  Measurement of the width or length of a dock, as applicable, shall be made from the property line. 
d.  Marine facilities shall comply with the side yard setbacks listed below. 
1.  Single-family zoning districts: Twenty-five (25) feet; provided, however, the side yard setback for shall be fifteen (15) feet for any single-family lot with a lot width of fifty (50) feet or more but less than seventy (70) feet. For those lots with less than fifty (50) feet abutting the water, the Town Commission may grant a special exception for the installation of a seawall mounted davit type lifting device (but not a dock structure) after being satisfied as to the protection of neighboring property and no infringement of standard navigation practices. 
2.  Multifamily zoning districts: Five (5) feet, measured from the perimeter property lines. In multifamily residential zoning districts, marine facilities shall be exempt from side yard setback requirements for all interior lot lines. 
(7)  Perpendicular docking. Unless otherwise provided herein, boats shall not be moored or docked perpendicular to the property at which they are located. 
a.  A boat moored at the landward end of a canal constructed for boat docking purposes may be moored perpendicular to the property line, provided such mooring does not impede the navigation of adjacent property owners. 
b.  A boat moored in the Intracoastal Waterway may be moored perpendicular to the property line, subject to approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
c.  A request for perpendicular docking of a boat in a canal shall be considered as a special exception by the town commission, following an advisory recommendation by the planning board. Applications for development order approval of perpendicular docking of boats shall be subject to all standards applicable to a special exception request, and the additional criteria contained herein: 
1.  Location of docks, docked boats, and relation to side setbacks shall be established by the waterward extension of property lines. 
2.  Perpendicular docking of boats shall not interfere with navigation of other boats within the affected canal, and will not be a hazard to navigation. 
3.  Perpendicular docking of boats shall comply with all setbacks required for accessory marine facilities. 
4.  Docks or accessory mooring facilities approved by the town commission for perpendicular docking of boats may exceed the maximum extension into a waterway allowed for accessory marine facilities. 
5.  The building official, planning board, or town commission may request evidence, prepared by a recognized marine expert, demonstrating the following: 
(a)  Proposed perpendicular docking and related accessory marine facilities will not reasonably deny or otherwise limit the ability of abutting or adjacent property owners to construct accessory marine facilities; 
(b)  Proposed perpendicular docking and related accessory marine facilities will reasonably deny or otherwise limit the normal ability of abutting or adjacent property owners to moor, maneuver, use or otherwise move a boat; and 
(c)  Proposed perpendicular docking and related accessory marine facilities will not deny reasonable visual access of abutting property owners to public waterways. 
(h)  Dolphins, freestanding pilings, boat lifts, and moorings: 
(1)  Installation. In order to be installed, dolphins, freestanding pilings, boat lifts, and moorings shall comply with all standards listed below: 
a.  The installation shall be subject to approval by the planning board at an advertised public hearing. 
b.  The mooring facilities will be located in a canal or waterway at least eighty (80) feet in width. 
c.  The mooring facilities will not create a hazardous interference with navigation, endanger life or property, or deny the public reasonable visual access to public waterways. 
d.  Construction of all mooring facilities shall require a building permit. 
(2)  Public notice. In addition to the requirements of section 30-46, written notice must be provided by certified mail, return receipt requested, to owners of property abutting the canal and located within three hundred (300) feet, as measured from both property lines along the canal bank, of the property in question. In addition to the notice required above, if the mooring facilities identified in (h)(1) above are to be installed/constructed in the Bel Lido Isle subdivision, notice, by first class mail, shall be provided to the owners of property located in the Bel Lido Isle subdivision, where such property is located outside the 300 feet notice area but where the property line is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of the property on which such installation/construction is proposed. 
(3)  Documentation. The building official or planning board may request evidence, prepared by a recognized marine expert, demonstrating the proposed mooring facilities will not be a hazard to navigation and will not deny reasonable visual access to public waterways. 
(4)  Adjacent property. Installation of the mooring facilities shall not cause a hazardous interference with navigation, endanger life or property, or deny the adjacent property owners or public reasonable visual access to the public waterway. 
(5)  Navigation. Installation of such mooring facilities shall not infringe upon standard navigational practices that are or may be used by abutting property owners. 
(6)  Floating docks. Floating docks are permitted, subject to conformance with all zoning code requirements herein and compliance with all applicable building codes. 
(7)  The Planning Board shall have final decision making authority over the granting of an approval for dolphins, freestanding pilings, boat lifts and moorings. Appeals of the final decision of the Planning Board shall be filed in the Fifteenth Circuit Court in Palm Beach County, Appeals shall be filed within thirty (30) calendar days of the decision. 
(i)  Dune walkover structures: 
(1)  Compliance with state requirements. Dune walkover structures shall conform to structural requirements adopted by the Department of Environment Protection or successor agency and shall receive all necessary state permits and approvals prior to construction. 
(2)  Planning board approval. Dune walkover structures shall require planning board approval prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  Compliance with setbacks. A dune walkover structure shall comply with the setbacks of the zoning district in which located. However, this requirement may be waived by the building official if one of the following applies: 
a.  A beach access easement or similar easement exists which would allow for construction of such structure; or 
b.  An alternative location, as determined by DEP, results in less damage to affected coastal dune and vegetation. 
(j)  Vehicular access to public and private rights-of-way: 
(1)  Access required. All lots or parcels shall have appropriate access to a public or private right-of-way. Such means of access shall conform to applicable county and state requirements when such requirements are more restrictive than the requirements set forth in this section or chapter. 
(2)  Minimum requirements for vehicular access and circulation. All lots, structures, and buildings shall provide access to a public or private right-of-way as provided below: 
a.  At least thirty-two (32) feet wide for all nonresidential uses and all residential uses consisting of two (2) or more dwellings; or 
b.  At least twenty-five (25) feet wide for all single-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Location of structures. All structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe, convenient access from a public or private right-of-way for delivery and collection of public services, fire protection, and required off-street parking. 
(k)  Essential services: 
(1)  Essential services permitted. Facilities necessary to provide essential services to town residents may be located within any zoning district. For the purposes of this section, essential public services include minor structures and uses necessary to provide natural gas, water, electricity, TV cable, sewerage, and telephone service. 
(2)  Essential services excluded. This section shall not be deemed to permit the establishment of prohibited uses such as electric or gas generating plants, sewage treatment plants, liquid petroleum gas storage facilities, and similar facilities of an industrial nature. 
(3)  Related commercial activities excluded. This section shall not be deemed to allow the establishment of structures for commercial activities such as sales or the collection of bills in zoning districts in which such activities are prohibited. 
(4)  Essential services structures. If the installation of essential services requires permanent structures of other than a minor nature, such structures shall be subject to special exception review. An application of this nature shall comply with the standards of section 30-33. In addition, to the extent possible, the structure shall provide architectural design and landscaping that is compatible with the character of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(l)  Underground utilities. With the exception of services boxes, fire hydrants, check valves, and related items, electric, telephone, cable television, natural gas, and similar facilities located on private property shall be installed below ground. 
(m)  Temporary structures: 
(1)  Temporary structures. Temporary structures may be erected in any district in connection with land development or construction projects, including real estate offices for original sales of dwelling units and construction trailers. Temporary structure shall not be used as dwelling or lodging units. 
(2)  Installation. A temporary structure shall not be installed without site plan review and approval and the issuance of a building permit for the temporary structure. The planning board shall have the final authority to approve a site plan for a temporary structure visible from a public right-of-way, and the building official shall have final authority to approve a site plan for a temporary structure not visible from a public right-of-way and for all temporary trailers or storage containers to be located on construction sites. Approval for a temporary structure shall be subject to the standards listed below. 
a.  The approved site plan and building permit for the temporary structure shall specify the location, type of construction, maintenance requirements, and the period for which the temporary structure shall be required. 
b.  Any building permit issued for a temporary structure shall expire after a period of six (6) months, unless renewed by the building official for one or more additional periods of six (6) months. 
c.  A temporary structure, whether it is visible from the public right-of-way or not, shall not be allowed for more than two (2) years, including any renewal periods, unless approved by the town commission. 
d.  A certificate of occupancy shall be issued before the structure is occupied. 
e.  Land development or construction activities on the site must commence within one year after the building permit for the temporary structure is issued. If land development or construction activities do not commence within the required time period, the building official may initiate code enforcement proceedings and/or any other lawful action to require removal of the temporary structure from the site. 
(3)  Dune walkovers and gazebos. Dune walkovers and gazebos are considered expendable structures, and are not subject to the time limits established above. Dune walkovers and gazebos are considered structures, and a building permit is required prior to construction. 
(4)  Tents. Tents proposed to be installed for temporary purposes shall require a building permit. Temporary purposes, for the purpose of this section, shall mean events such as festivals, weddings, craft sales, and outdoor ceremonies. 
a.  The building official may approve installation of a tent for not more than five (5) consecutive days. 
b.  Any request for installation of a tent for more than five (5) consecutive days shall require approval by the town commission. The decision of the town commission shall be based upon the location, duration, and potential impact of the event on adjacent properties. 
c.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if no portion of the tent is visible from a public right-of-way, the building official may approve installation of a tent for a period of not more than twenty (20) consecutive days. 
(n)  Developments divided by public or private road rights-of-way. Property owners may not combine properties on opposite sides of any public or private road right-of-way. Density transfers between divided lots and properties are prohibited. Divided properties are to be developed in accordance with regulations applicable to each separate lot. A unity of title for all lots or portions of lots divided by a public or private right-of-way shall be provided as required in section 30-67 of this article. 
(o)  Visibility triangles: 
(1)  Requirements for visibility triangles. The regulations and restrictions set forth herein are intended to assure adequate visibility as a means of ensuring safe conditions for vehicles and pedestrians at street intersections, and the intersection of access driveways and street rights-of-way. 
(2)  Access driveways. When an access driveway intersects with a public or private street right-of-way, visibility triangles shall be created along both sides of the access driveway. Two (2) sides of the visibility triangle shall extend not less than ten (10) feet each way from the point of intersection of the driveway pavement and the public right-of-way. The third side of the triangle shall be a line connecting the ends of the other two (2) sides as shown in Figure 30-4A. 
(3)  Right-of-way intersections. When two (2) public or private rights-of-way intersect, visibility triangles shall be created. Two (2) sides of the visibility triangle shall extend not less than twenty-five (25) feet along the abutting rights-of-way lines, measured from the point of intersection. The third side of the triangle shall be a line connecting the ends of the other two (2) sides as shown in Figure 30-4B. 
(4)  Alternative visibility triangles. Alternative visibility triangles to ensure adequate traffic safety may be required in individual cases when deemed necessary by the building official. If alternative visibility triangle configurations are required due to unusual site conditions, the alternative shall result in traffic safety that is equivalent or superior to the minimum standards required herein. 
(5)  Obstructions. Obstructions within visibility triangles are prohibited. The restrictions listed below shall apply to landscaping, bus shelters, benches, newspaper racks, signs, and other structures or appurtenances within any visibility triangle. 
a.  As indicated in Figure 30-4A and Figure 30-4B, signs, walls, or landscaping, excluding ground cover, shall not be located within three (3) feet of either side of an access driveway located within twenty (20) feet of the edge of a pavement of the public street. 
b.  Within a visibility triangle, structures, plantings, or foliage shall not be permitted within the clear zone established between the heights of two (2) feet and eight (8) feet above ground level. The clear zone shall be measured from the crown of the abutting roadway, or in the case of an intersection, from the crown of the roadway with the lower elevation. However, clear tree trunks and supports for street signs, traffic control signs and traffic signals which meet state and county standards shall be permitted. Limbs and foliage of trees and shrubs planted outside the area of a visibility triangle shall not extend into said triangle or clear zone. 
c.  Parking or vehicular use areas shall not be permitted within a visibility triangle. 


(p)  Overhangs: 
(1)  Permitted Roof Overhangs. Roof overhangs, not exceeding four (4) feet, shall be permitted to encroach into front, side, or rear setbacks. 
(2)  Other Features. Overhangs for bay windows, canopies, awnings, chimneys, and similar features may not project more than three (3) feet into reguired setbacks or yards. Bay windows and chimneys shall not exceed a length along the wall parallel to the property line more than ten (10) percent of the cumulative length of one or more walls along the same property line on which the feature is located. 
(3)  Canopies. Permanent and retractable canopies fabricated of metal, canvas, or other material consistent with applicable building codes, may be installed. All canopies must comply with required front, side, and rear setbacks, and shall comply with the standards listed below. 
a.  A canopy shall be attached only to a principal structure. 
b.  A building permit is required for installation of a permanent or retractable canopy. 
(4)  Balconies. Balconies at the second floor level or above shall not project more than three (3) feet into the required setback or yard and shall not exceed a length along the wall parallel to the property line more than twenty (20) percent of the cumulative length of one or more walls along the same property line. 
(q)  Unity of title: 
(1)  Unity of title declaration. Prior to the issuance of a development order or building permit the town may require a property owner to record a unity of title. The purpose of the unity of title is to ensure the combination of lots or parcels complies with all applicable property development regulations and standards of this chapter. Any properties affected by a unity of title shall comply with the density requirements of the comprehensive plan and this chapter. 
(2)  Form and content. The unity of title shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the town attorney. At a minimum, the unity of title shall contain the provisions listed below: 
a.  The combination of separate lots, plots, parcels, acreage, or portions thereof, shall be regarded as unified under one title as an indivisible building site. 
b.  The property shall be considered as one parcel of land, and no portion thereof shall be sold, assigned, transferred, or conveyed separately. 
c.  Any sale, assignment, transfer, or conveyance of the property shall be in its entirety as one parcel of land. 
d.  The unity of title declaration shall constitute a covenant to run with the land in perpetuity. 
e.  The unity of title shall be binding upon the declarer, heirs, successors, and assigns, until such time as the unity of title declaration may be released with the approval of the town commission. 
(3)  Town attorney. All unities of title applicable to property within the town shall be approved by the town attorney prior to issuance of a building permit, or as otherwise required by a development order approved by the town. 
(r)  Stormwater management: 
(1)  Stormwater management. Stormwater management shall be required for all land development activities, including single-family residential dwellings, within the town in order to control runoff, ensure maintenance of appropriate water qualify standards, protect groundwater resources, and prevent erosion. Stormwater management systems shall be designed by an engineer registered in the State of Florida. 
(2)  Applicable regulations. The stormwater management regulations applicable within the town shall be those administered by the South Florida Water Management District set forth in chapter 40E, Florida Administrative Code, as amended. 
(3)  Additional standards. All development activities within the town shall comply with the additional standards listed below: 
a.  Completed construction and improvements shall not impede the flow of stormwater runoff to points of collection, retention, or detention. 
b.  Completed construction and improvements shall retain onsite the first one inch of stormwater runoff generated by a three-year storm event. 
(s)  Open space and recreation: 
(1)  Purpose and intent. It is the intent of this section to provide land or funds or both to be used by the town commission to provide additional open space and recreational land necessary to meet demands created by new residential development. 
(2)  Land dedication requirements. For development of multifamily developments, the property owner shall dedicate to the town a parcel of land of suitable size, dimension, topography, and general character to meet the town's open space and recreational land needs created by the development. Land dedication requirements are listed below: 
a.  The total amount of land to be dedicated for the development site shall equal or exceed a ratio of one acre of land for every one hundred (100) residents of the development. 
b.  For purposes of this section, two (2) persons per unit shall be deemed to reside in a proposed multifamily development. The dedication of land shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
c.  The following formula shall be used for calculating the amount of open space and recreational land to be dedicated: 
2.0 × Total Units × 0.01 = Amount of Acres of Land to Be Dedicated 
(3)  "In lieu" payments. If the town commission determines a multifamily development is too small or it is not feasible and advisable to dedicate open space land or land for recreation purposes, the property owner shall make an in lieu payment to the town in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each dwelling unit. 
a.  The in lieu payment shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
b.  The in lieu payment shall be deposited into a separate nonlapsing open space land and recreational land fund established and maintained by the town. 
(4)  Single-family units. For a single-family unit, an in lieu payment for each unit shall be required. 
a.  For a single-family unit which is constructed on a vacant lot, an in lieu payment of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be required. 
b.  The in lieu payment shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit for the dwelling unit. 
c.  The in lieu payment shall be deposited into a separate nonlapsing open space land and recreational land fund established and maintained by the town. 
(5)  Limitation on use of land and fees. The land and fees received under this section shall be used for the purpose of providing open space land and recreational facilities. 
a.  The town shall establish a separate non-lapsing open space land and recreational land fund into which in lieu payments shall be deposited. 
b.  The money in this account shall be expended by the town only for the acquisition of open land and recreational lands, improvement to lands consistent with these open space land and recreational purposes, and providing equipment and personal property incidental thereto. 
(6)  Requirements of deed. Any land required to be dedicated under this section shall be granted via warranty deed with marketable title free and clear of all encumbrances. The dedication shall occur prior to the issuance of the first building permit for the development. The deed shall be provided in a form acceptable to the town attorney. 
(7)  Program for acquisition of lands. The town commission may establish a program for the acquisition of lands for development as recreational facilities and open space areas in order to meet the existing need for municipal recreational and open space areas. The program also be established to meet, as it occurs, the need for municipal recreational facilities and open space areas created by further residential developments constructed after the effective date of this section. 
a.  The annual budget and capital improvement program of the town shall provide for appropriation of funds as may be necessary to carry out the program for the acquisition of land for municipal recreational facilities and open space areas. 
b.  The funds necessary to acquire lands to meet the existing needs for municipal residential facilities and open space must be provided from a source of revenue other than from amounts deposited in the open space land and recreational land fund. 
c.  Amounts deposited in the fund shall be expended within a reasonable period of time for the purpose of acquiring and developing land necessary to meet the need for municipal recreational facilities and open space areas created by new development in order to ensure that such recreational facilities or open space areas will be available to and substantially benefit residents of new developments. 
(t)  Parking or storage of major recreational equipment and vehicles. Major recreational equipment shall not be used for temporary or permanent residential purposes. Parking or storage of major recreational equipment within the town is prohibited, unless the equipment is parked entirely within an enclosed garage. 
(u)  Finish floor elevation, building height, and exceptions to building height: 
(1)  Determination of finished floor elevation. Finished floor elevation shall be determined as provided herein. 
(2)  West of SR A1A. For all parcels west of SR A1A, minimum usable finished floor elevation shall be the higher of the following: 
a.  The flood elevation as determined by the United States Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or successor agency; or 
b.  Eighteen (18) inches above the average elevation of the centerline of the nearest public or private road providing access to the site, as measured from lot line to lot line of the affected site. 
c.  If a higher minimum elevation is established by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or FEMA, the higher elevation shall be used by the town. 
(3)  East of SR A1A. For all parcels east of SR A1A, finished floor elevation shall be at least the "design breaking wave crest or wave approach as superimposed on the storm surge with dynamic wave setup of a 100-year storm" elevation as determined by DEP, as indicated in Figure 30-5. The finished floor elevation shall not exceed the average height of the dune on which the structure is to be located. Use of this finished floor elevation shall be consistent with the standards listed below: 
a.  A building permit shall not be issued by the town until approval for the finished floor elevation is granted by the Department of Environmental Protection. 
b.  The area below the finished floor elevation shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 

c.  The maximum distance from the finished floor elevation of the garage floor to the garage ceiling shall be nine (9) feet and the maximum distance between the ceiling and finished floor elevation of the habitable or similar usable area is thirty (30) inches, as provided in Figure 30-5. 
d.  Finished floor elevation for a garage shall be constructed below the greater of the following: 
1.  The flood elevation as determined by FEMA; or 
2.  Eighteen (18) inches above the average elevation of the centerline of the nearest public or private road providing access to the site, as measured from side lot to side lot line of the affected site. 
(4)  Exceptions to building height. The following exceptions to building height limits for single-family and multi-family units containing up to four (4) dwelling unit dwellings shall be permitted. 
a.  Exceptions. Exceptions to building heights shall include such functional and nonfunctional architectural features as chimneys, cupolas, towers, dormers, parapet walls, domes, and spires. Mechanical features are considered exceptions to height limitations include heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment, and flagpoles and radio or television antennae, satellite receivers, digital transmitters, and telecommunication eguipment. 
b.  Measurement. Height exceptions shall be measured from that point of a flat or pitched roof utilized to determine building height. 
c.  Limitations. Height exceptions shall comply with the limitations listed below: 
1.  Not more than two (2) height exceptions, including elevator housings, shall be allowed on any defined roof line. 
2.  The size of each architectural height exception, unless otherwise provided herein, shall be limited to a total of four feet by four feet by four feet (4' × 4' × 4') and a maximum volume of sixty-four (64) cubic feet. 
3.  The size of height exceptions or architectural features shall not exceed four (4) feet above that point of a flat or pitched roof utilized to determine building height, except as may be required to comply with building codes for functional chimneys or similar features. 
4.  Parapet walls shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
5.  For single-family dwellings, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and exhaust equipment, and radio or television antenna shall not exceed the height of a parapet wall. In the absence of a parapet wall, such equipment shall be screened in a manner consistent with the architectural style, colors, and materials of the principal structure. 
6.  The height of flag poles shall not extend more than four (4) feet beyond that point of a flat or pitched roof utilized to determine building height. 
7.  All height exceptions shall be constructed in a manner consistent with the architectural style, colors, and materials of the principal structure. 
d.  Elevators. Elevator housings for single-family dwellings may exceed the height exception limits as provided herein, provided the structures are consistent with the standards listed below. 
1.  The exterior measurements of the housing or elevator structure shall not exceed six feet by six feet by ten feet (6' × 6' × 10') and a maximum volume of three hundred sixty (360) cubic feet. 
2.  One externally visible elevator housing per single-family residential structure is allowed. 
3.  A canopy or other weather protection for an elevator door may be provided in a scale consistent with the intended function. 
4.  The elevator housing shall be constructed in a manner consistent with the architectural style, colors, and materials of the principal structure. 
e.  Observation decks and widow's walks. Observation decks and widow's walks shall be permitted subject to the standards listed below: 
1.  The observation area shall not exceed two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet, and habitable area shall not be provided. 
2.  The walks or decks shall be open air features and shall not be walled, roofed, or otherwise enclosed. 
3.  Electricity, water, and similar services shall not be installed, unless determined necessary by the building official to meet requirements of the building code. 
4.  The surface of walks or decks shall not exceed the overall building height limit. 
5.  Not more than one deck or walk per principal structure or dwelling shall be installed. 
6.  Access to a deck or walk may be provided by an elevator or an unenclosed stairway, with such secondary access as may be required by the building official. 
7.  Swimming pools, spas, jacuzzis, and hot tubs, but not other recreational facilities, shall be allowed on a roof top of a single-family dwelling. Recreational facilities of this nature may be permitted on the roof of a multiple-family dwelling if approved by the town commission. 
8.  Safety railings shall be provided to meet building or safety codes, provided such railings shall not be opaque. 
9.  The decks, walks, and safety railings shall be constructed in a manner consistent with the architectural style, colors, and materials of the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. IV, § 8, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 10-002, Exh. A, 6-1-10; Ord. No. 14-002, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 14-003, § 2, 3-6-14; Ord. No. 14-004, § 3, 5-6-14; Ord. No. 14-008, § 3, 10-7-14; Ord. No. 16-006, § 3, 3-1-16 ) 
Sec. 30-69. - Off-street parking, loading, and vehicular circulation. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Generally. Off-street parking, loading, and vehicular circulation facilities shall be provided as required by this section. 
(2)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to create an efficient, safe, and balanced system of off-street parking, loading, and vehicular circulation accommodating vehicles and pedestrians. Design and construction of all parking facilities as well as on-site traffic circulation shall conform with the requirements of this section and are referred to herein as vehicular use areas. 
(b)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as required herein. 
(1)  Required parking spaces. Required parking spaces shall be provided as indicated in Table 30-5. 
Table 30-5. 
Required Off-Street Parking Spaces 
REQUIRED PARKING RE RS RML RMM RMH GSD Notes I. RESIDENTIAL Dwelling, single-family, 
detached 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit N/A Dwelling, single-family, 
attached 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit N/A Dwelling, single-family, 
zero lot line 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit N/A Multifamily dwellings N/A N/A 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit N/A 25% of required spaces reserved for guests Dwelling, patio or villa 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit N/A Dwelling, three-family 
(triplex) 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit N/A Dwelling, townhouse 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit N/A Dwelling, two-family (duplex) N/A N/A 2 per unit 2 per unit 2 per unit N/A Accessory dwelling 1 per unit 1 per unit 1 per unit 1 per unit 1 per unit 2 per unit II. NONRESIDENTIAL Houses of worship N/A N/A Seenotes See notes N/A N/A 1 per 3 seats Essential public service 
structures See notes Seenotes See notes See notes See notes See notes As required by town commission Essential public services, 
minor See notes Seenotes See notes See notes See notes See notes As required by planning broad Governmental buildings N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A To be determined by town commission Guardhouse, residential 1 per unit 1 per unit 1 per unit 1 per unit 1 per unit N/A 1 space per guardhouse Post offices N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of offices Recreation facilities, public N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A See notes To be determined by town commission  
NOTE. 
N/A = Not Applicable 
(2)  Parking study. The town may request a parking demand study for any multifamily residential development which proposes to construct dwelling units larger than three thousand (3,000) square feet. If the need for additional parking is demonstrated by the parking demand study, the town commission may require installation of such additional parking. 
(3)  Existing buildings and uses. Additional off-street parking and loading facilities for existing buildings and uses shall be provided as required below: 
a.  An existing building may be modernized, altered, or repaired without providing additional off-street parking or off-street loading facilities, providing there is no increase in floor area or capacity. 
b.  Any building or use that is expanded in floor area, number of units, or a similar increase shall provide off-street parking and loading facilities for the expansion. 
c.  Where change in use of a building or land requires additional parking or loading spaces, such spaces shall be provided in addition to the number existing for the prior use. 
d.  Where the change in use decreases requirements, only the number required for the new use need be maintained. 
(4)  Alteration of nonconforming uses. Where major repairs, alterations, or extension of uses are to made in a building occupied by a nonconforming use, no such repairs, alterations, or extensions shall be permitted unless and until the off-street parking requirements for a nonconforming use of the type involved in the district in which such use is first permitted are applied to the existing use and full provision of off-street parking facilities is made. 
(5)  Garages and driveways. Parking spaces for single-family and two-family dwellings may be located within an accessory garage or a driveway. Driveways for single-family and two-family dwellings shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length. 
(6)  Dimensions and striping. Excluding single-family and duplex dwelling unit, each off-street parking space shall have a length of twenty (20) and a minimum width of ten (10) feet, as indicated in Figure 30-6. Parking spaces shall be striped as indicated in Figure 30-6. 
(7)  Handicap parking. Handicap spaces shall be provided, located, and designed in accordance with the requirements F.S. § 553.5041, or as required by other applicable federal or state statute. 
(8)  Guest parking. Required guest parking for multifamily residences shall be considered public parking spaces for purposes of determining required handicap parking spaces. 
(9)  Location of required off-street parking: 
a.  Uses which require three or more off-street parking spaces shall provide individual spaces. Individual spaces shall be located in such manner that maneuvering incidental to parking shall not occur on any public street right-of-way, sidewalk, or pedestrian path. 
b.  In zoning all districts, parking is limited to front or side yards, and other approved structures such as garages or multilevel parking structures. 
(10)  Permanent parking surfaces. Permanent parking surfaces shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, brick, or other materials acceptable to the building official. Use of unpaved parking surfaces is prohibited. 

Parking Space Detail N.T.S. 
(11)  Double-loaded parking. Excluding single-family and two-family dwellings, double loaded parking is prohibited. 
(12)  Landscaping and buffering requirements. To the maximum extent possible, vehicular use areas for multifamily and nonresidential buildings shall be screened from public rights-of-way through the use of parking structures, other buildings, fences or walls, or vegetative screening. All landscaping proposed for perimeter areas, interior parking areas, and vehicular use areas shall conform with chapter 28 of this Code. 
(c)  Parking lots and vehicular use areas: 
(1)  Maintenance of vehicular use areas. Off-street parking and vehicular use areas shall be maintained as provided below: 
a.  All areas shall be maintained so as to function as proposed, and to present a neat and clean appearance, including the following: 
1.  Free of potholes and cracked or broken pavement; 
2.  Possessing a functional drainage system, especially with respect to protection of adjacent properties; 
3.  Avoidance of dust and dirt affecting adjacent properties; 
4.  Free of dirt, debris, and weeds; 
5.  Free of broken curbs and broken wheel stops; 
6.  Well-maintained landscaping; 
7.  Possessing all required landscaping; 
8.  Clearly striped; and 
9.  All lighting in working condition. 
b.  All landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of chapter 28 of this Code, and any additional requirements associated with approval of a development order. 
(2)  Access driveways. Each property, unless otherwise approved as provided herein, shall be limited to two (2) access driveways for each abutting public or private right-of-way. 
a.  A corner lot shall be limited to one access driveway to each public or private right-of-way, unless other driveways are granted as part of a development order approval. 
b.  Additional access driveways may be permitted by the building official. The building official shall consider the following standards to determine if additional access driveways may be installed: 
1.  Traffic generation; 
2.  Number of proposed access driveways; 
3.  Location of proposed access driveways; 
4.  Distance between access driveways; and 
5.  Relationships to adjacent land uses and access driveways. 
(3)  Location of multifamily and nonresidential access driveways. As measured from the closest edge of pavement to the centerline of the nearest intersection, the minimum separation distances between access driveways and intersections are established: 
a.  Local right-of-way: One hundred fifty (150) feet; and 
b.  Arterial right-of-way: Three hundred (300) feet. Compliance with this requirement may be achieved through the use of interconnecting parking lots which abut an arterial roadway. Alternative designs may be approved by the building official if natural features or property ownership patterns cause this requirement to be impracticable. 
(4)  Separation. The centerlines of access driveways shall be separated by a minimum distance of sixty (60) feet. 
(5)  Common access driveways. Adjacent developments may share a common access driveway, provided that appropriate access easements are granted between or among adjacent property owners in a form acceptable to the town attorney. 
(6)  Width of access driveways. Excluding single-family and duplex dwellings, minimum and maximum widths for access driveways are established below. The width shall be measured along the right-of-way line at the inner point of curvature, or as otherwise provided by the town engineer. 
Access Driveway Type Minimum or 
Maximum Width One Way 15 feet Two Way 24 feet (minimum) Two Way 36 feet (maximum)  
(7)  Design standards for vehicular use areas. Vehicular use areas shall be designed as provided below and in Figure 30-7. 
a.  Each parking area and loading area shall be designed so as to reflect the type of use, hours of operation, number of cars to be accommodated, uses and size of parking area, surrounding street pattern, adjacent buildings and other improvements in the general neighborhood. 

Vehicular Use Area Standards 
b.  The vehicular use area shall be designed to cause the least amount of adverse effects on adjoining or neighborhood properties. 
(8)  Safety. Pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, and off-street parking and loading areas shall be designed to be safe and convenient. 
(9)  Overall design. Parking and loading areas, aisles, pedestrian walks, landscaping, and open space shall be designed as integral elements of an overall site plan, and shall be properly related to existing and proposed buildings and pedestrian walks. 
(10)  Pedestrian-oriented design. Buildings, parking and loading areas, landscaping and open spaces shall be designed so that pedestrians moving from parking areas to buildings and between buildings are not unreasonably exposed to vehicular traffic. 
a.  Pedestrian walks shall be provided along areas of anticipated heavy pedestrian utilization, particularly from building entrances to streets, parking areas, and adjacent buildings. 
b.  Pedestrian walks should be designed to discourage pedestrian encroachment into landscaped areas except at designated crossings. 
c.  Pedestrian walks located adjacent to parking stalls shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width. 
(11)  Separation of pedestrian use areas. To the extent possible, separation of pedestrian use areas from vehicular use areas within a parking lot shall be accomplished through the use of landscaped areas. 
(12)  Landscaping. Off-street parking areas shall be landscaped as required by chapter 28 of this Code. 
(13)  On-site vehicular access. Each parking space, excluding single-family dwellings, shall have appropriate access to a public street or alley right-of-way. Each parking space shall have appropriate maneuvering and access aisle area sufficient to permit vehicles to enter and exit the site in a forward direction. 
(14)  Aisles and driveways. Excluding single-family and duplex dwelling units, aisles and driveways shall not be used for loading or unloading or parking vehicles. 
(15)  Design. Vehicular use areas shall be designed in a professional acceptable manner, to facilitate pedestrian safety, parking, loading, and the circulation of vehicles. A physical separation or barrier, such as landscaping, may be required to separate parking spaces from travel lanes. 
(16)  Individual access. Each parking space and loading space shall be directly accessible without driving over or through any other parking or loading space. 
(17)  Traffic-control devices. Traffic-control signs and other pavement markings shall be used as necessary to ensure safe and efficient traffic operation of parking and vehicular use areas. Signs and markings of parking lots shall be subject to the approval of the building official. 
(18)  Construction of parking facilities. All off-street parking spaces, loading areas, and vehicular use areas shall be constructed and surfaced with approved materials. 
(19)  Minimum elevations. Basement parking areas or underground garages shall have a floor elevation of not less than seven and one-half (71/2) feet above mean sea level. 
(20)  Location of parking facilities. Unless otherwise provided herein, required off-street parking and loading facilities shall be located on the same lot they are intended to serve. 
(21)  Off-premises parking. As a special exception, the town commission may authorize required off-street parking and loading facilities to be located on a separate parcel. In addition to the criteria applicable to a special exception provided in section 30-35, an off-premises parking facility also shall be subject to the criteria listed below: 
a.  The off-premises parcel shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of the principal use. 
b.  The off-premises parcel is located in the same zoning district as is the principal use or is located in a less restrictive zoning district. 
c.  Practical difficulties prevent the placing of the facilities on the same lot as the premises they are designed to serve. 
d.  Execution of an agreement, in a form acceptable to the town attorney, that will: 
1.  Bind the property owner and successors in title, in a manner acceptable to the town as long as the facilities are required for the use; 
2.  To discontinue such use unless such facilities are maintained in a manner acceptable to the town; 
3.  Identify the property to be use for off-premises parking, the number of spaces to be provided, and means of access; 
4.  Provide a site plan clearly indicating design, landscaping, and lighting; 
5.  Describe hours of operation and use; and 
6.  Provide a survey indicating the proposed facilities are within four hundred (400) feet of the principal use. 
(22)  Combined off-street parking. Two (2) or more owners, tenants, or operators of buildings or uses requiring off-street parking may make collective provision for such facilities. The total of parking spaces when combined or used together shall not be less than the sum of the requirement calculated separately. 
(d)  Off-street loading space requirements Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as required by this section. 
(1)  Minimum required. Each restaurant, clubhouse, place of assembly, or similar use with an aggregate floor area of more than five hundred (500) feet but less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall provide one space. For larger areas, one space shall be added for each additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet or major fraction thereof. 
(2)  Location and access. Each off-street loading space shall be directly accessible from a street without crossing or entering any other required off-street loading space. Loading spaces shall be accessible from the interior of the building served. Loading spaces shall be arranged to provide convenient and safe ingress and egress all trucks, semi-trucks and trailers, or other types of service vehicle. 
(3)  Combined off-street loading. Two (2) or more owners, tenants, or operators of buildings or uses requiring off-street loading spaces may make collective provision for such facilities. The total of loading spaces when combined or used together shall not be less than the sum of the requirement calculated separately. 
(4)  Nonconformities. Nonconforming uses and structures shall comply with the requirements listed below: 
a.  When the use of a structure or land or any part thereof is changed to a use requiring one or more off-street loading space, required off-street loading space shall be provided and maintained. 
b.  Any building or use that is expanded in floor area shall provide and maintain off-street loading facilities required for the expansion. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. IV, § 9, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-70. - Portable storage units. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
    Portable storage unit. Any container designed for the storage of personal property and/or overflow merchandise which is typically rented to owners or occupants of property for their temporary use and which may be delivered and removed by vehicle. 
    Site. A piece, parcel, tract, or plot of land occupied, or that may be occupied, by one or more buildings or uses and their accessory buildings and uses and which is generally considered to be one unified parcel. 
(b)  Number, duration and removal. 
(1)  On-site storage. There shall be no more than one portable storage unit located on any site at any given time. No portable storage unit shall be larger than one hundred thirty (130) square feet in total area and shall not exceed the height of the roofline of the principal structure on site. A site permit, as required in this section for a portable storage unit to remain at a site shall be valid for a maximum of ten (10) consecutive days. 
(2)  Cumulative time restriction. No portable storage unit shall be placed at any one site in excess of thirty (30) days within any 12-month period. All sites are limited to the maximum number of three (3) site permits within any 12-month period. If more than one unit in succession is to be used at a site, the time regulations detailed herein shall begin to accrue from the date of which the first unit was placed at the location. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the time limitations as stated above. All portable storage units shall be removed from the town immediately upon the issuance of a tropical storm or hurricane warning by a recognized governmental agency covering any portion of the town. The removal of a portable storage unit during a tropical storm or hurricane warning is the responsibility of the owner/operator of the portable storage unit. In the event removal is not possible, the portable storage unit shall be secured against windloads of one hundred and fifty (150) miles per hour. 
(4)  On-site storage prohibited. No on-site storage units shall be allowed on vacant, unimproved properties unless associated with a commensurate building permit for that site. 
(c)  Site permit required prior to placing a portable storage unit on any site. 
(1)  The site owner/occupier or the owner/operator of the portable storage unit must apply for site permit. Application for the site permit shall be made to the building department, on a form provided by the town. 
(2)  The application shall include the signature of the site occupant in order to ensure that the occupant has full knowledge of and consents to placement of the portable storage unit on his or her site and the provisions of this section. If the applicant is a tenant, then the applicant must also provide written consent from the property owner to make such application. A site permit fee, established by resolution of the town commission, shall accompany the application. The issuance of a site permit shall allow the applicant to place a portable storage unit on the site in conformance with the requirements of this section. The exterior of the portable storage unit shall have a weatherproof clear pouch, which must display the site permit at all times. However, no site permit shall be issued if it is determined that the storage unit provider or site owner is in violation of any provision of this section. 
(d)  Maintenance and prohibition of hazardous materials. The owner/operator of a portable storage unit and/or the owner/occupant of the site shall be responsible to ensure that the portable storage unit is in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering, discoloration, rust, ripping, tearing or other holes or breaks. When not in use, the portable storage unit shall be kept locked. The site owner/occupier of the property on which a portable storage unit is placed shall also be responsible that no hazardous substances are stored or kept within the portable storage unit. 
(e)  A portable storage unit shall only be placed in a driveway or other paved surface, unless the rear of the site is readily available, and must be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from side property lines, and three (3) feet from the front property lines. A portable storage unit shall not be placed within any utility or drainage easement. In the event that the building official, or his/her designee, determines that there is no driveway, or other paved surface, and the rear of the site is not accessible for placement of a portable storage unit, the building official, or his/her designee, may approve placement of a portable storage unit in the front yard providing that the placement of such portable storage unit does not obstruct the free, convenient, and normal use of the public right-of-way or access to any dwellings thereon. 
(f)  Portable storage units shall be for storage purposes only. No other activity such as utilizing the unit for work or living space shall be allowed. The portable storage unit shall not contain any signage other than the name, address and telephone number of the owner/operator of the portable storage unit. 
(h)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit the placement of a portable storage unit on a site which he or she owns, rents, occupies, or controls without first obtaining a site permit from the building department. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a portable storage unit to remain at a site in excess of the time periods permitted under this section. Each day that any such portable storage unit remains at the site in violation of the permitted time periods shall constitute a violation against any person who owns, rents, occupies, or otherwise controls the site. 
(3)  Any violation of this section shall be subject to section 1-9 or may be deemed a public nuisance and as such, would be subject to the provisions for removal and abatement of said nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 16-004, § 2, 3-1-16 ) 
Secs. 30-71-30-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NATURAL RESOURCES 

Sec. 30-81. - Fences, walls, poles or stakes within coastal construction control line. 
(a)  Fences, walls, poles or stakes east of the state coastal construction control line shall not be permitted, unless allowed by state law and approved by the Department of Environmental Protection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no fences, walls, poles or stakes shall be permitted in any dune area or beach area that is comprised of sand. This section shall not prevent recreational amenities, such as volleyball nets or beach umbrellas, provided they are not prohibited by any other law or regulation. If such recreational amenities are allowed on the beach, they shall only be allowed during daylight hours and must be removed each day. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to seawalls and other protective structures or barriers, including any stairs or steps needed to gain access to the beach area, that are otherwise regulated by the code nor shall it apply to those items allowed in yard areas, provided the yard area does not include any part of a dune or beach area. 
(c)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to temporary signs erected on stakes when the temporary signs otherwise comply with the sign code. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. V, § 1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 18-010 , § 2, 12-4-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-010 , § 2, adopted December 4, 2018, amended § 30-81 and in so doing changed the title of said section, as set out herein. 
Sec. 30-82. - Dune walkovers. 
    Dune walkover structures shall conform to applicable state requirements, and require site plan review, planning board approval, and a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. V, § 2, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-83. - Bulkheads, seawalls, and groins. 
(a)  Compliance. All bulkheads, seawalls, groins, and similar structures shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Establishment of bulkhead line along the Intracoastal Waterway. The bulkhead line along all shores of the Intracoastal Waterway within the town shall be coincident with the right-of-way lines established for the Intracoastal Waterway, as provided in Plat Book 17, Palm Beach County Records, except in locations where existing walls or bulkheads are located landward of said lines. In the latter case, the existing bulkheads shall be deemed to be the bulkhead line, or the extension thereof, up to but not beyond the right-of-way line of the Intracoastal Waterway in such manner as to produce the greatest advantage to the lands affected. 
(c)  Approval required. Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, groins, breakwaters, and similar structures shall obtain approval as provided in this section. 
(1)  Non-Atlantic Ocean. A bulkhead, seawall, or retaining wall shall not be constructed in any water, canal, or lake, or on land abutting thereon, unless the following approvals, as applicable, have been obtained: 
a.  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
b.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection; 
c.  Palm Beach County; and 
d.  other agencies as may be required. 
(2)  Atlantic Ocean Improvements. A groin, breakwater, or other similar improvement shall not be constructed in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean unless the following approvals, as applicable, have been obtained: 
a.  Town commission; 
b.  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
c.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection; 
d.  Palm Beach County; and 
e.  Other agencies as may be required. 
(d)  Protection of Ocean Ridge. There shall be no removal of any soil, sand, rock, vegetation, or other related elements from any lot east of SR A1A, except as provided below: 
(1)  Town approval. Approval for the removal, as part of a seawall, retaining wall, or similar structure has been granted by the town. 
(2)  Other approvals. Approval for the removal has been obtained, as applicable, from the Department of Environmental Protection, Palm Beach County, and other applicable federal, state, or local agencies. 
(3)  Removal requirements. The removal shall occur only in conjunction with the following: 
a.  A building permit for permanent construction in the coastal area included within the coastal construction control line; and 
b.  A building permit for construction of a reinforced concrete seawall with a finish elevation consistent with applicable state requirements. 
(4)  Construction limits. Construction shall not extend above or easterly of the seawall. 
(5)  Disturbance. If the dune or coastal ridge is disturbed during construction, the final grade between a building and the side property line shall be restored to the natural elevation of adjoining properties. However, the minimum elevation of the final grade shall be not less than eighteen (18) feet above mean sea level. In the event that the adjoining property is lower, some type of retaining construction shall be erected so as to prevent erosion and to keep surface runoff water within the property. 
(e)  Exception. Where alignment of existing seawalls or structures makes it impractical to comply with the provisions of this section, the town commission on advice from the planning board, may authorize an adjustment of the wall to meet existing conditions, However, construction shall be consistent with coastal construction requirements established by the Department of Environmental Protection. 
(f)  Basements. Basements shall be permitted subject to the requirements of this section. 
(g)  Temporary barriers. Before lot clearing can commence, a temporary barrier, such as a fence, shall be erected as required by the Department of Environmental Protection to preserve the integrity of the dune. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. V, § 3, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-84. - Dune protection 
    Boats shall not be dragged over or parked on the vegetation of the dunes east of the state coastal construction control line or such other line as may be established by the Department of Environmental Protection. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. V, § 4, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-85. - Coastal lighting. 
    All lighting of all structures east of SR A1A shall comply with the "sea turtle protection" lighting standards as adopted by the town. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. V, § 5, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-86. - Hurricane, storm, and flood damage. 
    For the purposes of this section, it is assumed that all of the area within the town is subject to either coastal damage due to wave action or flooding, or both. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purposes and intent of this section is to: 
(1)  Minimize hazards to life and damage to property in portions of the town exposed to severe wave action during hurricanes or other periods of extraordinary wind-driven high tides; 
(2)  Minimize hazard to life and damage to property to portions of the town exposed to flooding as a result of such occurrences or heavy rainfall; and 
(3)  Qualify for protection under the National Flood Insurance Program of the Federal Insurance Administration, Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(b)  Precedence. The requirements of this section, designed to reduce flood losses, shall take precedence over any conflicting laws, ordinances, or codes adopted by the town. Upon certification by the administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program, or successor program, that any area within the town is not so subject to either of these perils, the requirements herein shall not be applied to such area. In the absence of such certification, the special requirements listed below shall apply: 
(1)  Building permit applications. All building permit applications for new buildings or substantial improvements shall be reviewed by the building department to assure that such buildings or improvements shall conform to the standards listed below: 
a.  The buildings or modifications are designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. 
b.  The buildings or modifications use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage. 
c.  The buildings or modifications use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
(c)  Finish floor elevation west of SR A1A. For all parcels west of SR A1A, minimum usable finished floor elevation shall be the higher of the following: 
(1)  The flood elevation as determined by the United States Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or successor agency; or 
(2)  Eighteen (18) inches above the average elevation of the centerline of the nearest public or private road providing access to the site, as measured from lot line to lot line of the affected site. If a higher minimum elevation is established by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or FEMA, the higher elevation shall be used by the town. 
(d)  Required emergency generators. Required emergency generators or similar power sources of all structures located east and west of A1A shall be constructed at the higher of the following: 
(1)  Not less than five (5) feet above the crown of the road on which the property fronts; or 
(2)  Nine and one-half (91/2) feet above mean sea level, whichever is greater. 
(e)  Additional permits. The building official shall advise affected applicants that additional federal or state permits may be required and, to the extent possible, shall assist with identifying the permits necessary, copies of permit applications, etc. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. V, § 6, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-87. - Subdivision proposals. 
    The planning board, together with appropriate officials of the town and county, shall review proposed subdivision to minimize adverse impacts associated with flooding. 
(a)  Purpose of review. The purpose of the review is to ensure proposed subdivisions are consistent with the standards listed below and with article VI of chapter 20. 
(1)  Minimize flood damage. All proposed subdivisions are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)  Protect utilities. All proposed subdivisions possess public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems that are located, elevated, and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(3)  Evacuation. All proposed subdivisions provide adequate drainage so as to reduce exposure to flood hazard, and adequate access is provided to permit safe evacuation or servicing during emergencies involving high winds and flooding. 
(4)  Potable water and sanitary sewage. All proposed subdivisions provide new or replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems that comply with the following standards: 
a.  The systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwater; 
b.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed so as to avoid impairment during flooding; and 
c.  On-site waste disposal systems are located so as to minimize contamination of area waters during flooding. 
(b)  Compliance. All subdivision of property shall comply with chapter 26 and article VI of chapter 20 of the Town Code. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. V, § 7, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 16-009, § 5, 8-2-16 ) 
Secs. 30-88-30-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 30-101. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to allow legally established nonconformities to continue without an increase in the degree of nonconformity, subject to the provisions contained herein. For the purposes of this article, legally established nonconformities are those nonconformities which were permitted by previous zoning code provisions, but are not permitted by current zoning code requirements. For the purposes of this article, the following types of nonconformities are established. 
(a)  Nonconforming lots. Nonconforming lots are those legally established lots which do not conform to the property development, area, and dimensional regulations contained in this code. 
(b)  Nonconforming structures. Nonconforming structures are those legally established structures or buildings that do not conform to property development, setback, and dimensional regulations established in this code. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses are those legally established uses of land, structures, or land and structures in combination, which do not comply with the requirements of this code. 
(d)  Nonconforming characteristics of use. Nonconforming characteristics of use are operations, practices, or functions associated with a legally established use which do not comply with the requirements of this code. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VI, § 1, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-102. - General provisions. 
(a)  Rights. Nothing in this article shall adversely affect any building or demolition permits existing and in force on the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Governmental action. For the purposes of this article, a nonconformity may not be created as a result of governmental action. Failure to act or delay in action shall not be utilized when determining the period of time during which a nonconforming use has ceased to operate. 
(c)  Assessed value. Assessed value of land or improvements, as may be utilized in this article or chapter, shall be determined by the most recent tax roll prepared by the Palm Beach County Tax Collector. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VI, § 2, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-103. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  Use. In any zoning district, a nonconforming lot of record may be utilized for any use permitted in such zoning district. Any use or structures located on a nonconforming lot of record must comply with all property development regulations, permitted use standards, and all applicable requirements of this code. In order to be utilized a nonconforming lot of record must be in separate ownership, and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. 
(b)  Variances. Any variance from the requirements of this Code as applied to a nonconforming lot of record shall be subject to approval by the town commission as provided in section 30-40. 
(c)  Combinations of lots. Except as provided herein, if two (2) or more lots, or combinations of lots, or portions of lots with continuous frontage under single ownership are lots of record on the effective date of this article, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this code. No portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes the degree of compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this article. 
(d)  Creation of nonconforming lots prohibited. Unless otherwise provided herein, a division of any parcel shall not be made which creates a lot which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Existing nonconforming lots of record. An existing nonconforming lot of record shall not be declared a conforming lot under the provision of this article unless or until such lot meets all minimum requirements set forth herein and as applied in the zoning district in which such lot is located. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VI, § 3, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 18-008 , § 8, 10-2-18) 
Sec. 30-104. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
(a)  Nonconforming uses. On the effective date of this chapter, if lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted, then such nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied. 
(b)  Transfer of a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall not be transferred or moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use on the effective date of adoption of this article. 
(c)  Cessation of a nonconforming use. If a nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for more than six (6) continuous months or for a period of twelve (12) months within any three-year period, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which such land is located. 
(d)  Expansion or enlargement. A nonconforming use shall not be expanded or enlarged. However, the structure containing a nonconforming use may be modernized, upgraded, renovated, refurbished, restored, or updated as a means to continued maintenance and investment by the owner. In addition to normal repair and maintenance as provided herein, a building or structure housing a nonconforming use may be modernized if the value of such improvement does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of existing improvements. Modernization of this magnitude shall occur not more than once every five (5) years. 
(e)  Replacement. Any structure occupied by a nonconforming use that has been destroyed or has deteriorated to the extent of seventy (70) percent or more of the assessed valuation of the structure shall not be replaced, unless the replacement is consistent with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VI, § 4, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-105. - Nonconforming structures. 
(a)  Continuance. If a lawful structure exists on the effective date of this article that could not be built in the zoning district within which it is located by reason of changes or restrictions to minimum lot area, maximum lot coverage, building height, required yards and setbacks, location on the lot or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the provisions listed below: 
(1)  Enlargement or alternation. The nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged or altered in a way which increases or extends its nonconformity, but any structure or portions thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
(2)  Damage or destruction. Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure be destroyed or damaged by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the structure at the time of destruction, or damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Relocation. Should any structure be relocated for any distance whatever, the structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
(c)  Exception. If a residential structure, or approved accessory structures, is destroyed or damaged by a catastrophic event including hurricane or tropical storm, fire, flood, explosion, collapse, wind, war, or other event, the structure may be reconstructed or repaired without regard to the extent of destruction or damage. The reconstruction or repair shall not increase the height of the building, number of dwelling units, or total num- ber of square feet unless the comprehensive plan and the applicable zoning district regulations applicable at such time permit a greater number of dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VI, § 5, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-106. - Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in combination. 
(a)  Existing structures and premises. If, on the effective date of this article, a lawful use exists which involves individual structures, or structures and premises in combination, and such use would not be permitted by the zoning district within which the structures and premises are located, regulations imposed, then the standards listed below shall apply. 
(1)  Alteration prohibited. A structure shall not be enlarged, expanded, extended, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use to one permitted in the zoning district. 
(2)  Extension of nonconforming uses. Any nonconforming use may be extended through parts of a building manifestly arranged or designed for such use on the effective date of this article, but such use shall not be extended to occupy any land outside the affected building or structure. 
(3)  Modernization. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit a nonconforming use from the installation of those improvements, internal relocations, alterations, enhancements, or similar construction which allow such use to modernize or otherwise enhance architectural appearance. Such improvements shall comply with the standards listed below: 
a.  The overall size, impact, or use is not expanded. 
b.  Additional impacts, including traffic, and demand for water and sewer service, will not be created. 
c.  The nonconformity of the structure is not increased. 
d.  Installation of additional landscaping, screening, buffering, parking, etc., occurs to minimize or mitigate the impact of the nonconforming use. 
(b)  Establishment of new use. If a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, is superseded by a permitted use, such use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and a nonconforming use thereafter shall not be initiated or resumed. 
(c)  Abandonment. If a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, excluding single-family dwellings, is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months or for twelve (12) months during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(d)  Removal or elimination. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, and should the structure and premises be destroyed or damaged by any means to an extent of more than seventy (70) percent of the assessed value of the structure at the time of destruction, or damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VI, § 6, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-107. - Nonconforming characteristics of use. 
    Certain characteristics of use, such as signs, off-street parking, landscaping, or other matters pertaining to the use of land, structures or premises, may be made nonconforming by adoption of this article. In this event, a change to such characteristics of use shall not be made which increases nonconformity with the requirements of this code. However, a change may be made which decreases any nonconforming characteristic of use. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VI, § 7, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-108. - Repairs and maintenance. 
(a)  Repair and maintenance. The structure or building within which a nonconforming use is located shall be maintained or repaired subject to the criteria listed below: 
(1)  Expansion prohibited. The repair and maintenance shall not result in an expansion in the size of the nonconforming use. 
(2)  Enlargement prohibited. The repair and maintenance shall not result in an enlargement of the nonconforming use. 
(3)  Value. The value of the repair or maintenance, when calculated for an entire calendar year, shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the assessed value of the improvements. 
(4)  Waiver. The town commission may waive this limitation, based on compliance with the following standards: 
a.  Repair or maintenance will assist in maintenance of property values; 
b.  Repair or maintenance will assist in maintaining values of surrounding properties; 
c.  Repair or maintenance will assist in reducing adverse impacts on adjacent neighbors through the use of buffering, screening, and landscaping; and 
d.  Repair or maintenance will assist in reducing or eliminating any structural, landscaping, signage, and related nonconformities. 
(5)  Repairs not permitted. Repair or maintenance shall not be permitted on any nonconforming structure, structure housing a nonconforming use, or any nonconforming use and structure in combination that has experienced deterioration in excess of seventy (70) percent of the assessed value of the improvements. 
(b)  Structural safety. The provisions of this section shall not prevent repairs, maintenance, or construction that will eliminate any structural or related failures that are deemed unsafe or pose a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare. The repair, maintenance, or construction shall be ordered by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VI, § 8, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-109. - Existing special exceptions. 
    Any use which is permissible as a special exception in a zoning district, but was legally established before the effective date of this chapter, shall be considered a conforming use. The exemption for special exceptions shall not apply to a change from one nonconforming use to another, as permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VI, § 9, 7-25-00) 
Secs. 30-110-30-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 30-121. - Certificates of occupancy or completion. 
(a)  Issuance of certificates of occupancy or completion. Certificates of occupancy or completion shall be issued by the building official. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until a determination of compliance with all requirements of this chapter, the building code, any conditions of development approval applicable to the structure or property, and any other requirements of other governmental agencies. 
(b)  Certificates of occupancy or completion required. Certificates of occupancy or completion shall be issued prior to any use or occupancy of a building, structure. Appeals from the provisions of this section from a decision of the building official will be heard by the board of adjustment and appeals. 
(c)  Exceptions. Certificates of occupancy for sales models or similar uses and structures shall be granted only by the town commission. 
(d)  Temporary certificates of occupancy or completion; prohibited. Temporary certificates of occupancy or completion shall not be issued. All certificates of occupancy or completion to be issued shall be permanent. 
(e)  Records. The building department shall maintain a record of all certificates of occupancy or completion issued by the town. 
(f)  Failure to obtain. Failure to obtain certificate of occupancy or completion shall be a violation of this chapter and enforced as provided in chapter 2 of this Code. 
(g)  Construction and use. Certificates of occupancy or completion issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the building official authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this chapter, and enforceable as provided in chapter 2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VII, § 1, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-122. - Building permits. 
(a)  Building permits required. All construction within the Town of Highland Beach, unless otherwise exempted, shall require a building permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this code. All building permits shall be issued by the building official or designee. 
(b)  Expiration of building permit. Every building permit issued shall expire six (6) months after issuance, unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within that time period. A building permit shall expire if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the time the work is commenced. Not more than two (2) extensions of time, each for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, may be allowed by the building official. 
(c)  Failure to complete. If the work authorized by a building permit has not been substantially completed within two (2) years of the date of issuance, said permit shall expire and immediately be canceled by the building official. Written notice of cancellation via certified mail, shall be provided to the owner of the property. The notice shall state that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed. In order to proceed, a new building permit is necessary, along with any site plan or development review procedures applicable to the site. Additional fees for such new building permits may be waived by the town commission. 
(d)  Construction and use. Building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the building official authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this chapter, and enforceable as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VII, § 2, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 30-123. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. Violations of the code, including violations of any conditional of approval contained in an approved development order, shall be enforced as provided in chapter 2, article V. The building official shall issue a notice of violation to be followed by a citation if the violation is not corrected. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof, be fined the maximum as allowed by state law, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  Other violators. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  Signs and notices. It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided by state law, for any person to destroy, move or remove, deface, or obscure any sign or notice erected or posted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Other remedies preserved. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the town from taking any other lawful action necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(e)  Construction and use. Building permits and certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the building official authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed in violation of this chapter, and enforceable as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VII, § 3, 7-25-00) 
Secs. 30-124-30-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 30-131. - Definitions of terms. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions provided below shall apply. In the event of a conflict between the definitions provided in this section, and a definition provided in another section, then the definition provided in the other section shall prevail. In case of a conflict with the building, life/safety, or similar code, the more stringent definition will apply. 
    Alter means any change in size, shape, occupancy, character or use of a building or structure. 
    Area regulations means the regulation of building size, setbacks or yards, parking and loading requirements, and similar regulations not determining use of property. 
    Boat basin means a harbor created by decreasing the land area of any existing lot and providing covered or uncovered dockage, wet storage, or dry storage. 
    Boat lifts means the bottom of the keel of any boat shall not be hoisted greater than one foot above the minimum seawall elevation. In no case shall the lift be higher than the superstructure of the boat when lifted. 
    Buildable area means portion of a lot remaining after conformance to required setbacks or other similar limitations. 
    Building means any structure, roofed or unroofed, more than thirty (30) inches above the finished grade of the surrounding land. 
    Building height means the vertical distance between the finished floor elevation and the following: 
Flat roof: the highest point of any flat roof associated with a structure; and 
Pitched roof: the midpoint between the bottom of eaves and highest point of the highest roof ridge or peak associated with a structure (see Figure 30-8). 
    Building height exception means functional or decorative architectural features such as parapet walls, chimneys, towers, cupolas, and turrets, and roof or wall-mounted items such as flag poles, and radio and television antennae allowed to exceed the building height limit. 

    Building length means the length of a building or structure measured along a plane through that portion of a building facade which is perpendicular, or approximately perpendicular, to the public right-of-way used as principal public access. Private roads, driveways, and other secondary means of access shall not be considered as principal public access. 
    Building width means the width of a building or structure measured along a plane through that portion of a building facade which is parallel, or approximately parallel, to the public right-of-way used as principal public access. Private roads, driveways, and other secondary means of access shall not be considered as principal public access. 
    Building permit means an official document issued by the town, authorizing the construction of any building, structure, improvement, addition, expansion, alteration, renovation, or similar work. 
    Building permit, expired means a building permit to implement approved building plans, or an approved development order, that has been approved but has not been issued at the request of the applicant, or if issued, has not been completed within the time required by the building code. 
    Bulkhead line means, along all shores of the Intracoastal Waterway (ICW) within the town, the right-of-way lines established for the ICW now of record in Plat Book 17, Palm Beach County Records. 
    Cabana means an accessory single-level structure customarily associated with ocean or freshwater bathing. 
    Canopy means a permanent or retractable projection over a door or window that is attached to the principal structure. 
    Commencement of building means visible, tangible evidence of proceeding with building; i.e., pilings, footers, foundations, etc. 
    Commencement of development means visible, tangible evidence of proceeding with construction, including application for and receipt of a building permit, carrying out building activity, and requesting inspection of improvements constructed pursuant to a building permit. 
    Court means an uncovered open space enclosed on two (2) or more sides by external walls of a building. 
    Development order change, nonadministrative means a change to an approved development order that proposes substantial modification to such order, including conditions of development approval, time limitations, phasing, type of dwelling, number of dwelling units, change in architectural style, change of building elevation, increase in building height, change in building footprint, change of use, and any similar substantive change as determined by the building official. 
    Development order change, administrative means a change to an approved development order that does not propose a substantial modification. 
    Dock, residential means an accessory structure, including boat lifts, built on or over water, designed and used to provide a place to moor a boat belonging to the owner or resident of the principal dwelling. 
    Dolphin pilings means that the dolphin piling shall be marine grade wood pilings with a minimum butt diameter of twelve (12) inches. Concrete pile is prohibited. A maximum of twenty-five (25) feet or thirty (30) percent of the canal width, whichever is less, shall be allowed, measured from the property line. Setback shall be no further than the primary structures side yard setback. The minimum height shall be six (6) feet above mean high water (MHW) and the maximum shall be eight (8) feet above MHW. All pilings shall have a reflective tape no more than two (2) inches below the top of the piling and should be four (4) inches in width of the complete circumference. 
    Double-loaded parking means parking one automobile directly behind another, requiring moving one vehicle before the other can be moved. 
    Dune walkover means an expendable structure built over the ocean dune for access by pedestrians to the beach and ocean. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Dwelling, fourplex means a multifamily residential building containing four (4) attached dwelling units with common interior walls, sharing egress and some common areas or facilities. 
    Dwelling, multifamily means a residential building containing more than one dwelling unit, including such dwelling types as an apartment building, duplex, triplex, fourplex, townhouse apartment, patio apartment, garden apartment, and villa apartment. 
    Dwelling, patio means attached, single-family dwelling units constructed as part of a series or group forming a recognizable multifamily building. Each unit possesses walls or property lines separating it from any other unit, and each having individual means of exterior egress, parking, and other essential facilities. 
    Dwelling, single-family, attached means a building consisting of a single dwelling unit attached at one or more party walls to other single-family dwelling units, excluding mobile homes but including manufactured housing. 
    Dwelling, single-family, detached means a detached building consisting of a single dwelling unit, excluding mobile homes, but including manufactured housing. 
    Dwelling, single-family, detached, zero lot line means a detached single-family dwelling unit with at least a portion of one, but not more than a portion of two (2), exterior walls located directly abutting a side property line. 
    Dwelling, two-family (duplex) means a residential building containing two (2) dwelling units which share a common interior wall or walls. 
    Dwelling, townhouse means a dwelling consisting of two (2) or more units that are sharing a continuous foundation; located on an individual lot sharing at least one, but not more than two (2), party walls; connected along the party wall or walls for at least fifty (50) percent of the length of such walls; and sharing not more than two (2) common party walls with adjacent units. 
    Dwelling, triplex means a multifamily residential building containing three (3) attached dwelling units with common interior walls, sharing vehicular egress and other common areas or facilities. 
    Dwelling, villa apartment. See Dwelling, Patio. 
    Essential services means public utility services authorized and regulated by town, county, state, or federal governments, including electricity, potable water, sanitary sewer, telephone, cable television, garbage and refuse disposal, and natural gas. 
    Essential services, minor means minor structures, uses, and installations necessary to provide natural gas, water, electricity, television, sewerage, telephone, and similar public services. 
    Essential services, structures means permanent structures other than a minor nature, such as electrical substations, lift stations, and similar facilities, which are necessary to provide natural gas, water, electricity, television, sewerage, telephone, and similar public services to the town. 
    Expendable structure means an accessory structure, such as a dune walkover, allowed by the town and state to be constructed within the coastal construction control line established by the State of Florida. 
    Gazebo means an open-styled, single-level accessory structure having floor and roof, but no full walls, which may or may not be provided with electrical service. 
    Government offices and uses mean public-serving buildings and uses, including, but not limited to, town halls, police stations, fire stations, recreation facilities, post offices, utility systems, including any use commonly required to carry out public service or provide facilities for the activities of government. 
    Guard house means a single level, permanent structure for used solely for residential security purposes, including sanitation facilities, electricity, and heating and air conditioning. 
    Habitable space means enclosed air conditioned or non-air conditioned areas utilized for residential purposes, including cooking, sleeping, bathing, and similar daily activities. 
    Home occupation means a professional, occupational, trade, or business use performed in a residential dwelling by a resident or family member. 
    House of worship means a structure or site used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious purposes, owned or operated by a tax exempt religious group possessing a 501(c)(3) tax status granted by the Internal Revenue Service. 
    Improvement means any structural addition, alteration, expansion, or other construction affecting a parcel or existing structure which requires issuance of a building permit. 
    Land means the earth, water, and air above, below or on the surface, and includes marsh, wetland, or swamp. 
    Lot means a plot, parcel, or tract located within a closed boundary and not further divided by one or more interior property lines. 
    Lot area means the total square feet contained within a lot or parcel. 
    Lot, conforming means a plot, parcel, or tract can be identified as a unit of ownership of land of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, width, depth, lot coverage, and total area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are required, and including frontage on an improved public or private street right-of-way. 
    Lot, corner means a lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. 
    Lot depth means the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rear most points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
    Lot, nonconforming means a lot which does not conform to the area, width, or other applicable dimensional requirements of this chapter. 
    Lot frontage means that portion or portions of a lot nearest the street. 
    Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Palm Beach County, Florida. 
    Lot, through means a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street, and sometimes referred to as a double frontage lot. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured a point midway between the front and rear property lines. 
    Medical marijuana means all parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin, including low-THC cannabis, which are dispensed from a medical marijuana treatment center for medical use by a qualified patient. 
    Medical marijuana treatment center means an entity that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to qualifying patients or their caregivers and is registered by the state department of health. 
    Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facility means a facility that is owned or operated by, or affiliated with, a medical marijuana treatment center holding all necessary licenses and permits from which medical marijuana is delivered, purchased, possessed, or dispensed for medical purposes. 
    Open space means land or area not covered by buildings or parking lot or any use other than recreational equipment, and generally maintained in a natural or cultured living landscape. 
    Person means a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, limited liability company or corporation, or corporation, as well as an individual. 
    Personal watercraft lift (PWL) means that it can be either: 
(1)  A mechanical/electrical device for lifting jet skis, canoes, kayaks or other small watercraft out of the water; or 
(2)  A floating device that allows for the dry-docking of jet skis, canoes, kayaks or other small watercraft with no electrical hook up. 
    Recreation facility, public means a facility, structure, or site owned and operated by a public agency and providing opportunities for active or passive recreation activities to the general public 
    Recreational equipment means and includes, but is not limited to, boats and boat trailers, personal watercraft, sailboats, houseboats, travel trailers, camper tops for pickup trucks, motor homes, motorized dwellings, and tent trailers, and cases or boxes used for transporting or storing such recreational equipment. 
    Setback means the horizontal distance between the front property line to the closest point of the front structure, the side property line to the closest point of the side structure, or the rear property line to the closest point of the rear structure, respectively. "Setback" shall be measured perpendicular to and parallel with the property or right-of-way lines. 

    Site plan review, major modifications means one or more major modifications or alterations to an existing structure, including changes to a building footprint, building height, number of dwelling units, decrease in the number of parking places, change in facade, building height, increase in number of dwelling units, change of use, change of roof line, change of building elevation, and any similar substantial change in improvements as determined by the building official. 
    Site plan review, minor modifications means interior building alterations or building modifications, alterations, or improvements that are not considered major modifications. 
    Special exception means a use that usually would not be appropriate throughout a zoning district but which, if controlled as to such impacts as number, land area, location, number of square feet, operating hours, or proximity to adjacent residential and nonresidential uses, may not adversely affect the public interest. 
    State Coastal Construction Control Line means that line, including the fifty-foot setback line, as established by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to F.S. ch. 161, affecting coastal construction within the beach, beach and dune system, and coastal system associated with the Atlantic Ocean. 
    Story means continuous supporting surface extending horizontally and constituting one story, level, or stage in the building construction. 
    Street means public or private right-of-way designed to furnish vehicular or pedestrian access to two (2) or more lots. "Street" shall be synonymous with road or highway. 
    Structure means a building as well as other improvements constructed or erected on the ground, attached to something having location on the ground, or requiring construction or erection on the ground. 
    Structure, accessory means a detached building or other improvement which is clearly incidental to the principal structure, and is subordinate in area, extent, size, or purpose and serves only the principal structure. 
    Structure, nonconforming means a structure existing at the time of enactment chapter which does not conform to the property development regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated. 
    Structure, principal means the primary building or improvements on a site or parcel, and containing the principal use of the site or parcel, and may include attached buildings or structures that are considered as part of the principal structure. 
    Structure, temporary means a removable or nonremovable accessory structure requiring a building permit and having been granted a limited, specified time of use. 
    Substantially complete means a structure has been "sealed to the elements" through completion of foundations, walls roof, and windows and remaining construction is under contract to be completed within six (6) months. 
    Unity of title means a document recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Palm Beach County stipulating that a lot, lots, or parcel of land shall be held under single ownership, shall not be eligible for further subdivision, and shall not be transferred, conveyed, sold, or divided in any unit other than in its entirety. 
    Usable space means an enclosed or unenclosed area, whether or not air conditioned, for such accessory, nonsleeping residential uses as private garage, personal storage, clothes washing/drying, etc., including a bathroom with a sink, toilet, and shower. 
    Use means the purpose for which land, water, structure, or combination thereof, is designed, arranged, or intended to be occupied or utilized or for which purpose it is actually occupied or maintained. 
    Use, accessory means a permitted use that is customarily associated with the principal use or structure, is located on the same lot as the principal use or structure, is clearly incidental to the principal use, and is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to and serves only the principal use. 
    Use, conforming means the use of a building, structure, or land which conforms to the permitted or special exception uses specified the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Use, nonconforming means the use of a building, structure, or land which does not conform with the permitted or special exception uses specified in the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Use, principal means the primary purpose for which land or a structure is used, as may be allowed by the zoning district in which such land or structure is located. 
    Used means used or occupied for a use, and includes the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied. 
    Variance means a reduction of the dimensional requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, a reduction in lot area, lot width, lot depth, lot coverage, building height, and number of parking spaces. 
    Vehicular use area means all areas upon which vehicles traverse or circulate, including parking lots, drive aisles, and vehicular access points. 
    Yard, front means the required yard or setback located closest to a public or private street, and extending across the entire front of the lot. Lots extending through blocks in such a way as to have frontage on two public streets shall provide front yards adjacent to each street. 
    Yard, depth means the depth of required front yards as measured perpendicular to a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The foremost points of side lot lines, in the case of rounded property corners, as at street intersections, or irregular corners shall be assumed to be the points at which lines would have met without rounding or irregularity. 
    Yard, rear means a required yard or setback extending between side lot lines at the rear of the lot. 
    Yard, side means a required yard or setback extending along an interior side lot line and located between the required front and rear yards or setbacks. 
    Yard, side corner means a required yard or setback extending along the street side of a lot between the required front and rear yards or setbacks and, for the purposes of this Code, all yards adjacent to streets shall be considered front yards, except Block 1, lot 19; Block A 2, lot 1, Bel Lido Subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 684, Art. VIII, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 10-002, Exh. A, 6-1-10; Ord. No. 17-002 , § 3, 9-5-17) 
Chapter 31 - STORMWATER/NATIONAL POLLUTION ELIMINATION SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 628, adopted May 4, 1993, amended the Code by the addition of Ch. 31, and at the discretion of the editor, section numbering of these provisions has been adjusted to conform with the Code format. 
Cross reference- Planning and development, Ch. 20; floodplains, § 20-301 et seq.; sewers, Ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES 

Sec. 31-1. - General prohibitions. 
    Except as set forth under section 31-3 of this chapter or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1.1, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 31-2. - Specific prohibitions. 
    Any discharge to the stormwater system containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste materials, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, orders or permits, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1.2, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 31-3. - Authorized exceptions. 
    Unless the town manager or the manager's designee determines that it is not properly managed or otherwise is not acceptable, the following discharges are exempt from the general prohibition set forth under section 31-1 of this chapter: flows from fire fighting, water line flushing and other contributions from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, direct infiltration to the stormwater system, uncontaminated pump groundwater, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washings, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and dechlorinated swimming pool contributions. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1.3, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 31-4. - Illicit connections. 
    No person may maintain, use or establish any direct or indirect connection to the stormwater system that results in any discharge in violation of this chapter. This prohibition is retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under laws or practices applicable or prevailing at the time the connection was made. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1.4, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 31-5. - Administrative order. 
    The town manager may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge, or any connection to the stormwater system, determined by the town manager to be in violation of any provision of this chapter, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1.5, 5-4-93) 
Secs. 31-6-31-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPILLS AND DUMPING 

Sec. 31-21. - General prohibitions. 
    Except as set forth under section 31-23 of this chapter or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 2.1, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 31-22. - Specific prohibitions. 
    Any discharge to the stormwater system containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste materials, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, orders or permits, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 2.2, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 31-23. - Notification of spills. 
    As soon as any person has knowledge of any discharge to the stormwater system in violation of this chapter, such person shall immediately notify the town manager by telephoning (407) 278-4548, and if such person is directly or indirectly responsible for such discharge, then such person shall also take immediate action to ensure the containment and cleanup of such discharge and shall confirm such telephone notification in writing to the town manager at 3614 South Ocean Boulevard, Highland Beach, FL 33487, within three (3) calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 2.3, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 31-24. - Administrative order. 
    The town manager may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge, or connection to the stormwater system, determined by the town manager to be in violation of any provision of this chapter, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 2.4, 5-4-93) 
Secs. 31-25-31-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 31-31. - Civil penalties. 
    Any violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any regulation or order issued hereunder, shall be subject to a civil penalty up to a maximum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 3.1, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 31-32. - Criminal penalties. 
    Any intentional or willful violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any regulation or order issued hereunder, shall be subject to a criminal penalty up to a maximum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per day, or imprisonment of up to one year, or both, for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 3.2, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 31-33. - Injunctive relief. 
    Any violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any regulation or order issued hereunder, shall be subject to injunctive relief if necessary to protect the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 3.3, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 31-34. - Continuing violation. 
    A person shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation for each and every day during any continuing violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 3.4, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 31-35. - Enforcement actions. 
    The town manager may take all actions necessary, including the issuance of notices of violation and the filing of court actions, to require and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 3.5, 5-4-93) 
Chapter 32 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 32-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Highland Beach Telecommunications Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(1), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-2. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent of the Town of Highland Beach to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the use of the public rights-of-way within the town, to adopt and administer reasonable regulations consistent with state and federal law, including sections 337.401, 362.01, and 337.29(3) Florida Statutes, and the town's home-rule authority in accordance with the provisions of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, to provide for the payment of compensation and other consideration by a telecommunications service provider to the town for the cost of regulating and maintaining the public rights-of-way and for the privilege of using the public rights-of-way within the town for constructing and maintaining telecommunications facilities, and to establish the reasonable regulations concerning the use of the public rights-of-way by all telecommunications service providers after the effective date of this chapter. In regulating its public rights-of-way, the town shall be governed by and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(2), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined herein or in any permit that might be granted hereunder shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq., as amended (collectively the "Communications Act"), and, if not defined therein, as defined by Florida Statute; and, if not defined therein, be construed to mean the common and ordinary meaning. 
    Gross receipts shall mean all cash, credits or property of any kind or nature, with deductions for bad debt expense, reported as revenue items to the registrant's audited income statements arising from, or attributable to recurring local service revenues of registrant within the town. The town reserves the right to amend the definition contained herein as permitted by applicable Law. The definition herein shall not be applicable as of October 1, 2001. 
    Law means any local, state or federal legislative, judicial or administrative order, certificate, decision, statute, constitution, ordinance, resolution, regulation, rule, tariff, guideline or other requirements, as amended, now in effect or subsequently enacted or issued including, but not limited to, the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq. as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub L. No. 104-104 § 101(a), 110 Stat. 70, and all orders, rules, tariffs, guidelines and regulations issued by the Federal Communications Commission or the governing state authority pursuant thereto. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture, estate, trust, syndicate, fiduciary, organization or legal entity of any kind, and any lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof, and all other groups or combinations and shall include the town to the extent the town obtains or holds a certificate under Chapter 364, Florida Statutes. 
    PSC means the Florida Public Service Commission. 
    Public rights-of-way means the surface, the airspace above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, alley, viaduct, elevated roadway, bridge, public easement, or any other public way for which the town is the authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to such property pursuant to applicable law. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal town property except as described above and shall not include town buildings, fixtures, or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
    Recurring local service revenues means revenues from the monthly recurring charges for local service, including but not limited to (1) recurring basic area revenues derived from the provision of flat-rated basic area services; (2) recurring optional extended area revenues derived from the provision of optional extended area services; (3) local private line revenues derived from local services which provide communication between specific locations, either through dedicated circuits, private switching arrangements, predefined transmission paths, whether virtual or physical, or any other method of providing such services; (4) revenues from the sale of local services for resale; and (5) other local service revenues from the provision of secondary features that are integrated with the telecommunications network, including, without limitation, services such as call forwarding, call waiting, and touchtone line service. Except as provided herein, revenues from all recurring local services provided by a registrant over a telecommunications facility or system in the public rights-of-way shall constitute recurring local service revenues subject to this chapter. "Recurring local service revenues" do not include revenues from (1) toll charges for the transmission of voice, data, video, or other information; (2) access charges paid by carriers for origination and/or termination of toll telephone service as defined in section 203.012(7), Florida Statutes, or other charges required by the Federal Communications Commission which are directly passed through to end users; (3) interstate service; (4) ancillary services such as directory advertising, directory assistance, detailed billing services, inside wire maintenance plans, bad check charges, and nonrecurring charges for installation, move, changes or termination services; (5) cellular mobile telephone or telecommunications services; or specialized mobile telephone or telecommunications service; or specialized mobile radio, or pagers or paging service, or related ancillary services; (6) public telephone charges collected on site; (7) teletypewriter or computer exchange services as defined in section 203.012(6), Florida Statutes; or (8) local message rated (message, unit or time basis) and minutes of use charges in excess of the minimum flat-rated charges for similar services. This definition shall not be applicable as of October 1, 2001. 
    Registrant or facility owner shall mean a telecommunications company or other person which seeks to use or occupy the public rights-of-way that has registered with the town in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Registration and Register shall mean the process described in section 32-4 whereby a telecommunications service provider provides certain information to the town. 
    Telecommunications facilities, facilities or systems means any facility, equipment or property, including, but not limited to, cables, conduits, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, handholes, manholes, vaults, equipment, drains, surface location markers, appurtenances, located, to be located, used, or intended to be used, in the public rights-of-way of the town to transmit, convey, route, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services. As of October 1, 2001, the term "communications" shall be substituted for "telecommunications." 
    Telecommunications company has the meaning set forth in section 364.02(12), Florida Statutes, as amended. The term "telecommunications company" does not include an open video system, a cable service provider or a wireless service provider. 
    Telecommunications service shall include, without limitation, the transmission, conveyance or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, by and through electronic, radio, satellite, cable optical, microwave, or other medium or method now in existence or hereafter devised, regardless of the protocol used for such transmission or conveyance. "Telecommunications service", as contemplated herein, does not include the provision of service via an open video system, via a cable service provider or via a wireless service provider which shall require separate authorizations from the town. As of October 1, 2001, the term "communications" shall be substituted for "telecommunications." 
    Telecommunications service provider shall refer to any person making available or providing telecommunications services, as defined herein, through the use of a telecommunications facility in the public rights-of-way. As of October 1, 2001, the term "communications" shall be substituted for "telecommunications." 
    Town means the Town of Highland Beach, an incorporated municipality of the State of Florida, in its present form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, or enlarged form. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(3), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-4. - Registration. 
(a)  Each telecommunications service provider that desires to place, erect, construct, install, locate, maintain, repair, extend, expand, remove, or relocate any telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public right-of-way in the town shall be considered to be using or occupying the rights-of-way and shall be required to register with the town in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  Any telecommunications provider desiring to use the public right-of-way shall file a registration with the town which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Identity of the applicant and name, address and telephone number of applicant's primary contact person in connection with the registration. 
(2)  A statement of whether the applicant presently provides telecommunications services to a customer at retail within the jurisdictional limits of the town at the time of registration or whether the applicant simply intends to lease its facilities to other providers of telecommunication services who will themselves be providing direct service at retail to customers within the jurisdictional limits of the town. This information will allow the town to follow up, with the registrant, at the time the registrant begins to make physical use of the public rights-of-way, and allow the town to determine whether a linear mile charge is applicable in accordance with section 32-5(b) of this chapter. 
(3)  Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this chapter and acknowledgment that registrant has received and reviewed a copy of this chapter. 
(4)  A copy of federal and/or state certification authorizing the applicant to provide telecommunications services. 
(c)  The town will review the information submitted by the applicant. Such review will be by the town manager or his or her designee. If the applicant submits information in accordance with subsection (b) above, the registration shall be effective and the town shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of registration in writing. If the town determines that the information has not been submitted in accordance with subsection (b) above, the town shall notify the applicant of the noneffectiveness of registration, and reasons for the noneffectiveness, in writing. The town shall so reply to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of registration information from the applicant. A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the town noticing that it will no longer maintain facilities in the public rights-of-way and will no longer need to pull permits to perform work in public right-of-way. Within thirty (30) days of any change in the information required to be submitted pursuant to this section 32-4, registrant shall provide updated information to the town. 
(d)  A registration shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the public right-of-way. Registrants may only occupy public rights-of-way for telecommunications facilities. Registration does not excuse a telecommunications provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment before locating its facilities on another person's facilities. Registration does not excuse a provider from complying with all applicable town ordinances, including this chapter. 
(e)  Each application for registration or transfer shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of eight hundred dollars ($800.00). The fee amount shall be equal to the town's costs and expenses incurred in connection with approving the registration, transfer or renewal. If the application fee is insufficient to cover all costs or expenses incurred by the town in connection with approval of the registration or transfer the applicant shall reimburse the town for any such costs and expenses in excess of the application fee. Fee amounts may be amended from time to time, by resolution of the town commission, for the purpose of complying with this provision. 
(f)  Registration with the town shall be nonexclusive. Registration does not establish any priority for the use of the public right-of-way by a registrant or any other registrants. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this chapter and further subject to any additional town ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted during the term of the registration. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(4), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-5. - Fees and payments. 
(a)  In consideration for the rights, privileges and permission granted hereunder, a registrant hereunder shall pay to the town annually a sum equal to one percent of gross receipts of the registrant on recurring local service revenues for services provided within the corporate limits of the town. Included within such one percent maximum fee or consideration are all taxes, licenses, fees, in-kind contributions accepted pursuant to Florida Statute, section 337.401(5), and other impositions except ad valorem taxes and amounts for assessments for special benefits, such as sidewalks, street pavings, and similar improvements, and occupational license taxes levied or imposed by the town upon a registrant. In the event that applicable law currently permits or is amended to permit the town to collect a fee higher than one percent, or permits the town to calculate the fee on revenues not specified herein, the registrant shall pay following written notice from the town, its fee payments to the town to that higher amount on the effective date of such law. In the event applicable law is amended to require the town to collect a fee lower than the current statutory limit, the town shall take all necessary steps to conform the requirements hereof to applicable law. All of the aforestated payments shall be made to the town quarterly, with such payments made within twenty (20) days following the end of each calendar quarter. Payments received after the due date stated herein shall be subject to interest in accordance with the interest rate identified in section 55.03, Florida Statutes, or its successors. 
(b)  A registrant, that makes physical use of the public rights-of-way and who is not providing telecommunications services as defined in section 203.012(3), Florida Statutes, or, as of October 1, 2001, a registrant that makes physical use of the public rights-of-way and who is not providing communications services to a customer at retail within the jurisdictional limits of the town at the time the registrant begins to make physical use of the public right-of-way, shall pay to the town annually no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per linear mile of any cable, fiber optic, or other pathway that makes physical use of the public rights-of-way. The town may adopt additional fees or other consideration, provided that any fee or other consideration imposed by the town in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per linear mile shall be applied in a nondiscriminatory manner and shall not exceed the sum of: 
(1)  Costs directly related to the inconvenience or impairment solely caused by the disturbance of the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  The reasonable cost of the regulatory activity of the town; and 
(3)  The proportionate share of cost of land for such street, alley or other public way attributable to utilization of the public rights-of-way by a telecommunications service provider. 
    The fee or other consideration imposed pursuant to this subsection shall not apply in any manner to any telecommunications company which provides telecommunications services as defined in section 203.012(3), Florida Statutes, for any services provided by such telecommunications company. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the town shall at all times hereby require the maximum compensation allowed under applicable law. 
(d)  Except to the extent prohibited by applicable law: (1) the fee payments to be made pursuant to this section shall not be deemed to be in the nature of a tax; (2) such fee payments shall be in addition to any and all taxes of a general applicability; (3) a registrant shall not have or make any claim for any deduction or other credit of all or any part of the amount of said fee payments from or against any of said town taxes or other fees or charges of general applicability which registrant is required to pay to the town, except as required by law; and (4) the fee specified herein is the consideration for use of the public rights-of-way, including all public easements, for the purpose of installing and maintaining a telecommunications facility. 
(e)  The payments required under subsection (a) shall not apply as of October 1, 2001. Additionally, after October 1, 2001, subsection (b) shall continue to apply to any person or entity that does not directly serve a communications services customer at retail within the jurisdictional limits of the town at the time the person or entity makes physical use of the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(1), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-6. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The town may, at its option, upon sixty (60) days notice to the registrant, but in no event more often than once per year, examine the records and accounting files, and such other books and records, if such records relate to the calculation of fee payments. The examination of such books, accounts, records or other materials necessary for determination of compliance with the terms, provisions, and requirements of this chapter shall be during regular hours of business of the registrant at an office of the registrant located within the county, or at another location satisfactory to the town. In the event that the town, pursuant to an audit, determines that there exists a discrepancy in the amount paid and the amount owed to the town by the registrant in excess of two (2) percent, registrant shall pay all reasonable costs, fees and expenses of the audit. This paragraph shall not apply for periods after October 1, 2001. 
(b)  Upon reasonable request, a registrant shall provide the following documents to the town as received or filed: 
(1)  Any pleadings, petitions, notices, and documents, regarding any legal proceeding involving any provisions of this chapter which are reasonably necessary for the town to protect its interests under this chapter. 
(2)  Any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall affect the remedies the registrant has available under applicable law. 
(c)  In addition, the town may, at its option, and upon reasonable notice to the registrant, inspect the facilities in the public rights-of-way to ensure the safety of its residents. 
(d)  The town shall keep any documentation, books and records of the registrant confidential to the extent required under Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(6), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-7. - Underground installation; relocation. 
(a)  A registrant shall install its facilities underground, to the extent that this obligation is not expressly prohibited by applicable federal law, state law or PSC rules and regulations. 
(b)  Every registrant which places or constructs telecommunications facilities underground shall maintain appropriate participation in the regional notification center for subsurface installations. 
(c)  Any telecommunications facilities heretofore or hereafter placed upon, under, over, or along any public rights-of-way that is found by the town to be unreasonably interfering in any way with the convenient, safe or continuous use or the maintenance, improvement, extension or expansion of such public rights-of-way shall, upon written notice to the registrant or its agent, be removed or relocated, within thirty (30) days of such notice, by such registrant at its own expense in accordance section 337.403, Florida Statutes. The town manager may extend the time within which a registrant shall remove or relocate a telecommunications facility, for good cause shown. 
(d)  The registrant shall not in any way displace, damage, or destroy any facilities, including, but not limited to, gas, sewer, water main, pipe cable, conduit, fiber optic, or other pathway or any other facilities belonging to the town. The registrant shall be liable to the town for the costs of any repairs made necessary by any such displacement, damage or destruction, of facilities belonging to the town, and the registrant shall pay such costs upon demand. In the case of an emergency, the town may commence repairs without any prior notice to the registrant. The term "emergency" shall mean a condition that may affect the public's health, safety or welfare. In the event of an emergency the town may cause the repairs to be made at the facility's owner expense, utilizing town employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, and require reimbursement within thirty (30) days after the submission of the bill by the town to the registrant. In all other nonemergency circumstances, the registrant shall be given prior written notice. If such repairs are not performed in a reasonable and satisfactory manner within the thirty (30) calendar days after receiving notice, the town may, cause the repairs to be made at the facility's owner expense, utilizing town employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, and require reimbursement within thirty (30) days after the submission of the bill by the town to the registrant. 
(e)  Subject to section 337.403, Florida Statutes, whenever an order of the town requires such removal or change in the location of any telecommunications facility from the public rights-of-way, and the facility owner fails to remove or change the same at its own expense to conform to the directive within the time stated in the notice, the town may proceed to cause the telecommunications facility to be removed. The expense thereby incurred except as provided in section 337.403(1)(a)-(c), shall be paid out of any money available therefor, and such expense shall be charged against the owner of the telecommunications facility and levied, collected and paid to the town. 
(f)  Subject to section 337.404, Florida Statutes, whenever it shall be necessary for the town to remove or relocate any telecommunications facility, the owner of the telecommunications facility, or the owner's chief agent, shall be given written notice of such removal or relocation and requiring the payment of the costs thereof, and shall be given reasonable time, which shall not be less than twenty (20) nor more than thirty (30) days in which to file an appeal with the town commission to contest the reasonableness of the order. Upon receipt of a written appeal, the town commission shall place the matter on the commission's agenda for consideration within forty-five (45) working days. Should the owner or the owner's representative not appear the determination of the cost to the owner shall be final, in accordance with section 337.404, Florida Statutes. 
(g)  A final order of the town imposed pursuant to Florida Statutes, and applicable provisions of the Town Code, if any, shall constitute a lien on any property of the owner and may be enforced as provided therein. 
(h)  The town retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the public rights-of-way of the town, as the town manager in his/her reasonable discretion may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the town shall attempt to notify the owner of the facility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the owner of the facility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
(i)  Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of the town, the owner of the facility shall notify the town within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice, the town may direct the facility owner to remove all or any portion of the facility if the town determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the town does not direct the removal of the abandoned facility by the owner of the facility, and the facility owner chooses not to remove its facilities, then such owner, by its notice of abandonment to the town, shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(7), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-8. - Use of rights-of-way. 
(a)  A facility owner agrees at all times to comply with and abide by all applicable provisions of the state statutes and local laws including, but not limited to, applicable zoning regulations not inconsistent with state and federal laws. 
(b)  Except in the case of an emergency, no telecommunications service provider shall construct any facility under or within any public right-of-way which disrupts the public rights-of-way without first filing an application with and obtaining a permit from the town therefor, pursuant to applicable permitting requirements of the town, and other applicable town code requirements, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The term emergency shall mean a condition that affects the public's health, safety or welfare, which includes unplanned out of service condition of a pre-existing service. The registrant shall still be required to provide prior notice to the town in the event of an emergency. For the purposes of the notice requirements herein, the town shall provide the registrant with a town contact. Unless otherwise required by the Town Code, the town may waive the permit requirement in cases where there will be no disruption of the public rights-of-way. When work is performed on an emergency basis, the registrant must still apply for a permit by the following business day in accordance with the town's permitting guidelines. In all instances, the registrant shall restore all damaged property and indemnify the town from any and all damages caused by the registrant's emergency work. 
(c)  As part of any permit application, with respect to new or existing facilities, where applicable, in the public rights-of-way, the registrant shall provide a proposal for construction of the telecommunications facility that sets forth at least the following: 
(1)  An engineering plan signed and sealed by a Florida Registered Professional Engineer or prepared by a person who is exempt from such registration requirements as provided in section 471.003, Florida Statutes, identifying the location of the proposed facility, including a description of the facilities to be installed, where it is to be located, and the approximate size of facilities and equipment that will be located in, on, over, or above the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  A description of the manner in which the facility will be installed (i.e. anticipated construction methods and/or techniques). 
(3)  The time required to place the facility. 
(4)  A maintenance of traffic plan for any disruption of the public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed facility, if available (such information shall be provided without certification as to correctness, to the extent obtained from other users of the public rights-of-way). 
(6)  If appropriate, given the facility proposed, an estimate of the cost of restoration to the public rights-of-way. 
(7)  And, such plan shall include the timetable for construction for each phase of the project, and the areas of the town which will be affected. 
(8)  The town may request such additional information as it finds reasonably necessary to review an application for a permit to perform work in the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  The town shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the public rights-of-way, if there is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests to occupy or use the rights-of-way, for the protection of existing facilities in the public rights-of-way, or for town plans for public improvements which have been determined by the town to be in the public interest. Nothing in this chapter shall affect the town's authority to add, vacate, or abandon public rights-of-way, and the town makes no warranties or representations regarding the availability of any added, vacated or abandoned public rights-of-way for communications facilities. 
(e)  All facilities shall be installed, located and maintained so as not to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the public and to cause unreasonable interference with the rights and convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the public rights-of-way. The registrant shall be liable for costs and expenses for the displacement, damage or destruction of any irrigation system or landscaping within the public rights-of-way, to the extent not covered by the construction bond. The registrant shall make such repairs upon request of the affected property owner. In the event the registrant fails to make the appropriate repairs, to restore such property to as good a condition as existed prior to commencement of work, the affected property owner may file a complaint with the town manager or a designee. In this instance, the registrant shall be given prior written notice of the necessary repairs by the town manager or the designee. If such repairs are not performed in a reasonable and satisfactory manner within the thirty (30) calendar days after receiving notice, the town may cause the repairs to be made at the facility's owner expense, utilizing town employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, and require reimbursement within thirty (30) days after the submission of the bill by the town to the registrant. After thirty (30) days, the town may obtain reimbursement from the security fund. The "prior written notice" described in this paragraph shall be considered a final written decision for purposes of the appellate rights outlined in subsection (p) of this section. 
(f)  The use of trenchless technology (i.e., directional bore method) for the installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way as well as joint trenching and/or the co-location of facilities in existing conduit is strongly encouraged, and should be employed wherever possible. 
(g)  The town manager may issue such additional rules and regulations concerning the placement or maintenance of a telecommunications facility in the public rights-of-way, as may be consistent with applicable law and not inconsistent with this chapter. 
(h)  All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry practices and standards shall be used during construction, maintenance, and repair of the telecommunications facilities. 
(i)  In the event that at any time during the term of the rights granted herein the town shall lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade of, any public rights-of-way, upon reasonable notice by the town, the registrant shall make any necessary removals, relaying and relocations of its telecommunications facilities at its own expense, in accordance with applicable law. The town reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage, communications or other types of facilities, cables or conduits, and to do, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the town in the public rights-of-way occupied by the registrant. 
(j)  A facility owner shall obtain any and all required permits and pay any and all required fees before commencing any construction on or otherwise disturbing any public rights-of-way as a result of its construction, except as provided herein. The facility owner shall, at its own expense, restore such property to as good a condition as existed prior to commencement of work. A registrant shall guarantee its restoration for a period of twelve (12) months after the completion of such restoration. If such restoration is not performed in a reasonable and satisfactory manner within thirty (30) calendar days after the completion of construction, the town may, after prior written notice to registrant, cause the repairs to be made at the facility's owner expense, utilizing town employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, and require reimbursement within thirty (30) days after the submission of the bill by the town to the registrant. A permit from the town constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities on public rights-of-way in accordance with this chapter, and does not create a property right or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way. 
(k)  All ongoing installation, construction and maintenance of a telecommunications facility located in the public rights-of-way shall be subject to the town's periodic inspection for compliance with this chapter, or any applicable provisions of the Town Code. 
(l)  The town makes no warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability or availability of the town's public rights-of-way for the registrant's communications facilities and any performance of work, costs incurred or services provided by registrant shall be at registrant's sole risk. 
(m)  A facility owner shall cooperate with the town by providing timely and complete information requested under this subparagraph. Upon completion of any installation or construction of new facilities in public right-of-way, at no cost to the town, the facility owner shall provide such information, as may be requested, showing the exact location of its facilities and structures, including but not limited to, as-built plans, maps, geographical information systems, plats, construction documents, drawings and any other information the town may find reasonably necessary. Such plans shall be provided in digitized format showing the two-dimensional location of the facilities based on the town's geographical database datums, or other format acceptable to the town manager. All information required by this section shall be maintained in accordance with section 202.195, Florida Statutes. 
(n)  Suspension or denial of permits. Subject to subsection (p) below, the town manager or a designee may suspend or deny a permit for work in the public rights-of-way for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of permit conditions, including conditions set forth in this chapter or other applicable provisions of the Town Code or regulations governing use of public rights-of-way; or 
(2)  Misrepresentation or fraud by registrant in a registration or permit application to the town; or 
(3)  Failure to relocate or remove facilities as may be lawfully required by the town; or 
(4)  Failure of registrant, its employees, agents or subcontractors, in connection with the subject permit, to (a) place barricades or signs around the work area, (b) take reasonable safety precautions to alert the public of work at the work site, or (c) repair, replace and restore any sidewalk, street, alley, pavement, water, sewer or other utility line or appurtenance, soil, landscaping, dirt or other improvement, property or structure of any nature. In the event of such failure, the town may perform the work utilizing town employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, and require reimbursement within thirty (30) days after the submission of the bill by the town to registrant. 
(o)  Immediately after the suspension or denial of permit pursuant to this section, the town shall provide written notice of the violation, which notice shall contain a description of the violation. A final written decision(s) of the town manager suspending a permit or denying an application is subject to appeal. Upon correction of any violation that gave rise to a suspension or denial of permit, the suspension or denial shall be lifted. 
(p)  An appeal must be filed with the town within thirty (30) days of the date of the final, written decision(s) to be appealed. Any appeal not timely filed shall be waived. The town commission shall hear the appeal no later than forty-five (45) days from the end of the thirty (30) day appeal period, unless waived by the registrant. 
(q)  In the event registrant desires to use its existing facilities or to construct new facilities for the purpose of providing other utility or non-utility services to existing or potential consumers or resellers, by providing cable services, or any other services other than the provision of telecommunications service, or for providing any other use to existing or potential consumers, a registrant shall seek such additional and separate authorization from town for such activities as may required by applicable law. In the event that a registrant is acting in its proprietary function as a retail provider of telecommunications equipment or appliances, registrant shall seek the appropriate permits and licenses from the town. 
(r)  To the extent that any person or registrant leases or otherwise uses the facilities of an entity that is duly registered or otherwise authorized to place and maintain facilities in the public rights-of-way of the town, the person or registrant shall make no claim, nor assert any right, which will impede the lawful exercise of the town's rights, including requiring the removal of such facilities from the public rights-of-way of the town, regardless of the effect on the persons ability to provide service or on the registrant's ability to maintain its own telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way of the town. Any person or registrant leasing or otherwise using the facilities of a registrant or other entity authorized to place and maintain facilities in the public rights-of-way, may provide the town with notice of its use of such facilities, describing the location of the facilities used and providing the town with an address to which notices from the town should be sent. In the event the town exercises its lawful authority to require the removal or relocation of any such facilities, under this provision, such person or registrant leasing or otherwise using the facilities of a registrant or other entity authorized to place and maintain facilities in the public rights-of-way, shall receive notice from the town of such removal or relocation of such facilities. The failure of the town to provide notice, under this paragraph, shall not render the town's actions under this paragraph invalid. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(8), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-9. - Termination of registration. 
    The involuntary termination of a registration may only be accomplished by an action of the town commission. The town may declare the registration terminated and revoke and cancel all privileges granted under that registration if: 
(a)  A federal or state authority suspends, denies, or revokes a registrant's certification to provide telecommunications service; 
(b)  The registrant is adjudicated bankrupt by a United States District Court or through any legal proceeding of any kind, or that a receiver is appointed to take possession of the assets of the registrant 
(c)  The registrant abandons all of its facilities. 
Prior to such termination by the town resulting from a violation of any of the provisions of this subparagraph, the registrant shall be notified by the town manager with a written notice setting forth all matters pertinent to such violation, and describing the action of the town with respect thereto. The registrant shall have sixty (60) days after receipt of such notice within which to cure the violation, or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the town commission, to accomplish the same. In the event of an emergency, the town may take appropriate action in accordance with subsection 32-7(d) of this chapter. In the event of a vote by the town commission to terminate, the registrant shall, within a reasonable time following such termination, remove or abandon the facilities and take such steps as are necessary to render every portion of the facilities remaining within the public right-of-way of the town safe. If the registrant has either abandoned its facilities or chooses to abandon its facilities, the town may either (1) require the registrant's bonding company to remove some or all of the facilities from the public right-of-way and restore the public right-of-way to its proper condition or (2) the town may require that some or all of the facilities be removed and the public right-of-way restored to its proper condition at the registrant's expense, utilizing town employees, agents or contractors, and charge any and all costs, and require reimbursement. The obligations of the registrant and the bonding company hereunder shall survive, for a period of twenty-four (24) months from, the termination of the registration. In the event of a termination of registration, this provision does not permit the town to cause the removal of any facilities that are used to provide another service for which the registrant holds a valid certification with the governing federal and state telecommunications agencies and is properly registered with the town, for such certificated service, under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(9), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-10. - Compliance with other laws; police power. 
    A facility owner shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws. A facility owner shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercises of the police power of the town, to the extent not inconsistent with applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(10), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-11. - Transfer of control; sale or assignment. 
(a)  If the registrant transfers or assigns its registration incident to a sale or other transfer of the registrant's assets, the transferee or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the terms of this chapter. Written notice of any transfer, sale or assignment shall be provided to the town within twenty (20) days of the effective date of the transfer, sale or assignment. In order for the transfer of registration to be effective, the transferee or assignee must comply with the registration requirements under section 32-4 of this chapter. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter, pledges in trust or mortgages or other hypothecations of the assets of the registrant to secure the construction, operation or repair of its telecommunications facilities may be made to any person without notice to the town. Any mortgage, pledge, lease or other encumbrance of the telecommunications facilities shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the town by virtue of this chapter or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(11), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-12. - Insurance; surety; indemnification. 
(a)  A facility owner shall at all times maintain the following liability insurance coverage insuring the registrant and naming the town, its officers, boards, commission, commission members, agents and employees as an additional insured: worker's compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all requirements of Florida law and commercial general liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation and maintenance of the telecommunications facilities, and the conduct of registrant's business in the town, in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  $250,000.00 for property damage in any one accident; 
(2)  $500,000.00 for personal bodily injury to any one person; and 
(3)  $1,000,000.00 for personal bodily injury in any one accident. 
(b)  All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business in the State of Florida; shall be with sureties with a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition except as provided in subsection (d) below. The town may require coverage and amounts in excess of the above minimums where necessary to reflect changing liability exposure and limits or where required by law. A registrant may provide a portion of the insurance coverage required by subsection (a) above, through excess or umbrella policies of insurance and where such policies are in a form acceptable to the town's risk manager. 
(c)  A registrant shall keep on file with the town certificates of insurance which certificates shall indicate that the town, its officers, boards, commission, commission members, agents and employees are listed as additional insureds. In the event of a potential claim such that the town claims insurance coverage, the facility owner shall immediately respond to all reasonable requests by the town for information with respect to the scope of the insurance coverage. 
(d)  The certificates of insurance shall further provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless thirty (30) days' prior written notice thereof has been given to the town. A registrant shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of proof that the registrant has obtained alternative insurance satisfactory to the town which complies with this chapter. A registrant that elects to self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by this section is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under this section. A registrant that elects to self-insure shall provide to the town evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under this section, such as evidence that the registrant is a "private self insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act. For purposes of this section, "self-insure" shall also include a registrant which insures through a "captive insurer" as defined in section 628.901, Florida Statutes. 
(e)  A registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, release, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the town, its officials, boards, members, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses, sustained by the town, arising out of the construction, maintenance or operation of its telecommunications system or facilities in the public rights-of-way, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter, provided, however, that a facility owner's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the negligence of the town. Town agrees to notify the registrant, in writing, within a reasonable time of the town receiving notice, of any issue it determines may require indemnification. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the town from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and at its own cost if in the town's reasonable belief there exists or may exist a conflict, potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. Nothing contained in this provision shall be construed or interpreted (1) as denying to either party any remedy or defense available to such party under the laws of the State of Florida, and (2) as a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in section 768.28, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(12), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-13. - Construction bond. 
(a)  Except in the case of an emergency, as described in subsection 32-8(b) of this chapter, prior to performing any work in the public rights-of-way, a registrant shall establish in the town's favor a construction bond in an amount specified in an engineering permit or other authorization as necessary to ensure the registrant's faithful performance of the construction in the public rights-of-way, in accordance with applicable sections of the Town Code. The amount of the construction bond shall be as set forth in the engineering permit, and may be modified in the town manager's reasonable discretion, based on the cost of the restoration to take place in the public rights-of-way, and any previous history of the registrant concerning restoration within the public rights-of-way of the town. The town, in its discretion, may request a certified estimate of the cost of restoration by a Florida registered professional civil engineer or certified by a person who is exempt from such requirements as provided in section 471.003, Florida Statutes. 
(b)  In the event a registrant subject to such a construction bond fails to complete the work in a safe, timely and competent manner in accordance with the provisions of the permit, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the town as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the registrant, or the cost of completing the work, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. 
(c)  Twelve (12) months after completion of the construction and satisfaction of all obligations in accordance with the bond, the town shall eliminate the bond. Notwithstanding, the town may require a new bond for any subsequent work performed in the public right-of-way. 
(d)  The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition; shall be subject to the approval of the town attorney; and shall provide that: 
"This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty (60) days after receipt by the Town, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(e)  The rights reserved by the town with respect to any construction bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the town may have under this chapter, or at law or equity. 
(f)  The rights reserved to the town under this section are in addition to all other rights of the town, whether reserved in this chapter, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the construction bond will affect any other right the town may have. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(13), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-14. - Security fund. 
    At the time of registration, the registrant shall file with the town, for town approval, a cash security, a bond, or irrevocable letter of credit, in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), in a form acceptable to the town manager or a designee. For purposes of the bond and irrevocable letter of credit, the registrant must have as a surety a company qualified to do business in the State of Florida. The cash security, bond, or irrevocable letter of credit, shall be to secure the full and faithful performance by the registrant of all requirements, duties and obligations imposed upon registrant by the provisions of this chapter, and to pay any taxes, fees or liens. The bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be furnished annually, or as frequently as necessary, and shall provide a continuing guarantee of the registrant's full and faithful performance at all times. Should the town draw upon the cash security, bond, or irrevocable letter of credit, the town shall promptly notify the registrant, and the registrant shall within thirty (30) calendar days restore the cash security, annual bond, or irrevocable letter of credit, to full required amount. In the event a registrant fails to perform its duties and obligations imposed upon the registrant by the provisions of this chapter, subject to section 32-15, below, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the town as a result, including the full amount of any compensation or indemnification, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the fund. The cash security, bond or letter of credit may be waived by the town where the town determines that the security fund is not necessary to secure the required performance under this chapter. The town may from time to time increase the amount of the security fund to reflect the increased risks to the town and to the public. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(14), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-15. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity or provided in this chapter, the town may apply any one or combination of the following remedies in the event a registrant violates this chapter, or applicable local law or order related to use of the public rights-of-way: 
(1)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or other law applicable to users and/or occupants of the public rights-of-way, may result in imposition of penalties to be paid by the registrant to the town in an amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(2)  A registrant's failure to obtain a permit before commencing work, except in cases of an emergency, may result in imposition of penalties to be paid to the town in an amount of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(3)  In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the town may seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Before imposing a fine pursuant to this section, the town shall give written notice of the violation and its intention to assess such penalties, which notice shall contain a description of the alleged violation. Following receipt of such notice, the registrant shall have thirty (30) days to either (1) cure the violation and the town shall make good faith reasonable efforts to assist in resolving the violation, or (2) file an appeal in accordance with subsection 32-8(p). If the violation is not cured within that thirty-day period, and no appeal is filed, the town may collect all fines owed, beginning with the first day of the violation, either by removing such amount from the security fund or through any other means allowed by law. 
(c)  In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the town shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the town determines are appropriate to the public interest. 
(d)  Failure of the town to enforce any requirements of this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the town's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(e)  In any proceeding before the town commission wherein there exists an issue with respect to a registrant's performance of its obligations pursuant to this chapter, the registrant shall be given the opportunity to provide such information as it may have concerning its compliance with the terms of the ordinance. The town commission may find a registrant that does not demonstrate compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter in default and apply any one or combination of the remedies otherwise authorized by this chapter. 
(f)  The town manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for administration and enforcement of this chapter, and is authorized to give any notice required by law. 
(g)  Nothing in this chapter shall affect the remedies the registrant has available under applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(15), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-16. - Force majeure. 
    In the event a registrant's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter is prevented by a cause or event not within the facility owner's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided, however, that such owner uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this chapter, causes or events not within a facility owners control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within registrant's control, and thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, registrant's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of registrant's directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(16), 7-3-01) 
Sec. 32-17. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  The town reserves the right to amend this chapter as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers. 
(b)  This chapter shall be applicable to all telecommunications facilities permitted to be placed in the public rights-of-way, on or after the effective date of this chapter, and shall apply to all existing telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way prior to the effective date of this chapter, to the full extent permitted by state and federal law. Providers with existing lines and cables have one hundred twenty (120) days from the effective date of this chapter to comply with the terms of this chapter, or be in violation thereof. 
(c)  The town reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action or proceeding involving any provision of this chapter. Registrant agrees to advise town of any such suits. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(17), 7-3-01) 
Chapter 33 - ACQUISITION OF GOODS AND SERVICES 

Sec. 33-1. - Applicability. 
    This chapter applies to the acquisitions of property, goods and services by the town after June 2, 2015 as provided for in this chapter. Any actions taken or contracts entered into contrary to the provisions of this chapter may, in the town's sole discretion, be declared null and void. The town has also adopted a purchasing policy whose regulations shall govern where not in conflict with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-007, § 2, 6-2-15) 
Sec. 33-2. - Methods of acquisition. 
(a)  Sealed competitive method. Acquisitions of or contracts for non-real property, goods or services where the expenditure by the town (including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures relating to change orders) is estimated to be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or greater shall be subject to a sealed competitive method, unless the town utilizes one of the methods that is exempt from the sealed competitive method or from obtaining quotes, as provided in subsection 33-2(c). 
(1)  Competitive bids. Sealed competitive bids are utilized where price, responsiveness, and responsibility are the sole determining factors. 
(2)  Requests for proposals, requests for qualifications, requests for letters of interest. Requests for proposals, requests for qualifications, and requests for letters of interest are utilized where price, responsiveness, and responsibility are not the sole determining factors. The town manager may appoint a selection committee to review the submissions received by the town in response to requests for proposals, requests for qualifications, and requests for letters of interest and make a recommendation to the town commission. The selection committee shall terminate upon the award of the contract, or such other time as determined by the town commission. 
(3)  Submissions. It shall be the sole responsibility of the bidder, proposer or responder to have the bid, proposal or response delivered before the specified closing date and time. Bids, proposals or responses received after the closing date and time shall not be considered and shall be returned unopened. The clock in the town clerk's office shall govern. All bids, proposals and responses submitted pursuant to a sealed competitive method shall remain sealed until they are opened publicly on the date and time and location stated in the notice to bidders, proposers or responders, or as may be amended by addendum. 
(4)  Town's reservation of rights. The town may utilize a sealed competitive method for any acquisition that the town deems appropriate regardless of the estimated cost of the acquisition. Until final award of contract, the town reserves the right to waive any informality or irregularity and to reject all bids, proposals and responses, with or without cause. 
(b)  Acquisitions under twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be governed by the town's purchasing policy. 
(c)  Exemptions from purchasing by the sealed competitive method or by obtaining a written quote. 
(1)  Professional services. Except as otherwise provided for in Florida law, contracts for professional services (which include but is not limited to services provided by architects, engineers, surveyors, attorneys, accountants, actuaries, lobbyists and financial advisors) may be made or entered into by the town manager without utilizing a sealed competitive method or obtaining written quotes. Acquisitions of professional services where the expenditure by the town (including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures relating to change orders) is estimated to be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or greater shall be subject to approval by the town commission. 
(2)  Specialty goods and services. Acquisitions of or contracts for specialty goods and services (including but not limited to performing artists, artwork, special events, entertainment, and food and beverage) may be made or entered into by the town manager without utilizing a sealed competitive method or obtaining written quotes. Acquisitions of specialty goods and services, where the expenditure by the town is estimated to be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) or greater, shall be subject to approval by the town commission. 
(3)  Emergency acquisitions. The town manager may acquire or contract for non-real property, goods, or services required in contemplation of, preparation for, or during an emergency without utilizing a sealed competitive method or obtaining written quotes regardless of the amount. Emergency acquisitions of non-real property, goods or services where the expenditure by the town is estimated to be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or greater shall be subject to ratification by the town commission as soon as practicable. 
(4)  Sole source and town standard. 
a.  Sole source. The town may acquire or contract for non-real property, goods or services that are available to the town from only one source without utilizing the sealed competitive method or obtaining written quotes. Sole source acquisitions where the expenditure by the town (including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures relating to change orders) is estimated to be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or greater shall be subject to approval by the town commission. 
b.  Town standard. Where the town has determined that a particular style, brand, make, or model is the only type that meets the town's requirements for performance, consistency, compatibility or other salient characteristics, and such determination has resulted in there being only one source available to the town, the town may acquire or contract for such goods without utilizing a sealed competitive method or obtaining written quotes. Town standard acquisitions where the expenditure by the town (including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures relating to change orders) is estimated to be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or greater shall be subject to approval by the town commission. 
(5)  Utilization of other governmental entities' contracts. 
a.  The town may acquire or contract for non-real property, goods or services without utilizing a sealed competitive method or obtaining written quotes where the desired goods or services are the subject of a contract with the state, its political subdivisions or other local governmental entities in the state, with associations in Florida affiliated with state and/or local governmental entities or departments (such as the Florida Sheriffs' Association and the Florida Fire Chiefs' Association) or with the United States government or national cooperatives, provided that the contract is based strictly on competitive bidding and not on any preference, and provided that the form of the contract is acceptable to the town attorney. Acquisitions utilizing other governmental entities' contracts where the expenditure by the town (including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures relating to change orders) is estimated to be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or greater shall be subject to approval by the town commission. 
b.  Utilization of other government entities' contracts shall only be permitted during the term of the other governmental entity's contract or for one year from the date the other governmental entity awards the bid, whichever is longer. 
c.  If the town desires to utilize another governmental entity's contract, the town shall require the vendor to certify that the price or rate represents the lowest price or rate for the non-real property, goods or services of any contract between the vendor and any other governmental entity within the state. 
(6)  Cooperative acquisitions. The town may acquire or contract for non-real property, goods or services without utilizing a sealed competitive method or obtaining written quotes where the town participates in joint procurement of non-real property, goods or services with other public entities within the state, including, but not limited to acquisitions made pursuant to interlocal agreements entered into with other governmental entities in accordance with F.S. Ch. 163. Cooperative acquisitions where the expenditure by the town (including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures relating to change orders) is estimated to be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or greater shall be subject to approval by the town commission. 
(7)  Utilities. Water, sewer, gas, electrical, and other utility services may be acquired without utilizing a sealed competitive method or obtaining written quotes and without town commission approval. 
(8)  Resale. Food, beverages and merchandise purchased for resale, may be acquired without utilizing a sealed competitive method or obtaining written quotes and without town commission approval. 
(9)  Employee benefits and health services. Employee benefits and health related services may be procured/renewed directly through a negotiating process conducted by town staff and/or an expert in the field, or to maintain continuity of employee-health records, and is not subject to competitive procurement methods. 
(10)  Property, casualty, workers compensation, liability, automobile insurance. Insurances may be procured/renewed directly through a negotiating process conducted by town staff and/or an expert in the field, or to maintain continuity of insurance records, and is not subject to competitive procurement methods. 
(11)  Best interest acquisitions. The town may acquire or contract for non-real property, goods or services without utilizing a sealed competitive method or obtaining written quotes where the town commission declares by at least a four-fifths ( 4/5 ) affirmative vote that the sealed competitive method or obtaining written quotes is not in the best interest of the town. The town commission shall make specific factual findings that support its determination, and such contracts shall be placed on the regular town commission agenda. This provision may not be used when the purchasing or procurement method is prescribed by state law, such as F.S. § 287.055 or 255.20, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 15-007, § 2, 6-2-15) 
Sec. 33-3. - Town commission approval. 
(a)  Acquisitions of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or greater. Acquisitions of or contracts for non-real property, goods or services where the expenditure by the town (including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures relating to change orders) is estimated to be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or greater shall be subject to prior approval by the town commission, except for emergency acquisitions, which are subject to subsequent ratification by the town commission pursuant to subsection 33-2(c)(3). 
(b)  Multiple acquisitions from a vendor exceeding twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in any fiscal year. Acquisitions of or contracts for non-real property, goods or services from the same vendor exceeding the aggregate sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), per project, shall not be permitted from the same vendor during the course of any fiscal year, unless the acquisition is first approved by the town commission. This subsection shall not apply to utility acquisitions. 
(Ord. No. 15-007, § 2, 6-2-15) 
Sec. 33-4. - Cone of silence. 
    Any person participating in a competitive solicitation issued by the town shall comply with section 2-355 of the Palm Beach County Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 15-007, § 2, 6-2-15) 
APPENDIX A - ELECTRIC FRANCHISE[1] 
    AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, FLORIDA GRANTING TO FLORIDA POWER & LIGHT COMPANY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, AN ELECTRIC FRANCHISE, IMPOSING PROVISIONS AND CONDITIONS RELATING THERETO, PROVIDING FOR MONTHLY PAYMENTS TO THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COMMISSION OF THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, FLORIDA: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This appendix contains the text of the town's electric franchise ordinance, as adopted by the town commission as Ord. No. 07-022 on Dec. 4, 2007. Section catchlines have been added by the editor. Section 14 of Ord. No. 07-002 repealed Ord. No. 357, which had been previously codified as App. A. 
Cross reference- Electrical code, § 6-231 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - [Granting of franchise.] 
    There is hereby granted to Florida Power & Light Company, its successors and assigns (hereinafter called the "Grantee"), for the period of 30 years from the effective date hereof, the nonexclusive right, privilege and franchise (hereinafter called "franchise") to construct, operate and maintain in, under, upon, along, over and across the present and future roads, streets, alleys, bridges, easements, rights-of-way and other public places (hereinafter called "public rights-of-way") throughout all of the incorporated areas, as such incorporated areas may be constituted from time to time, of the Town of Highland Beach, Florida, and its successors (hereinafter called the "Grantor"), in accordance with the Grantee's customary practice with respect to construction and maintenance, electric light and power facilities, including, without limitation, conduits, poles, wires, transmission and distribution lines, and all other facilities installed in conjunction with or ancillary to all of the Grantee's operations (hereinafter called "facilities"), for the purpose of supplying electricity and other services to the Grantor and its successors, the inhabitants thereof, and persons beyond the limits thereof. 
Sec. 2. - [Location of facilities; relocation; restoration of right-of-way.] 
    The facilities of the Grantee shall be installed, located or relocated so as to not unreasonably interfere with traffic over the public rights-of-way or with reasonable egress from and ingress to abutting property. To avoid conflicts with traffic, the location or relocation of all facilities shall be made as representatives of the Grantor may prescribe in accordance with the Grantor's reasonable rules and regulations with reference to the placing and maintaining in, under, upon, along, over and across said public rights-of-way; provided, however, that such rules or regulations (a) shall not prohibit the exercise of the Grantee's right to use said public rights-of-way for reasons other than unreasonable interference with motor vehicular traffic, (b) shall not unreasonably interfere with the Grantee's ability to furnish reasonably sufficient, adequate and efficient electric service to all of its customers, and (c) shall not require the relocation of any of the Grantee's facilities installed before or after the effective date hereof in public rights-of-way unless or until widening or otherwise changing the configuration of the paved portion of any public right-of-way used by motor vehicles causes such installed facilities to unreasonably interfere with motor vehicular traffic. Such rules and regulations shall recognize that above-grade facilities of the Grantee installed after the effective date hereof should be installed near the outer boundaries of the public rights-of-way to the extent possible. When any portion of a public right-of-way is excavated by the Grantee in the location or relocation of any of its facilities, the portion of the public right-of-way so excavated shall within a reasonable time be replaced by the Grantee at its expense and in as good condition as it was at the time of such excavation. The Grantor shall not be liable to the Grantee for any cost or expense in connection with any relocation of the Grantee's facilities required under subsection (c) of this Section, except, however, the Grantee shall be entitled to reimbursement of its costs from others and as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 3. - [Indemnity of town.] 
    The Grantor shall in no way be liable or responsible for any accident or damage that may occur in the construction, operation or maintenance by the Grantee of its facilities hereunder, and the acceptance of this ordinance shall be deemed an agreement on the part of the Grantee to indemnify the Grantor and hold it harmless against any and all liability, loss, cost, damage or expense which may accrue to the Grantor by reason of the negligence, default or misconduct of the Grantee in the construction, operation or maintenance of its facilities hereunder. 
Sec. 4. - [Rates, regulation.] 
    All rates and rules and regulations established by the Grantee from time to time shall be subject to such regulation as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 5. - [Payments to town.] 
    As a consideration for this franchise, the Grantee shall pay to the Grantor, commencing 90 days after the effective date hereof, and each month thereafter for the remainder of the term of this franchise, an amount which added to the amount of all licenses, excises, fees, charges and other impositions of any kind whatsoever (except ad valorem property taxes and non-ad valorem tax assessments on property) levied or imposed by the Grantor against the Grantee's property, business or operations and those of its subsidiaries during the Grantee's monthly billing period ending 60 days prior to each such payment will equal 5.9 percent of the Grantee's billed revenues, less actual write-offs, from the sale of electrical energy to residential, commercial and industrial customers (as such customers are defined by FPL's tariff) within the incorporated areas of the Grantor for the monthly billing period ending 60 days prior to each such payment, and in no event shall payment for the rights and privileges granted herein exceed 5.9 percent of such revenues for any monthly billing period of the Grantee. 
    The Grantor understands and agrees that such revenues as described in the preceding paragraph are limited, as in the existing franchise Ordinance No. 357, to the precise revenues described therein, and that such revenues do not include, by way of example and not limitation: 
(a)  Revenues from the sale of electrical energy for Public Street and Highway Lighting (service for lighting public ways and areas); 
(b)  Revenues from Other Sales to Public Authorities (service with eligibility restricted to governmental entities); 
(c)  Revenues from Sales to Railroads and Railways (service supplied for propulsion of electric transit vehicles); 
(d)  Revenues from Sales for Resale (service to other utilities for resale purposes); 
(e)  Franchise fees; 
(f)  Late Payment Charges; 
(g)  Field Collection Charges; 
(h)  Other service charges. 
Sec. 6. - [Service exclusive.] 
    As a further consideration, during the term of this franchise or any extension thereof, the Grantor agrees: (a) not to engage in the distribution and/or sale, in competition with the Grantee, of electric capacity and/or electric energy to any ultimate consumer of electric utility service (herein called a "retail customer") or to any electrical distribution system established solely to serve any retail customer formerly served by the Grantee, (b) not to participate in any proceeding or contractual arrangement, the purpose or terms of which would be to obligate the Grantee to transmit and/or distribute, electric capacity and/or electric energy from any third party(ies) to any other retail customer's facility(ies), and (c) not to seek to have the Grantee transmit and/or distribute electric capacity and/or electric energy generated by or on behalf of the Grantor at one location to the Grantor's facility(ies) at any other location(s). Nothing specified herein shall prohibit the Grantor from engaging with other utilities or persons in wholesale transactions which are subject to the provisions of the Federal Power Act. 
    Nothing herein shall prohibit the Grantor, if permitted by law, (i) from purchasing electric capacity and/or electric energy from any other person, or (ii) from seeking to have the Grantee transmit and/or distribute to any facility(ies) of the Grantor electric capacity and/or electric energy purchased by the Grantor from any other person; provided, however, that before the Grantor elects to purchase electric capacity and/or electric energy from any other person, the Grantor shall notify the Grantee. Such notice shall include a summary of the specific rates, terms and conditions which have been offered by the other person and identify the Grantor's facilities to be served under the offer. The Grantee shall thereafter have 90 days to evaluate the offer and, if the Grantee offers rates, terms and conditions which are equal to or better than those offered by the other person, the Grantor shall be obligated to continue to purchase from the Grantee electric capacity and/or electric energy to serve the previously-identified facilities of the Grantor for a term no shorter than that offered by the other person. If the Grantee does not agree to rates, terms and conditions which equal or better the other person's offer, all of the terms and conditions of this franchise shall remain in effect. 
Sec. 7. - [Termination of franchise by grantee due to more favorable terms and conditions.] 
    If the Grantor grants a right, privilege or franchise to any other person or otherwise enables any other such person to construct, operate or maintain electric light and power facilities within any part of the incorporated areas of the Grantor in which the Grantee may lawfully serve or compete on terms and conditions which the Grantee determines are more favorable than the terms and conditions contained herein, the Grantee may at any time thereafter terminate this franchise if such terms and conditions are not remedied within the time period provided hereafter. The Grantee shall give the Grantor at least 60 days advance written notice of its intent to terminate. Such notice shall, without prejudice to any of the rights reserved for the Grantee herein, advise the Grantor of such terms and conditions that it considers more favorable. The Grantor shall then have 60 days in which to correct or otherwise remedy the terms and conditions complained of by the Grantee. If the Grantee determines that such terms or conditions are not remedied by the Grantor within said time period, the Grantee may terminate this franchise agreement by delivering written notice to the Grantor's Clerk and termination shall be effective on the date of delivery of such notice. 
Sec. 8. - [Termination of franchise due to competitive disadvantage.] 
    If as a direct or indirect consequence of any legislative, regulatory or other action by the United States of America or the State of Florida (or any department, agency, authority, instrumentality or political subdivision of either of them) any person is permitted to provide electric service within the incorporated areas of the Grantor to a customer then being served by the Grantee, or to any new applicant for electric service within any part of the incorporated areas of the Grantor in which the Grantee may lawfully serve, and the Grantee determines that its obligations hereunder, or otherwise resulting from this franchise in respect to rates and service, place it at a competitive disadvantage with respect to such other person, the Grantee may, at any time after the taking of such action, terminate this franchise if such competitive disadvantage is not remedied within the time period provided hereafter. The Grantee shall give the Grantor at least 90 days advance written notice of its intent to terminate. Such notice shall, without prejudice to any of the rights reserved for the Grantee herein, advise the Grantor of the consequences of such action which resulted in the competitive disadvantage. The Grantor shall then have 90 days in which to correct or otherwise remedy the competitive disadvantage. If such competitive disadvantage is not remedied by the Grantor within said time period, the Grantee may terminate this franchise agreement by delivering written notice to the Grantor's Clerk and termination shall take effect on the date of delivery of such notice. 
Sec. 9. - [Forfeiture of grant.] 
    Failure on the part of the Grantee to comply in any substantial respect with any of the provisions of this franchise shall be grounds for forfeiture, but no such forfeiture shall take effect if the reasonableness or propriety thereof is protested by the Grantee until there is final determination (after the expiration or exhaustion of all rights of appeal) by a court of competent jurisdiction that the Grantee has failed to comply in a substantial respect with any of the provisions of this franchise, and the Grantee shall have six months after such final determination to make good the default before a forfeiture shall result with the right of the Grantor at its discretion to grant such additional time to the Grantee for compliance as necessities in the case require. 
Sec. 10. - [Failure to comply.] 
    Failure on the part of the Grantor to comply in substantial respect with any of the provisions of this ordinance, including but not limited to: (a) denying the Grantee use of public rights-of-way for reasons other than unreasonable interference with motor vehicular traffic; (b) imposing conditions for use of public rights-of-way contrary to Florida law or the terms and conditions of this franchise; (c) unreasonable delay in issuing the Grantee a use permit, if any, to construct its facilities in public rights-of-way, shall constitute breach of this franchise and entitle the Grantee to withhold all or part of the payments provided for in Section 5 hereof until such time as a use permit is issued or a court of competent jurisdiction has reached a final determination in the matter. The Grantor recognizes and agrees that nothing in this franchise agreement constitutes or shall be deemed to constitute a waiver of the Grantee's delegated sovereign right of condemnation and that the Grantee, in its sole discretion, may exercise such right. 
Sec. 11. - [Records; audits.] 
    The Grantor may, upon reasonable notice and within 90 days after each anniversary date of this franchise, at the Grantor's expense, examine the records of the Grantee relating to the calculation of the franchise payment for the year preceding such anniversary date. Such examination shall be during normal business hours at the Grantee's office where such records are maintained. Records not prepared by the Grantee in the ordinary course of business may be provided at the Grantor's expense and as the Grantor and the Grantee may agree in writing. Information identifying the Grantee's customers by name or their electric consumption shall not be taken from the Grantee's premises. Such audit shall be impartial and all audit findings, whether they decrease or increase payment to the Grantor, shall be reported to the Grantee. The Grantor's right to examine the records of the Grantee in accordance with this Section shall not be conducted by any third party employed by the Grantor whose fee, in whole or part, for conducting such audit is contingent on findings of the audit. 
    Grantor waives, settles and bars all claims relating in any way to the amounts paid by the Grantee under the Current Franchise Agreement embodied in Ordinance No. 357 not asserted in writing within 120 days after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 12. - [Severability.] 
    The provisions of this ordinance are interdependent upon one another, and if any of the provisions of this ordinance are found or adjudged to be invalid, illegal, void or of no effect, the entire ordinance shall be null and void and of no force or effect. 
Sec. 13. - [Definition.] 
    As used herein "person" means an individual, a partnership, a corporation, a business trust, a joint stock company, a trust, an incorporated association, a joint venture, a governmental authority or any other entity of whatever nature. 
Sec. 14. - [Repealer.] 
    Ordinance No. 357, passed and adopted June 26, 1979 and all other ordinances and parts of ordinances and all resolutions and parts of resolutions in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 15. - [Effective date.] 
    As a condition precedent to the taking effect of this ordinance, the Grantee shall file its acceptance hereof with the Grantor's Clerk within 30 days of adoption of this ordinance. The effective date of this ordinance shall be the date upon which the Grantee files such acceptance. 
APPENDIX C - GAS FRANCHISE[1] 
    AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN COMMISSION OF THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, FLORIDA, RELATING TO THE RENEWAL OF A GAS FRANCHISE WITHIN THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH: GRANTING TO FLORIDA PUBLIC UTILITIES COMPANY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS A GAS FRANCHISE; IMPOSING PROVISIONS AND CONDITIONS RELATING THERETO; PROVIDING A CONFLICTS CLAUSE AND A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
    WHEREAS, the Town Commission finds that it is in the best public interest to renew and update the gas franchise grant to Florida Public Utilities Company. 
    NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COMMISSION OF THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, FLORIDA that: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This appendix contains the text of the town's gas franchise ordinance, as adopted by the town commission as Ord. No. 09-004 on Nov. 3, 2009. Section catchlines have been added by the editors. Appendix C was formerly comprised of the town's gas franchise adopted as Ord. No. 143 on Nov. 7, 1967. As this was a 30-year franchise, at the discretion of the editor, Ord. No. 09-004 has been treated as superseding Ord. No. 143. 
Cross reference- Taxation, Ch. 27; gas, § 6-176 et seq. 
State Law reference- Franchise for private companies, rate fixing, F.S. § 180.14. 

Section 1. - [Granting of franchise.] 
    The Town of Highland Beach, a municipal corporation of the State of Florida (hereinafter "grantor"), hereby grants to Florida Public Utilities Company, a corporation of the State of Florida (hereinafter "grantee"), its successors and assigns, for the term of thirty (30) years, beginning the first day of the first full calendar month following the date of filing by the grantee of its acceptance of this franchise grant, the right, privilege and authority or franchise to construct or otherwise acquire and to own, maintain, equip and operate plants and works, and all necessary or desirable appurtenances thereto, for the manufacture, purchase, transmission and distribution of artificial, natural and/or mixed gas (hereinafter referred to generally as "gas"), including the right without the payment by grantee of any special tax, assessment or charges therefor to construct, lay, extend, maintain, renew, remove, replace, repair, use and operate gas pipes and gas mains, and all appurtenances and appendages thereto, in, under, on or across the present and future public streets, avenues, alleys, highways, bridges, easements and other public places within the present or any future corporate limits of the grantor or its successors, for the purpose of distributing, supplying and selling gas to grantor or its successors, and to persons and corporations inhabitants thereof, as well as to persons or corporations beyond the present or future corporate limits thereof, but nothing herein contained shall relieve grantee from meeting all applicable requirements of the grantor's Code of Ordinances including the building and zoning codes (which are not in conflict with the Florida Administrative Code and/or the Code of Federal Regulations requirements) with the exception of grantor's field inspection requirements. Furthermore, nothing herein contained shall relieve grantee from the payment of any fees, licenses or ad valorem taxes ordinarily imposed by grantor on similar business activities. 
Section 2. - [Location of facilities; restoration of disturbed property.] 
    Grantee's facilities shall be so located or relocated and so erected as to interfere as little as possible with traffic over said streets, avenues, alleys, highways, bridges, easements and other public places, and with reasonable egress from and ingress to abutting property. The location or relocation of all facilities shall be made under the supervision and with the approval of such representatives as the governing body of grantor may designate for the purpose, but not so as unreasonably to interfere with the proper operation of grantee's facilities and service. When any portion of the grantor's property is excavated or disturbed by grantee in the location or relocation of any of its facilities, the portion of the grantor's property so excavated or disturbed shall, within a reasonable time and as early as practicable after such excavation or disturbance, be restored by the grantee at its sole expense and in as good condition as it was at the time of such excavation or disturbance. In addition, such work shall be done only [in] the manner and pursuant to the regulations established by the ordinances of the grantor. Upon failure of grantee to do so after twenty (20) days' notice in writing shall have been given to said grantee by grantor, the grantor may repair such portion of the grantor's property that may have been excavated or disturbed by grantee, and the cost of same shall be paid by grantee. Nothing in this section shall be construed to make the grantor liable to the grantee for any cost or expense in connection with the construction, reconstruction or relocation of the grantee's facilities in streets, avenues, alleys, highways, bridges, easements, and other public places of the grantor made necessary by widening, paving, or otherwise improving such streets, avenues, alleys, highways, bridges, easements, and other public places, except that the grantee shall be entitled to seek reimbursement of such costs and expenses from funds available from sources other than the grantor as may be provided by law. 
Section 3. - [Quality of service.] 
    At all times during the term of this franchise grantee shall promptly and without discrimination furnish an adequate supply of gas of standard quality and pressure to grantor and its successors, and to persons, corporations and inhabitants thereof who request the same and agree to abide by grantee's reasonable rules and regulations, and shall acquire, construct, maintain, equip and operate all necessary facilities for the manufacture, purchase, transmission, supply and distribution of gas for the benefit and convenience of grantor and its inhabitants. In any case where there is interruption or impairment of service, or failure to supply gas or pressure, grantee shall promptly remedy such condition; provided that any interruption or impairment of service resulting from a strike, accident, an act of God, or other cause beyond the control of the grantee shall, if remedied within a reasonable time period agreed to by the parties hereto, not constitute grounds for revoking and canceling any rights hereunder. 
Section 4. - [Grantee's rules, regulations; rates.] 
    Grantee shall have the right to adopt and enforce rules and regulations with respect to the extension, initiation and rendering of gas service, including rules providing for the discontinuance of service to any customer for nonpayment of bills when due, or for failure to comply with the grantee's other rules and regulations. All rates for gas and rules and regulations established by grantee from time to time shall be those prescribed and approved by the Florida Public Service Commission. 
Section 5. - [Indemnity of town.] 
    Grantor, and its officers, employees and agents shall not be liable or responsible for any accident or damage that may occur in the construction, operation, conduct or maintenance by the grantee of its facilities or services hereunder, and the acceptance of this franchise grant shall be deemed an agreement on the part of the grantee to protect, defend and indemnify the grantor, and its officers, employees and agents and hold it harmless against any and all liability, claims, demands, expenses, fees, fines, penalties, suits, proceedings, actions and costs of actions, of whatsoever kind or nature arising out of the negligence, default, misconduct or otherwise of the grantee in the construction, operation, conduct or maintenance of its facilities or services hereunder, excepting only the negligence of the grantor. 
Section 6. - [Insurance required.] 
    Grantee shall carry in full force and effect during the entire term of this agreement, and any extension period thereof, the following insurance coverages: 
(a)  Comprehensive general liability insurance, including bodily injury liability, property damage liability and product liability insurance, with a minimum combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); and 
(b)  Workers compensation insurance and comprehensive automobile liability insurance as required under the Florida Statutes for the benefit of the employees of grantee. 
Section 7. - [Annual payment to town.] 
    Within thirty (30) days after the first anniversary date of this grant and within thirty (30) days after each succeeding anniversary date during the existence of this grant, the grantee, its successors and assigns, shall pay or have paid to the grantor or its successors a privilege tax equal to the amount by which six and one-half (6.50) percent of its gross revenues (gross revenues being the amount billed less charge-off for uncollectible accounts and adjustments) from the sale of gas to residential and general service customers within the corporate limits of grantor for the twelve (12) calendar months preceding the applicable anniversary date, shall exceed the amount of any other taxes, licenses or other impositions levied or imposed by grantor against grantee's property, business or operations for the tax year preceding the beginning of the applicable privilege tax year, but not including any public service tax levied on the purchase of metered or bottled gas pursuant to F.S. § 166.231. 
    Payment shall be made quarterly on or before the final day of each three (3) calendar month period based on one-fourth of the total payments made in the preceding privilege tax year, except for the first privilege tax year where each quarterly payment shall equal one and six hundred twenty-five thousandths (1.625) percent of gross revenues from the sale of gas to residential and general service customers for the twelve (12) calendar months preceding the effective date of this ordinance. At the close of each fiscal tax year, an accounting shall be made to determine whether grantee owes additional monies, which shall be paid not less than thirty (30) days after the close of said fiscal tax year, or whether grantee is owed a refund, which shall be collected by offsetting the total amount of the refund from the next succeeding quarterly payment made to the grantor. 
Section 8. - [Grantor's right of purchase.] 
    As a condition precedent to the taking effect of this grant, grantor hereby reserves and grantee hereby gives and grants to grantor, the right at and after the expiration of this grant to purchase the property of grantee used under this franchise grant at a valuation to be determined by negotiation between the parties. 
Section 9. - [Grantee's service exclusive.] 
    In consideration of the grantee's undertakings hereunder as evidenced by its acceptance hereof, the grantor agrees not to engage in the business of distributing and selling gas during the life of this franchise or any extension thereof in competition with the grantee, its successors and assigns. 
Section 10. - [Forfeiture.] 
    Failure on the part of grantee to comply in any substantial respect with any of the provisions, covenants, terms or conditions of this ordinance, shall be grounds for a forfeiture of this grant, but no such forfeiture shall take effect if the reasonableness or propriety thereof is protested by grantee until a court of competent jurisdiction (with right of appeal in either party) shall have found that grantee has failed to comply in a substantial respect with any of the provisions of this franchise, and the grantee shall have six (6) months after the final determination of the question, to make good the default before a forfeiture shall result with the right in grantor at its discretion to grant such additional time to grantee for compliance as necessities in the case require. 
Section 11. - [Acceptance.] 
    Grantee by its acceptance hereof, which shall be filed with the grantor's town clerk within thirty (30) days after the final passage of this ordinance, agrees to observe, perform and keep all of the agreements, covenants, terms and conditions hereof to be observed, performed and kept by grantee. All of the terms, covenants and conditions hereof shall inure to and be binding upon the respective successors and assigns of the grantor and the grantee. 
Section 12. - [Assignment or transfer of rights.] 
    No assignment or transfer of the franchise rights granted hereby, shall be effective unless the grantee shall have notified the grantor in writing prior to the scheduled date of said assignment or transfer, and unless, after the filing of said notice, the grantor shall have by ordinance approved and consented to such assignment or transfer, such approval and consent not to be unreasonably withheld. The assignment or transfer of the franchise rights shall be subject to any additional provisions and conditions, as agreed to between the parties, and as set forth in the ordinance approving the assignment or transfer. 
Section 13. - [Bankruptcy.] 
    In the event of a final adjudication of bankruptcy of the grantee, the grantor shall have full power and authority to terminate, revoke, and cancel any and all rights granted under the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 14. - [Changes in terms and conditions.] 
    Minor changes in the terms and conditions hereof may be made by written agreement between the grantor and the grantee; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed as conferring authority to make changes in or modification of the provisions of this ordinance which would be repugnant to or inconsistent with the basic grant, factors or principles underlying the terms and conditions hereof. 
Section 15. - [Examination of records.] 
    The accounts and records of the grantee pertaining to gas service rendered under this franchise shall be maintained within the State of Florida, and grantor may, at its option, upon reasonable notice to grantee, at any time during the ninety (90) days after the close of each privilege tax year of this grant, or at such other times as mutually agreed to between the parties, examine said accounts and records and as such relate to the calculation of the franchise payment to the grantor. Such examination of accounts and records of grantee by grantor shall be made during the regular business hours of the grantee at the general office of the grantee. The grantee shall maintain its records in sufficient detail that revenues within the corporate limits of the grantor are readily discernible from other revenues for auditing purposes. All examinations shall be at the sole expense of the grantor. However, if the grantor conducts an audit of the grantee's books and records, and substantial discrepancies are discovered which result in sums which should have been paid to grantor, then the cost of such audit will be paid by grantee. 
Section 16. - [Conflicting ordinances.] 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Section 17. - [Severability.] 
    Should any section or provision of this ordinance or any portion thereof, any paragraph, sentence or word be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder hereof as a whole or part thereof other than the part declared to be invalid. 
Section 18. - [Effective date.] 
    This ordinance shall take effect upon the first day of the first full calendar month following the date upon which the grantee files its acceptance. 
APPENDIX D - TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH FRANCHISE[1] 
    AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, FLORIDA, AUTHORIZING THE SOUTHERN BELL TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH COMPANY TO USE THE PUBLIC STREETS OF THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH, FLORIDA, FOR THE PURPOSE OF ERECTING, CONSTRUCTING, MAINTAINING AND OPERATING LINES OR TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH THEREON AND THEREUNDER. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This appendix contains the text of the town's telephone and telegraph franchise ordinance, as adopted by the town commission as Ord. No. 430 on November 3, 1981. Section catchlines have been added by the editors. 
Cross reference- Taxation, Ch. 27. 

Sec. 1. - [Granting of franchise.] 
    Be it ordained by the Town Commission of the Town of Highland Beach, Florida, that permission be and the same is hereby granted to the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company, its successors and assigns, to construct, maintain and operate lines of telephone and telegraph, including the necessary poles, conduits, cables, fixtures and electrical conductors upon, along, under and over the public roads, streets and highways of the Town of Highland Beach, Florida, as its business may from time to time require, provided that all poles shall be neat and symmetrical. 
Sec. 2. - [Installation of facilities; restoration of streets, sidewalks.] 
    The work of erecting poles and constructing underground conduits under this ordinance shall be done subject to the supervision of the town, and the company shall replace or properly relay and repair any sidewalk or street that may be displaced by reason of such work, and upon failure of the company so to do, after twenty (20) days' notice in writing shall have been given by the mayor of the town to the company, the town may repair such portion of the sidewalk or street that may have been disturbed by the company and collect the cost so incurred from the company. 
Sec. 3. - [Right of town to use company poles.] 
    In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, the company, when requested by the town, will designate and provide without cost to the town (1) on each pole owned and used by the company hereunder and during its ownership and use thereof, either (a) space for a fixture for, or (b) space for a crossarm for, wires of the police and fire alarm signalling system of the town and (2) in each underground conduit owned and used by the company hereunder and during its ownership and use thereof, one duct for the cables of the police and fire alarm signalling system of the town; provided, however, that no use shall be made by the town of said space on such poles or of said duct which will result in interfering with or impairing the operation or use of the company's property or service, or which will endanger, damage or injure the person or property of the public or employees of the company or town. 
Sec. 4. - [Annual payment to town.] 
    In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, the company shall pay to the town annually a sum equal to one percent of the gross receipts of the company from rentals derived from telephones in use within the corporate limits of the town, provided that there shall be credited against such sum the amount of all taxes, occupational licenses, and all other license fees and other impositions (except ad valorem taxes and amounts for assessments for special benefits, such as sidewalks, street pavings and similar improvements) levied or imposed by the town upon the company's property, business or operations and paid during the preceding fiscal year as defined herein. Payment shall be made to the town for each of the years that this ordinance is in effect and shall be based on the receipts of the company for the preceding fiscal year. For the purposes of this payment, such fiscal year shall end on the last day of the month in which the ordinance becomes effective. Payment shall be made within six (6) months of the end of such fiscal year. 
Cross reference- Public service tax, § 27-26 et seq. 
Sec. 5. - [Indemnity of town.] 
    The company shall indemnify the town against, and assume all liabilities for, damages which may arise or accrue to the town for any injury to persons or property from the doing of any work herein authorized, or the neglect of the company or any of its employees to comply with any ordinance regulating the use of the streets of the town, and the acceptance by the company of this ordinance shall be an agreement by it to pay to the town any sum of money for which the town may become liable from or by reason of such injury. 
Sec. 6. - [Acceptance.] 
    The company shall file with the town clerk of the town its acceptance of this ordinance within sixty (60) days from the date when it shall take effect. 
Sec. 7. - [Term; town's right of purchase.] 
    This ordinance shall be in force and effect for a term of thirty (30) years from and after its passage, and the town hereby reserves the right and requires the said company, as a condition precedent to the taking effect of this grant, to give and grant to the Town of Highland Beach, Florida, the right, at and after the expiration of such term, to purchase the telephone and telegraph plant or other property in said town used under or in connection with this grant, or such part of such property as the municipality may desire to purchase at a valuation of the property, real and personal, desired, which valuation shall be fixed by arbitration, as may be provided by law; and the acceptance of this ordinance shall operate as a grant by the said company to the town of said right to purchase. 
Sec. 8. - [Reservation of power.] 
    Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as a surrender by the town of its right or power to pass ordinances regulating the use of its streets. 
Sec. 9. - [Effective date.] 
    This ordinance shall be in force and effect for a term of thirty (30) years from and after its passage. 
APPENDIX E - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE[1] 
    AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO SOUTHEAST FLORIDA CABLE, INC. D/B/A ADELPHIA CABLE COMMUNICATION TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, AND MAINTAIN A CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM IN THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND BEACH ("HIGHLAND BEACH"); SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANT OF THE FRANCHISE; PROVIDING FOR REGULATION AND USE OF THE SYSTEM; AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ORDINANCE. 
PREAMBLE 
    The Town of Highland Beach does ordain that it is in the public interest to permit the use of public rights-of-way and easements for the construction, maintenance, and operation of a Cable Television System under the terms of this Franchise; said public purpose being specifically the enhancement of communications within the Town, the expansion of communications opportunities outside the Town, and the provision of programming of a truly local interest. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This appendix contains the text of the town's cable television franchise ordinance, as adopted by the town commission as Ord. No. 656 on Feb. 27, 1996. This ordinance replaces the former franchise with Highland Beach Cable T.V. as enacted by Ord. No. 408 on March 3, 1981. 
Cross reference- Electrical code, § 6-231 et seq. 
State Law reference- Cable television franchises, F.S. § 166.046. 

SECTION 1. - SHORT TITLE. 
    This ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Highland Beach Cable Television Franchise Ordinance." Within this document it shall also be referred to as "this Franchise" or "the Franchise." 
SECTION 2. - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this Franchise, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    2.01  Basic Service means a group or groups of Cable Services distributed over the cable system consisting of any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
    2.02  Cable Act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, 98 Stat. 2779 (1984)(codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-611 (1982 & Supp. V 1987)) and any amendments thereto. 
    2.03  Cable System or System means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable television service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the Town, but such term does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management, unless such facility or facilities crosses or uses any public right-of-way, including streets or easements; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Cable Act, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or (D) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
    2.04  Cable Service means: (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
    2.05  Channel means a band of frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum, or any other means of transmission (including, without limitation, optical fibers or any other means now available or that may become available), which is capable of carrying a video signal, an audio signal, a voice signal, or a data signal. 
    2.06  Complaint means any written inquiry, allegation or assertion made by a subscriber which raises an objection to the business practices of Grantee. The term "Complaint" does not include an inquiry which is immediately answered by the Grantee. 
    2.07  Converter means an electronic device with an appropriate Channel selector that permits a subscriber to view all signals included in the Standard Service (as that term is defined by Grantee) delivered to designated Converter dial locations. 
    2.08  Drop means the cable that connects the subscriber terminal at a point in the subscriber's home, designated by the subscriber, to the nearest feeder cable of the system. 
    2.09  FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any successor thereto. 
    2.10  Grantee means Southeast Florida Cable, Inc., d/b/a Adelphia Cable Communications, a Florida corporation, with offices located at 5 W. 3rd. Street, Coudersport, Pennsylvania 16915. 
    2.11  Gross Revenues means all revenues derived directly or indirectly by the Grantee, from or in direct or indirect connection with the provision of Cable Service; all revenues shall include, but not be limited to, basic Subscriber Service monthly fees, pay cable fees, Installation and reconnection fees, wiring fees, leased Channel fees, converter rentals, and advertising revenues, and that this shall not include any taxes on Services furnished by the Grantee herein imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the State, or other governmental unit and collected by the Grantee on behalf of other governmental units. 
    2.12  Installation means the act of connecting the system from the feeder cable to the subscriber terminal so that cable television service may be received by the subscriber. 
    2.13  Pay Television means the delivery over the system of per-channel or per-program audio-visual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge. 
    2.14  Person means any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit or not-for-profit. 
    2.15  Public Property means any real property, other than a street, owned by any governmental unit. 
    2.16  Signal means any transmission of radio frequency energy or of optical information. 
    2.17  Street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, public road, public highway, public freeway, public lane, public path, public way, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive or any public easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by the Town which shall entitle Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a system. 
    2.18  Subscriber means any person or entity who lawfully subscribes to any cable service whether or not a fee is paid for such service. 
    2.19  Town means the Town of Highland Beach or, as appropriate in the case of specific provisions of this Franchise, any board, bureau, authority, agency, commission, department of, or any other entity of or acting on behalf of, the Town of Highland Beach, or any officer, official, employee, or agent thereof, the designee of any of the foregoing, or any successor thereto. 
    2.20  Town Commission means the governing body of the Town. 
SECTION 3. - GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
    3.01  Grant of Franchise. This Franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and conditions contained herein. Such terms and conditions shall be subordinate to all applicable provisions of state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
    3.02  Authority for Use of Streets. 
A.  For the purpose of constructing, operating, and maintaining a System and providing communications and information services in the Town, Grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, relocate, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the streets within the Town such lines, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the System, provided that all applicable permits are applied for and granted, all fees paid and all other Municipality codes and ordinances are otherwise complied with. 
B.  Grantee shall construct and maintain the System so as not to interfere with other uses of streets. Grantee shall endeavor to make use of existing poles and other facilities available to Grantee where feasible. Grantee shall publicize proposed construction work prior to commencement of that work. Except in cases of emergency, Grantee shall use all reasonable efforts to notify all residents affected by proposed work not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to commencement of that work. Such notice shall include the Grantee's telephone number and the department to call regarding questions about the construction. 
C.  Notwithstanding the above grant to use the streets, no street shall be used by Grantee if the Town reasonably determines that such use is inconsistent with the terms, conditions or provisions by which such street was created or dedicated or is presently used. 
    3.04  Nature of Franchise. Upon acceptance, the Grantee's nonexclusive franchise for the occupation and use of the streets within the Municipality for the construction, operation, maintenance, upgrade, repair, and removal of the system in accordance with the provisions of this Franchise shall be deemed to have been renewed. 
    3.05  Franchise Term. This Franchise shall commence upon acceptance by Grantee as defined herein and shall be in full force and effect for a period of ten (10) years, unless renewed, revoked or terminated sooner as herein provided. 
    3.06  Area Covered. This Franchise is granted for the territorial boundary of the Town. In the event of annexation by the Town, Grantee shall use every reasonable effort in its best business judgment to provide service to the new territory. 
    3.07  Use of Grantee Facilities. The Town shall have the right to install and maintain, free of charge, upon the poles and within the underground pipes and conduits of Grantee, any wires and fixtures desired by the Town to the extent that such installation and maintenance does not interfere with existing and future operations of Grantee and provided such wires and fixtures are not used to deliver cable services or data transmissions to the subscribers within the Town. 
    3.08  Written Notice. All notices, reports or demands required to be given in writing under this Franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered personally to the person designated below, or when five (5) days have elapsed after it is deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, with registered or certified mail postage prepaid thereon, or on the next business day if sent by express mail or overnight air courier addressed to the party to which notice is being given, as follows: 
If to Town: Town of Highland Beach 
Town Manager 
3614 South Ocean Boulevard 
Highland Beach, FL 33487 With Copy to: Thomas E. Sliney, Esq. 
Town Attorney 
Hodgson, Russ, Andrews, Woods & Goodyear 
2000 Glades Road, Suite 400 
Boca Raton, FL 33432 If to Grantee: Southeast Florida Cable, Inc. 
5 W. 3rd Street 
Coudersport, Pennsylvania 16915 
Attn: Michael Rigas With Copy to: Legal Department 
Adelphia Communications Corporation 
5 W. 3rd Street 
Coudersport, Pennsylvania 16915  
    Such addresses and phone numbers may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party given as provided in this section. 
    3.09  Franchise Non-Exclusive. The Franchise granted herein is non-exclusive. However, no multi-channel video provider shall have the right to provide any comparable service upon terms more favorable or less burdensome than those applicable to the provision of such service by the Grantee. In the event that applicable Florida state law is amended during the term of this Franchise, the provisions of this Section 3.09 shall stand as so amended. This Section 3.09 is not intended to and does not pre-empt federal law. 
SECTION 4. - DESIGN PROVISIONS. 
    4.01  System Design. Grantee shall upon request provide the Town a full description of the System proposed for construction and shall, upon completion of any System upgrade, and upon request, submit to the Town, maps for the entire System, as upgraded, to the extent such maps have not been previously provided to the Town. Grantee shall maintain a System capable of providing 62 channel capacity. 
    4.02  Provision of Service. 
A.  After Cable Service has been established by activating trunk and distribution cable for any area, Grantee shall provide Cable Service to any household requesting Cable Service within that area seven (7) days from the date of request. 
B.  Grantee shall install and provide its Basic Service to all public buildings designated below. Each of these installations should include a signal drop, one outlet, and one converter (or such other terminal equipment as may be necessary to provide an electronic interface with a television receiver). Grantee will provide internal building wiring at its cost of time and materials. Grantee shall provide the Town, at no charge, five hookups (drops) within Town buildings as requested by the Town from time to time. 
    4.03  Technical Standards. The system shall be designed, constructed and operated so as to meet those technical standards promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission relating to Cable Systems contained in subpart K of part 76 of the Federal Communications Commission's rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be amended. 
    4.04  Special Testing. The Grantee shall only be required to conduct such tests as required by the Federal Communications Commission. No other testing shall be required of Grantee. The Town shall be free to conduct its own testing as it deems is warranted, and at its own expense, but such testing shall have no bearing on Grantee's status as franchisee unless such test requirements are no longer preempted by the Federal Communications Commission. 
    4.05  Signal Quality. The system shall produce a picture that is consistent with Federal Communications Commission and NTSC standards. 
SECTION 5. - SERVICE PROVISIONS. 
    5.01  Programming Decisions. All programming decisions shall be at the sole discretion of Grantee, after notice to the Town Manager. 
    5.02  Access Channels. 
A.  The Grantee shall make available for use by the Town, without charge, a minimum of one activated channel for non-commercial governmental programming, non-commercial public access programming and non-commercial educational programming. 
B.  The Grantee may use the access channel required in paragraph A for any programming during those hours when the channel is not in use by the general public, local educational authorities or local government. 
C.  No charges may be made for channel time or playback of locally produced live or pre-recorded programming on the access channel required in paragraph A. 
D.  Whenever the access channel required in paragraph A is in use for unduplicated, locally produced live programming for six (6) hours per day, six (6) days per week, for six (6) weeks running, demand for a full-time channel shall be presumed and Grantee shall refrain from further use of said channel for programming other than that designated by franchise. Once this channel is in use to provide unduplicated locally produced live programming continuous for twelve (12) hours a day, six (6) days per week, for six (6) continuous weeks, Grantee, upon notice from the Town, shall have three (3) months in which to provide an additional access channel for the same purpose. 
E.  The Town shall establish rules pertaining to the administration of the access channel required in paragraph A. 
SECTION 6. - CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS. 
    6.01  Construction Standards. 
A.  All construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as amended, as well as all state and local codes where applicable. 
B.  All installation of electronic equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical and Safety Code and National Electrical Code as amended. 
C.  Antennas and their supporting structures (tower) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable state or local laws, codes and regulations. 
D.  All of Grantee's plant and equipment, including, but not limited to, the antenna site, headend and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable[,] coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the Town may deem appropriate to make or to interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
E.  Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public. 
    6.02  Repair of Streets and Property. Any and all streets or public property or private property, which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of the system shall be promptly repaired by Grantee, at its expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing prior to Grantee's construction. The Town shall reimburse Grantee under this Section to the same extent that it reimburses telephone, electric and other like companies for such undertakings. 
    6.03  Use of Existing Poles. Grantee shall exercise its best efforts to negotiate the lease of pole space and facilities from the existing pole owners for all aerial construction. Grantee shall not erect, for any reason, any pole on or along any public street in an existing aerial utility system without the advance written approval of the Town Commission, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
    6.04  Undergrounding of Cable. Cable shall be installed underground at Grantee's expense where both the existing telephone and electrical utilities are already underground. Grantee shall place cable underground in newly platted areas in concert with both the telephone and electrical utilities. In the event that telephone or electric utilities are reimbursed by the Town or any agency thereof for the placement of cable underground or the movement of cable, Grantee shall be reimbursed upon the same terms and conditions as the telephone or electric utilities. 
    6.05  Reservation of Street Rights. 
A.  Nothing in this Franchise shall be construed to prevent the Town from constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating sewers; grading, paving, maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or altering any street; constructing, laying down, repairing, maintaining or relocating any water mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating, or repairing any sidewalk or other public work. 
B.  All such work shall be done, insofar as practicable, in such a manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and operation of the poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes or appurtenances of Grantee. 
C.  If any such property of Grantee shall interfere with the construction or relocation, maintenance or repair of any street or public improvement, whether it be construction, repair, maintenance, removal or relocation of a sewer, public sidewalk, or water main, street or any other public improvement, thirty (30) days['] notice shall be given to Grantee by the Town and all such poles, wires, conduits or other appliances and facilities shall be removed or replaced by Grantee in such manner as shall be directed by the Town so that the same shall not interfere with the said public work of the Town, as determined by the Municipality, and such removal or replacement shall be at the expense of Grantee herein. Should, however, any utility company be reimbursed for relocation of its facilities as part of the same work that requires Grantee to remove its facilities, Grantee shall be reimbursed upon the same terms and conditions as utilities. 
D.  Nothing contained in this Franchise shall relieve any Person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring Grantee's facilities while performing any work connected with grading, regrading, or changing the line of any street or public place or with the construction or reconstruction of any sewer or water system. 
    6.06  Trimming of Trees. Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and hanging over public streets, public alleys, public sidewalks, and public places of the Town so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of Grantee; provided, however, all trimming shall be done, at the expense of Grantee, under the supervision and direction of the Town. 
    6.07  Movement of Facilities. In the event it is necessary temporarily to move or remove any of Grantee's wires, cables, poles, or other facilities placed pursuant to this Franchise, in order to lawfully move a large object, vehicle, building or other structure over the streets of the Town, upon two (2) weeks['] notice by the Municipality to Grantee, Grantee shall move at the expense of the person requesting the temporary removal such of his facilities as may be required to facilitate such movements. Any service disruption provisions of this Franchise shall not apply in the event that the removal of Grantee's wires, cables, poles or other facilities results in temporary service disruptions. 
SECTION 7. - OPERATION AND REPORTING PROVISIONS. 
    7.01  Open Books and Records. The Town shall have the right to inspect and/or audit, upon two [(2)] weeks['] notice, at any time during normal business hours at the system office, which system office should be located in Palm Beach County, books, records, maps, plans, service complaint logs, performance test results, record of requests for service and other like materials of Grantee which are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms of this Franchise. Grantee shall first be given two (2) weeks['] written notice of the inspection and/or audit request, the description of and purpose for the inspection and/or audit and description, to the best of the Town's ability, of the documents and equipment it wants to inspect and/or audit. All costs incurred in connection with performance of an inspection or audit shall be paid by the Town unless the inspection or audit reveals that there has been a shortfall of franchise fees paid to the Town in excess of five percent (5%) of the fees which should have been paid to the Town during any six-month period, in which case, the cost shall be paid by the Grantee, together with payment of any shortfall discovered during the audit. 
    7.02  Maps. Grantee shall provide to the Town upon request a current map or set of maps drawn to scale showing the system and all equipment installed or in place in streets and other public places as required by Section 4.01. 
SECTION 8. - SUBSCRIBER SERVICE PROVISIONS. 
    8.01  Schedule of Charges. Grantee shall upon request provide to the Town a current schedule of all rates and charges. 
    8.02  Subscriber Complaint Resolution Procedures. 
A.  Grantee shall design, implement, and notify the Town and subscribers of subscriber complaint resolution procedures in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the FCC. 
B.  Grantee shall maintain records pertaining to Grantee's receipt of subscriber complaints in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the FCC. 
    8.03  Subscriber Service Procedures. Grantee shall design, implement and notify the Town of service procedures in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the FCC. 
    8.04  Subscriber Notification Procedures. Grantee will provide subscribers with notifications in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the FCC. 
    8.05  Subscriber Billing Procedures. Grantee will provide subscribers with written information regarding billing procedures in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the FCC. 
    8.06  Parental Control Option. Grantee shall provide parental control devices to all subscribers who wish to be able to cut out any objectionable channel(s) of programming from the cable service entering the subscriber's home. 
SECTION 9. - GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS. 
    9.01  Payment to Town. 
A.  Grantee shall pay to the Town a franchise fee equal to five percent (5%) of its annual Gross Revenues. 
B.  Payments due the Town under this provision shall be computed at the middle and end of each calendar year. Payments shall be due and payable for each such six-month period within sixty (60) days of the end of that six-month period. 
C.  Grantee shall pay all costs of publication with respect to the promulgation and adoption of the ordinance granting this Franchise, together with any other publication costs associated with the continuance of this Franchise, if any. 
    9.02  Violations of Franchise. 
A.  Whenever the Town finds that Grantee has allegedly violated one or more terms, conditions or provisions of this Franchise, a written notice shall be given to Grantee. The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the alleged violations so as to afford Grantee an opportunity to remedy the violation. Grantee shall have thirty (30) days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to either correct the violation or diligently be acting toward correction of the problem. Grantee may, within ten (10) business days of receipt of notice, notify the Town that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by Grantee to the Town shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by Grantee and shall stay the running of the above-described time. 
1.  The Town shall hear Grantee's dispute at a regularly or specially scheduled meeting. Grantee shall have the right to subpoena to the extent that has the authority to issue and enforce a subpoena, and cross-examine witnesses. The Town shall determine if Grantee has committed a violation and shall make written findings of fact relative to its determination. If a violation is found, Grantee may petition for reconsideration. 
2.  If after hearing the dispute the claim is upheld by the Town, Grantee shall have ten (10) business days from such a determination to remedy the violation or failure. 
B.  The time for Grantee to correct any alleged violation may be extended by the Town if the necessary action to correct the alleged violation is of such a nature or character to require more than thirty (30) days within which to perform provided Grantee commences the corrective action within the thirty (30) day period and thereafter uses reasonable diligence to correct the violation. The time to correct any alleged violation shall not apply in the case of the occurrence of any force majeure. 
    9.03  Damages and Defenses. 
A.  Grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the Town for all damages and penalties, at all times during the term of this Franchise, as a result of Grantee's negligent acts or omissions regarding the operation of the System. These damages and penalties shall include, but shall not be limited to, damages arising out of personal injury, property damage, copyright infringement, defamation, antitrust, errors and omission, theft, and fire. 
B.  In order for the Town to assert its rights to be indemnified, defended, or held harmless, the Municipality must: 
1.  Promptly notify Grantee of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise to such right; 
2.  Afford Grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of such claim or proceeding; unless, however, the Town, in its sole discretion, determines that its interests cannot be represented in good faith by Grantee in which case the grantee shall be excused from any further obligation to indemnify the Town; and 
3.  Fully cooperate with the reasonable requests of Grantee, at Grantee's expense, in its participation in, and control, compromise, settlement or resolution or other disposition of such claim or proceeding subject to paragraph (2) above. 
    9.04  Liability Insurance. Grantee shall maintain, throughout the term of the Franchise, liability insurance insuring Grantee and the Town with regard to all damages mentioned in paragraph A of Section 9.03 hereof, with primary and umbrella insurance in a total limit of Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000.00). Copies of policies shall be furnished to the Town. 
    9.05  Town's Right to Revoke. In addition to all other rights which the Town has pursuant to law or equity, the Town reserves the right to revoke, terminate or cancel this Franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, in the event that: 
A.  Grantee materially breaches this Franchise; or 
B.  Grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged as bankrupt and the grantees['] creditors or Trustee in Bankruptcy do not agree to fulfill and be bound by all requirements of this Franchise upon request by the Town. 
    9.06  Revocation Procedures. In the event that the Town determines that Grantee has violated any material provision of the Franchise, or any material applicable federal, state or local law, the Town may make a written demand on Grantee that it remedy such violation and that continued violation may be cause for revocation. If the violation, breach, failure, refusal, or neglect by Grantee is due to acts of God or other causes which result from circumstances beyond Grantee's control. Such determination shall not unreasonably be withheld. 
A.  A public hearing shall be held and Grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard upon fourteen (14) days['] written notice to Grantee of the time and the place of the hearing. The causes for pending revocation and the reasons alleged to constitute such cause shall be recited in the notice. Said notice shall affirmatively recite the causes that need to be shown by the Town to support a revocation. 
B.  If notice is given and, at Grantee's option, after a full public proceeding is held, the Town determines there is a violation, breach, failure, refusal or neglect by Grantee, the Town shall direct Grantee to correct or remedy the same within such reasonable additional time, in such manner and upon such reasonable terms and conditions as Town may direct. 
C.  If after a public hearing it is determined that Grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations, or requirements of Franchise was prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided Grantee has notified Town in writing within thirty (30) days of its discovery of the occurrence of such an event. Such causes beyond Grantee's reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited to, acts of God, civil emergencies and labor strikes. 
D.  If, after notice is given and, at Grantee's option, a full public proceeding is held, the Town determines there was a violation, breach, failure, refusal or neglect, then the Town may declare, by resolution, the Franchise revoked and canceled and of no further force and effect unless there is compliance within such period as Town may fix, such period not to be less than thirty (30) days. 
E.  The issue of revocation shall automatically be placed upon the Town Commission agenda at the expiration of the time set by it for compliance. The Town then may terminate Franchise forthwith upon finding that Grantee has failed to achieve compliance or may further extend the period, in its discretion. 
F.  If the Town, after notice is given and, at Grantee's option, a full public proceeding is held and appeal is exhausted, declares the Franchise breached, the parties may pursue their remedies pursuant to Franchise or any other remedy, legal or equitable. Grantee may continue to operate the system until all legal appeals procedures have been exhausted. 
SECTION 10. - FORECLOSURE AND RECEIVERSHIP. 
    10.01  Foreclosure. Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of the system, Grantee shall notify the Town of such fact and such notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of Grantee has taken place. Written request for Town approval of such change in control shall be required in accordance with Section 11.02 of this Ordinance. 
    10.02  Receivership. The Town shall have the right to cancel this Franchise subject to any applicable provisions of state law, including the Bankruptcy Act, one hundred and twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of Grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred and twenty (120) days, or unless: 
A.  Within one hundred and twenty (120) days after his election or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have complied with all the material provisions of this Franchise and remedied all defaults thereunder; and, 
B.  Such receiver or trustee, within said one hundred and twenty (120) days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the Court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this Franchise. 
    10.03  Abandonment. Grantee may not abandon any portion of the system thereof without having first given three (3) months['] written notice to the Town. 
SECTION 11. - REMOVAL, TRANSFER AND PURCHASE. 
    11.01  Removal After Revocation or Expiration. 
A.  At the expiration of the present and all subsequent renewal terms for which the Franchise is granted, or upon its revocation, as provided for, the Town shall have the right to require Grantee to remove, at Grantee's expense, all or any portion of the System from all streets and public property within the Town. 
B.  If Grantee has failed to commence removal of the System, or such part thereof as was designated within thirty (30) days after written notice of the Town's demand for removal is given, or if Grantee has failed to complete such removal within one year after written notice of the Municipality's demand for removal is given, the Town shall have the right to exercise one of the following options: 
1.  Declare all right, title and interest to the System to be in the Town or its delegator with all rights of ownership including, but not limited to, the right to operate the System or transfer the System to another for operation by it; or 
2.  Cause the System, or such part thereof as the Town shall designate, to be removed at no cost to the Town. The cost of said removal shall be recoverable from the indemnity and penalty section provided for in the Franchise, or from Grantee directly. 
    11.02  Sale or Transfer of Franchise. 
A.  This Franchise shall not be sold, assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased or sublet in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any Person without full compliance with the procedure set forth in this section. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall only apply to the sale or transfer of all or a majority of Grantee's assets, merger (including any parent and its subsidiary corporation), consolidation, or sale or transfer of stock in Grantee so as to create a new controlling interest. The term "controlling interest" as used herein is not limited to majority stock ownership, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. 
1.  The parties to the sale or transfer shall make a written request to the Town for its approval of a sale or transfer. 
2.  The Town shall reply in writing within thirty (30) days of the request and shall indicate approval of the request or its determination that a public hearing is necessary due to potential adverse effect on Grantee's subscribers. 
3.  If a public hearing is deemed necessary pursuant to (2) above, such hearing shall be commenced within thirty (30) days of such determination and notice of any such hearing shall be given fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing by publishing notice thereof. The notice shall contain the date, time and place of the hearing and shall briefly state the substance of the action to be considered by the Town. 
4.  Within thirty (30) days after the closing of the public hearing, the Town shall approve or deny in writing the sale or transfer request. 
5.  Within thirty (30) days of any transfer, Grantee shall file with the Town a copy of the deed, agreement, mortgage, lease or other written instrument evidencing such sale, transfer of ownership or control or lease, certified and sworn to as correct by the Grantee. 
C.  In reviewing a request for sale or transfer pursuant to paragraph (A) above, the Town may only inquire into the legal, technical, character and financial qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and Grantee shall assist the Town in so inquiring. Upon a demonstration of the transferee's qualifications, as set forth above, the Town shall approve the sale/transfer. The Town shall not unreasonably delay or withhold its approval. In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or control be approved without the transferee becoming a signator to this Franchise. For purposes of this section 11.02, no assignment, transfer or sale shall occur when the franchise is transferred or sold to a company owned, managed or controlled by Adlephia Communications Corporation, any of its subsidiaries, John J. Rigas or any member of his immediate family or the assets or stock of the company are transferred to a financial institution as security for refinancing purposes. 
SECTION 12. - RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS PROTECTED. 
    12.01  Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, programmers or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, or age. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and Town laws, and all executive and administrative orders relating to non-discrimination. 
    12.02  Subscriber Privacy. Grantee shall comply with all privacy provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act, as amended. 
SECTION 13. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. 
    13.01  Compliance with Laws. Grantee and the Town shall conform to all state and federal laws and rules regarding cable television as they become effective, unless otherwise stated. Grantee shall also conform during the entire term of the Franchise with all the Town ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted that do or do not apply specifically to the provision of Cable Service that are not preempted by federal law. 
    13.02  Compliance with Federal, State and Local Law. 
A.  If any term, condition or provision of this Franchise or the application thereof to any Person or circumstance shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof and the application of such term, condition or provision to Persons or circumstances other than those as to whom it shall be held invalid or unenforceable shall not be affected thereby, and this Franchise and all the terms, provisions and conditions hereof shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective and to be complied with. 
    13.03  Miscellaneous Violations. 
A.  From and after the acceptance of the Franchise, it shall be unlawful for any Person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any persons in the Town any television signals or radio signals by means of a System unless a Franchise therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of an ordinance, and unless such Franchise is in full force and effect. 
B.  From and after the acceptance of the Franchise, it shall be unlawful for any Person to construct, install or maintain within any street in the Town, or within any other public property of the Town, or within any privately owned area within the Town which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the Town, or the Town's official map or the Municipality's major thoroughfare plan, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television or other signals through a System, unless a Franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained. 
    13.04  Construction. This Franchise shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the State of Florida and without reference to its principals of conflicts of law. 
    13.07  Captions. The paragraph captions and headings in this Franchise are for convenience and reference purposes only and shall not affect in any way the meaning of [or] interpretation of this Franchise. 
    13.08  Calculation of Time. Where the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, payment or thing is required hereunder and the period of time or duration for the performance or during thereof is prescribed and fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period or duration of time. When the last day of the period falls on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be omitted from the computation. 
SECTION 14. - EFFECTIVE DATE; PUBLICATION AND TIME OF ACCEPTANCE. 
    14.01  Publication; Effective Date. This Franchise shall be signed by the Mayor or acting Mayor and attested by the Town Clerk. The Franchise shall be published in accordance with the requirements of Town and state law and shall take effect upon acceptance by Grantee. 
    14.02  Time of Acceptance; Incorporation of Proposal; Exhibits. 
A.  Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from the date of adoption of this Franchise to accept this Franchise. Such acceptance by Grantee shall be deemed the grant of this Franchise for all purposes. In the event acceptance does not take place within thirty (30) days or such other time as the Town might allow, this Franchise shall be null and void. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1972 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1972 Code, as updated through November 3, 1987, which are included herein. Sections of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1972 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-6 1-1-1-6 1-7-1-10 1-8-1-11 2-1 2-1 2-2, 2-3 2-26, 2-27 2-4 2-46 2-6, 2-7 2-28, 2-29 2-8 2-56 2-19-2-25 2-47-2-53 2-27, 2-28 2-54, 2-55 2-41 20-26 20-28 2-42 20-27 2-42.1 20-28 2-43 20-1 2-50, 2-51 2-76, 2-77 2-61, 2-62 2-97, 2-98 2-63 2-96 2-64 2-99 2-65 2-102 2-66, 2-67 2-100, 2-101 2-68 2-104 2-69 1-9 2-70 2-103 2-72 2-105, 2-106 2-81-2-86 20-46-20-51 3-1 6-196 3-1.1 6-197 3-2-3-19 6-198-6-215 4-1 3-1 4-14, 4-15 3-3, 3-4 4-19, 4-20 3-5, 3-6 4-21 3-2 5-1-5-8 4-1-4-8 6-1-6-7 5-1-5-7 7-1 6-51 7-1.1 6-52 7-2 6-53 7-2.1 6-54 7-2.2 6-52 7-3-7-5 6-55-6-57 7-16-7-21 6-26-6-31 71/2-1 6-76 71/2-2, 71/2-3 6-78, 6-79 71/2-4 6-77 71/2-5 6-80 71/2-20-71/2-25 6-96-6-101 71/2-26 6-103 8-1-8-9 7-2-7-10 8-10 7-1 8-11 7-11 8-25-8-32 7-31-7-38 9-1-9-12 6-232-6-243 9-12.1 6-244 9-13, 9-14 6-245, 6-246 9-25 6-231 91/2-1, 91/2-2 8-1, 8-2 10-1 9-2 10-1.1 9-3 10-2 9-1 10-3, 10-4 9-4, 9-5 101/2-11-101/2-14 10-26-10-29 101/2-15-101/2-20 10-30-10-35 11-1 24-1 11-2 24-3 11-3-11-6 24-4-24-7 11-7 24-2 11-8-11-13 24-8-24-13 12-1 6-176 12-6-12-8 6-177-6-179 13-1, 13-2 11-1, 11-2 131/4-1 12-1 131/4-1.1 106.6 131/4-2, 131/4-4 12-3, 12-4 14-2-14-4 16-53-16-55 15-1-15-6 13-1-13-6 151/2-1-151/2-4 14-1-14-4 16-1, 16-2 15-1, 15-2 16-4 15-3 16-6-16-16 15-4-15-14 16-30-16-35 15-31-15-36 17-1 17-1 17-2 17-3 17-3 16-51, 16-52 17-2 17-3-17-5 17-4-17-6 18-1-18-7 18-1-18-7 18-9-18-13 18-8-18-12 18-15, 18-16 18-13, 18-14 19-1-19-3 6-151-6-153 19-5 6-154 20-1-20-5 21-1-21-5 21-1-21-5 6-127-6-131 21-6 6-126 21-7 6-132 22-1, 22-2 22-1, 22-2 22-4-22-7 22-3-22-6 23-1 23-2 23-2 23-1 23-3, 23-4 23-3, 23-4 23-12, 23-13 23-11, 23-12 23-15 23-13 24-1-24-13 25-1-25-13 24-30-24-39 25-31-25-40 25-1-25-4 26-26-26-29 25-16-25-36 26-46-26-66 25-48-25-57 26-86-26-95 25-69 26-30 26-1 27-26 26-2 27-27, 27-28 26-3-26-8 27-29-27-34 27-1, 27-2 16-2, 16-3 27-3 16-6 27-4, 27-5 16-4, 16-5 27-6 16-7 27-7 16-1 27-8, 27-9 16-9, 16-10 27-9.1 16-11 27-10 16-12 27-11 16-8 28-1-28-6 16-31-16-36 281/2-11 28-26 281/2-12 28-29 281/2-13 28-27 281/2-14 28-30 281/2-15-281/2-24 28-51-28-60 281/2-25 28-31 281/2-26 28-61 281/2-27 28-32 281/2-28 28-62 281/2-29, 281/2-30 28-33, 28-34 281/2-31 28-28, 28-35 281/2-32-281/2-36 28-36-28-40 281/2-37 28-28 281/2-48-281/2-56 28-81-28-89 281/2-58 28-90 281/2-59, 281/2-60 29-41, 29-42 281/2-62 29-43 29-1-29-24 29-1-29-24 Ch. 30, §§ 1-7 Ch. 30, §§ 1-7 Ch. 30, § 8 Ch. 30, §§ 8, 9 Ch. 30, § 9 Ch. 30, § 10 Ch. 30, §§ 11-17 Ch. 30, §§ 11-17  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1972 Code, as updated through November 3, 1987, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1972 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede November 3, 1987, but which were never included in the 1972 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Section  Section 
this Code 119 12-15-59 App. B, §§ 1-11 143 11- 7-67 App. C, §§ 1-16 184  2- 1-72 3 1-12 357  6-26-79 App. A, §§ 1-12 408  3- 3-81 App. E, §§ 1-19 430 11- 3-81 App. D, §§ 1-9 503  9-11-84 1-8 Ch. 30, §§ 1-8 9 Ch. 30, § 10 11-17 Ch. 30, §§ 11-17 522  5- 7-85 Ch. 30, § 4 558  4- 5-88 22-4, 29-11 559  6- 7-88 2-76 560  7-28-88 1-10 Ch. 30, § 4 11 Ch. 30, § 13 562  9- 7-88 2-76 20-26 563  9- 7-88 1 20-2 566 10- 5-88 22-2, 29-10 568 11- 1-88 6-52 6-152 6-202 6-234 570 11- 1-88 1-3 Ch. 30, § 4 571  1- 3-89 22-1, 29-23 572  1- 3-89 6-152 573  1- 3-89 28-30, 28-51 574  1-17-89 1-5 Ch. 30, § 8 6-11 Ch. 30, § 9 12 Ch. 30, § 10 575  2- 7-89 29-10 576  3- 7-89 1 Ch. 30, § 5.18 577  6- 6-89 1-6 6-1 578  7- 5-89 1 2-56 579  8-15-89 1 28-51 580  8-29-89 1 Ch. 30, § 14.1 581  9-19-89 20-3 584 10- 3-89 6-234 585 10- 3-89 29-11 587 10- 3-89 24-13 588 10- 3-89 28-51 590  3- 6-90 29-24(a), 
29-24(c)(1), 
29-24(c)(1)a., 
29-24(c)(2), 
29-24(d) 591  3- 6-90 6-52 592  5- 1-90 2-28(1) 593  6-12-90 1 Ch. 30, § 5.8 2 Ch. 30, § 5.9 595  8-22-90 1       Rpld 28-26-28-40, 
28-51-28-62, 
28-81-28-90, 
29-41-29-43 2 28-1-28-19 596  8-22-90 1 Ch. 30, § 4.3 2       Rpld Ch. 30, § 4.4 3       Rnbd Ch. 30, § 4.5       as Ch. 30, § 4.4       Amnd Ch. 30, § 4.4 4       Rnbd Ch. 30, § 4.6       as Ch. 30, § 4.5       Amnd Ch. 30, § 4.5 6 Ch. 30, § 5.17 597  8-22-90 1(1) 20-101  (2.1) 20-121  (2.3)-(2.28) 20-122-20-146  (3.1)-(3.11) 20-181-20-191  (4.1), (4.2) 20-201, 20-202  (5.1), (5.2) 20-251, 20-252  (6.1)-(6.6) 20-301-20-306 598  8-22-90 1(1)-(6) 20-321-20-326 601 11- 7-90 2 2-28(10) 602 12- 4-90 1 6-244(b)(6) 603 12- 4-90 24-13 604  1- 2-91 29-10 607  3- 5-91 1 Ch. 30, § 8.1 608  4- 2-91 1 2-2 609  6- 4-91 2-28(7) 610  6- 4-91 Adopting Ordinance, 
p. ix 611  6- 4-91 2-47(b) 612  6- 4-91 2-57 614  9- 3-91 29-10 617 10- 1-91 20-26(a), 20-46, 2-76(a) 618 11- 5-91 2-28 620 12- 3-91 2-28 621  2- 4-92 1-3 5-8 622  5- 5-92 6-247 625 11- 4-92 24-13 626 12- 1-93 9-1, 9-2       Added 9-3       Rnbd 9-3-9-5       as 9-4-9-6 628  5- 4-93 1.1-1.5 31-1-31-5 2.1-2.4 31-21-31-24 3.1-3.5 31-31-31-35 629  5- 4-93 22-4 630  5- 4-93 6-246 632  8- 3-93 Ch. 30, § 6.5(b) 633  9- 7-93 1 2-76(a) 2 20-26(a) 3 20-46 638 12- 7-93 16-3 639  5- 3-94       Rpld Ch. 30, § 6.4(f) 640  8- 2-94       Rpld 16-4(d)       Amnd 16-36 644  2- 7-95 Ch. 30, § 5.1(a)(1) Ch. 30, § 5.1(b) 645  4- 4-95       Rpld 23-1-23-13       Added 23-1-23-13 646  4- 4-95 6-244(a) 647  4- 4-95       Rpld 15-31-15-36       Added 15-31-15-37 648  4- 4-95 6-52 6-152 6-202 6-234 650  7- 5-95 24-13 654 10- 3-95 22-2(1), 29-10 656  2-27-96 1-14 App. E 657  4- 2-96 6-52 660 10-29-96 Ch. 30, § 5.2(e) 661 12- 3-96 22-2(1), 29-10 662  2- 4-97 2-47(b) 664  3- 4-97 23-7(b)(6)c. 665  3- 4-97 6-152 666  8- 5-97 1 6-248-6-258 669 10- 7-97 1, 2 6-152 673 10- 6-98 2-47(b), (d) 675 11- 4-98 22-2(1) 677  4- 6-99 6-1(b) 684  7-25-00 Art. I, §§ 1-12 30-1-30-12 Art. II, §§ 1-4 30-21-30-24 Art. III, §§ 1-16 30-31-30-46 Art. IV, §§ 1-9 30-61-30-69 Art. V, §§ 1-7 30-81-30-87 Art. VI, §§ 1-9 30-101-30-109 Art. VII, §§ 1-3 30-121-30-123 Art. VIII 30-131 688  1- 2-01 27-29, 27-34 1       Dltd 2-46(3) 2       Dltd 2-54 3 4-5 4       Dltd 2-76, 2-77 5 5-1 6       Dltd 5-2, 5-3, 5-8(c) 7       Dltd 6-30 8       Dltd 12-1-12-4 9, 10 16-8, 16-9 11       Dltd 18-10(8) 12 20-46-20-51 13 20-124, 20-125 14 20-127(5), 20-131 15 23-3, 23-7(c) 16 28-2(t), 28-5(a)(2)a., d., 4.c., d.2.c. 17 28-5(a)(2)a. 18 28-9(a)(2), 28-10(e)(2), 28-12(c)(7), (8), 28-16 19       Dltd App. B 20 12-1-12-10 691  7- 3-01 1(1)-(17)       Added 32-1-32-17 692  7- 3-01 23-7(c)(1)(A) 693  8- 7-01       Added 5-9 697  2- 5-02 1 16-9 700 11- 6-02 29-10 703  5- 6-03 1, 2 2-28(1), (4) 3 2-54 4 4-8(c) 708  7- 6-04       Added 5-10 711  1-13-05 1       Added 7-12 713  6- 7-05 29-14 715  9-13-05 1 2-29 2-7       Added 2-30-2-35 716 10-11-05 1       Added 2-36 718  8- 1-06 4-8(c) 720A 10- 3-06 Ch. 6(note) 720B 11-28-06 1       Added 9-7 721 12-12-06 29-10 722 12-12-06       Added 9-8 07-001  3- 6-07 24-13(note) 07-002 12- 4-07 App. A 07-003  6- 3-08 29-10 08-001  9- 2-08       Added 29-25-29-31 08-003 11- 4-08 24-13(note) 09-001  4- 7-09 1 24-1 2 24-3(b) 09-002  4- 7-09 1       Added 17-2(3) 2 17-5 3       Added 2-98(c) 09-003  5- 5-09 1       Dltd 2-96-2-106       Added 2-96-2-107 09-004 11- 3-09 1-18 App. C 09-005 12- 1-09 1 22-2(1) 2 22-4 3 29-10 4 29-11 5 29-10 10-001  3- 2-10 2       Rpld 29-25-29-31 10-002  6- 1-10 Exh. A 23-7(c)(1)(C)a., 23-8, 30-46(a)(3), (5), 30-64(Table 30-2), (b) 30-68(f)(1)-(3), (5), (g)(3), (6)d.1., (h)(2), (p), (u)(4)a., 30-131 10-003  7- 6-10 2       Added 2-76-2-81 11-001  5- 3-11 1 2-98 12-001  5- 1-12 1 2-46(b)(7) 12-002  9- 4-12 3       Dltd Ch. 6(note) 4 6-1 5       Rpld Ch. 6, Arts. II-IV, VI-X       Added 6-26-6-30 6 6-126, 6-127(c), 6-128(a), 6-129(a), 6-132(a), (c) 7       Rnbd Ch. 6, Art. XI       as Ch. 6, Art. VI 9       Dltd 6-248 12-007 10- 2-12 2       Added 29-25-29-30 13-001  3- 5-13 2 2-28(4) 13-002  9- 3-13 2 30-46 13-003 11- 5-13 2 6-27 14-002  3- 4-14 2 30-68(h) 14-003  3- 6-14 2 30-68(m) 14-004  5- 6-14 2 30-67       Added 30-67(10) 3 30-68(m) 14-005  1- 6-15 2 28-10(a), (c) 14-006  7- 1-14 2       Rpld 23-1-23-13       Added 23-1-23-12 14-008 10- 7-14 2 30-67 3 30-68(h) 15-002  4- 7-15 2-4 7-7-7-9 15-003  5- 5-15 2 23-3 3       Added 23-5(c)(2)e. 4 23-8 15-004  5- 5-15 2       Added ch. 18, art. I(tit.) 3       Added ch. 18, art. II, 
§§ 18-20-18-22 15-005  6- 2-15 2, 3       Rpld 7-4, 7-5 15-007  6- 2-15 2       Added ch. 33, §§ 33-1-33-4 15-008  1- 5-16 2 2-101(a) 3       Added 2-26(e) 4 20-48 16-001  3- 1-16 2 12-4 16-002  3- 1-16 2 30-46(d) 16-004  3- 1-16 2       Added 30-70 16-005  3- 1-16 2 6-132(a) 3 17-2-17-4 17-6       Added 17-7-17-10 16-006  3- 1-16 2       Added 12-1(c) 3 30-68(m)(2) 16-007  5- 3-16 2       Added 7-4 16-008  7- 5-16 2 22-1(a) 22-2       Rpld 22-2(3)       Rnbd 22-2(4)       as 22-2(3) 22-4 3 29-2(a) 29-3 29-5, 29-6 29-10-29-12 29-23(a) 29-24(e)(2) 4 24-13 16-009  8- 2-16 2       Added 6-31 3       Rpld ch. 20, art. IV, div. 6, §§ 20-301-20-306       Added ch. 20, art. VI, div. 1, §§ 20-340-347, div. 2, §§ 20-348, 20-349, div. 3, §§ 20-350-20-355 4 30-23(c) 5 30-87 16-010  9- 6-16 2 12-4(d)(5) 16-011 11- 1-16 2 23-1 23-3-23-6 23-8       Rpld 23-9, 23-10       Added 23-9       Rnbd 23-11, 23-12       as 23-10, 23-11 17-001  8- 1-17 2 20-341(c) 17-002  9- 5-17 2       Added 30-67(c) 3 30-131 17-003 10- 3-17 3 7-1-7-3       Added 7-5 7-6 17-004 11- 7-17 2 20-26 18-004  6- 5-18 2       Added Art. V, 2-96-2-101 2-135-2-141 2-155-2-160       Rnbd 2-96-2-107       as 2-110-2-121 4 20-26 20-46-20-49 20-51 18-006  8- 7-18 1       Rpld 2-98       Rnbd 2-99-2-101       as 2-98-2-100 18-007  8- 7-18 2       Added 12-1       Rnbd 12-1       as 12-1.5 3 12-2 4, 5 12-6, 12-7 6       Added 12-11 18-008 10- 2-18 2 20-51 3 20-346 4 30-23 5 30-31 6 30-40 7 30-64 8 30-103 18-010 12- 4-18 2 30-81 18-011 12- 4-18 2 6-128  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Florida Statutes. 
F.S. 
Section Section  
this Code 1.01 et seq. 1-2 1.01 15-1 1.01(9) 27-31 7.50 1-2 34.191 1-9 55.03 32-5 ch. 57 6-132 60.05 17-5 ch. 97 et seq. 7-1 97.051 7-3 98.041 et seq. 7-2 100.011 7-8 100.181 7-5 100.201 et seq. 7-11 100.361 Chtr. § 10.01 Ch. 7, Art. II 100.361(1)(a) 7-38 100.3605 7-7 ch. 101 Chtr. § 1.06 101.55 7-8 101.657 7-12 102.012 7-7 102.071 7-8 ch. 104 7-1 ch. 112 2-80 112.311 et seq. Ch. 2, Arts. II, III 112.311-112.326 2-80 112.312(1) 2-78 112.312(5) 2-78 112.312(6) 2-78 112.312(8) 2-78 112.312(12a) 2-78 112.312(21) 2-78 112.324 2-81 112.531 et seq. Ch. 21 121.011 et seq. Ch. 19 125.0102 Ch. 23 ch. 161 Ch. 6, Art. V 161.011 et seq. 5-2 161.053 5-5 20-349 161.055 20-343 161.54 20-350 161.141 20-343 161.163 4-8 162.01 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 162.01-162.12 2-120 162.07(2) 2-117 162.09 1-9 1-9 6-126 162.11 25-40 162.12 2-120 6-132 ch. 163 20-1 20-28 33-2 ch. 163, pt. II 20-46 163.362 20-2 163.3161 et seq. Ch. 20 20-46 Ch. 26 163.3161 20-1 163.3174 Ch. 20, Art. II 20-26 20-28 30-46 163.3177 20-28 163.3184 30-46 163.3187 30-46 163.3220 20-324 163.3814 30-46 ch. 166 Chtr. § 1.05 Chtr. § 2.01 Ch. 2 166.032 7-2 166.041 1-6 2-28 30-46 166.0425 Ch. 23 166.046 App. E 166.121 7-11 166.201 Ch. 15 166.201 et seq. Ch. 27 166.221 Ch. 15 166.222 Ch. 6 166.231 Ch. 27, Art. II App. C, § 7 166.241 27-28 166.261 Chtr. § 3.02 Chtr. § 7.01 ch. 170 Chtr. § 8.02 Ch. 25 ch. 171 Chtr. § 1.01 171.062(4) Ch. 24 ch. 177 26-29 177.091 26-29 ch. 180 Ch. 22 Ch. 25 Ch. 29 180.14 Chtr. § 5.02 ch. 186 et seq. Ch. 20 ch. 192 et seq. Ch. 27 ch. 193 Ch. 27 ch. 197 Ch. 27 197.172 13-4 ch. 200 Ch. 27 202.19 32-8 203.012(3) 27-27 32-5 203.012(6) 32-3 203.012(7) 32-3 ch. 205 Ch. 15 205.022 15-1 205.042 15-2 205.053 15-10 15-11 205.171 15-7 205.192 15-8 ch. 210 Ch. 27 210.03 Ch. 27 ch. 218 2-48 Ch. 27 ch. 252 2-29 253.01 et seq. 14-2 253.12 et seq. Ch. 5 253.128 Ch. 6, Art. V 253.1221 Ch. 6, Art. V 255.20 33-2 256.01 et seq. 23-7 286.011 2-28 287.055 33-2 ch. 298 26-29 309.01 Ch. 5 Ch. 6, Art. V 309.02 Ch. 5 ch. 316 et seq. Ch. 16 ch. 316 16-2 316.007 Ch. 16 316.008 Ch. 16 316.008(1)(a) 16-3 316.271 18-10 316.655 16-1 316.1945 16-6 318.18 16-1 ch. 320 16-5 320.01(1)(a) 16-3 16-6 320.01(1)(b) 16-4 320.18(a) 16-5 320.8249 20-353 322.16 16-12 327.22 5-1 327.60 5-7 330.36 5-4 ch. 332 18-3 ch. 335 Ch. 25 335.20 Ch. 25 336.045 Ch. 25 337.29(3) 32-2 337.401 32-2 337.401(5) 32-5 337.403 32-7 337.403(1)(a)-(c) 32-7 337.404 32-7 362.01 32-2 364.02(12) 32-3 ch. 366 et seq. Ch. 22 Ch. 29 366.02 20-343 370.032 et seq. Ch. 14 370.12 4-8 ch. 372 Ch. 4 ch. 373 Ch. 26, Art. IV Ch. 29 373.036 20-343 375.065 Ch. 5 ch. 380 20-324 380.20 et seq. Ch. 5 381.0065 20-343 381.031 22-6 381.261 Ch. 22 Ch. 29 381.986(11)(b)1       30-67 386.01 et seq. 17-5 386.03 17-5 396.161 16-10 ch. 399 Ch. 8 8-2 403.91 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. V 403.413 Ch. 24 403.702 et seq. Ch. 24 403.801 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. V 403.813 Ch. 14 403.850 et seq. Ch. 29 471.003 32-13 479.01 et seq. Ch. 23 ch. 489 Ch. 6 ch. 500 et seq. Ch. 10 ch. 509 Ch. 10, Art. II 15-35 509.215 15-33 509.271 15-32 ch. 514 Ch. 5 514.06 5-2 ch. 534 et seq. Ch. 4 ch. 552 Ch. 9 552.25 Ch. 14 ch. 553 Ch. 6 553.73(5) 20-346 553.73(8) Ch. 9 553.73(10)(k) 20-343 553.795 Ch. 6 ch. 561 et seq. Ch. 3 ch. 561 16-11 561.01 3-1 ch. 562 16-11 562.14 3-6 562.45 3-6 chs. 563-565 16-11 ch. 567 16-11 ch. 568 16-11 ch. 585 Ch. 4 ch. 588 Ch. 4 590.12 Ch. 9 604.50 628.901 32-8 ch. 633 Ch. 9 633.025(2) 9-2 633.121 Ch. 9 650.01 et seq. Ch. 19 683.01 et seq. 16-5 ch. 687 6-132 ch. 705 Ch. 16, Art. III 715.07 23-7 ch. 767 4-6 768.28 Chtr. § 9.03 32-12 ch. 775 et seq. Ch. 18 775.08 18-1 775.082 1-9 775.083 1-9 775.21 18-20 18-21 776.05 21-5 784.011 et seq. 18-4 ch. 791 Ch. 9 794.011 18-21 ch. 800 18-6 800.03 5-4 800.04 18-21 823.01 et seq. 17-5 823.01 17-3 827.071 18-21 ch. 828 Ch. 4 828.27 Ch. 4 ch. 843 Ch. 21 843.01 18-1 843.02 18-1 843.04 18-1 ch. 847 18-6 847.0145 18-21 849.01 et seq. 18-11 860.13 5-4 ch. 870 2-29 870.041 et seq. 2-29 2-30 870.044 et seq. 2-31 870.044 2-29 870.045 2-31 871.01 18-5 877.03 18-4 ch. 900 et seq. Ch. 21 ch. 901 21-4 ch. 903 Ch. 21 ch. 943 Ch. 21 943.0435 18-21 944.607 18-21 1001.021 7-6  
