CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF JUNO BEACH, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published in 2007 by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 
Adopted: February 27, 2008 
Effective: February 27, 2008 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
JUNO BEACH, FLORIDA 
(November 2017) 
____________ 
Jason Haselkorn 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jim Lyons, Vice Mayor 
Frank Fahy, Vice Mayor Pro Tem 
Bill Greene 
Peggy Wheeler 
Town Council 
____________ 
Joseph F. Lo Bello 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Leonard G. Rubin 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Vanessa M. Mutchnik 
Town Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
JUNO BEACH, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Linda S. Hodgkins 
Mayor 
____________ 
James R. Lyons, Vice-Mayor 
John M. Thomas, Vice-Mayor Pro Tem 
Frank P. Fahy 
John T. Callaghan 
Town Council 
____________ 
Jeffrey I. Naftal 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Leonard G. Rubin 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Allison J. Fay 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Juno Beach, Florida. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1980 Code, as supplemented through June 23, 2004, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Jeffrey Naftal, Town Manager, Mr. Leonard G. Rubin, Town Attorney, and Ms. Allison J. Fay, Town Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Juno Beach, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Juno Beach, Florida. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Juno Beach, Florida. 2007. 
TOWN OF JUNO BEACH, FLORIDA 
ORDINANCE NO. 610 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF JUNO BEACH, FLORIDA ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN, INCLUDING A CODIFICATION OF THE TOWN OF JUNO BEACH COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES AND PARTS OR PROVISIONS THEREOF NOT INCLUDED IN OR IN CONFLICT WITH THE NEW CODE; PROVIDING FOR A GENERAL PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF THE TOWN CODE; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDMENTS; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
WHEREAS, the Town of Juno Beach has recodified its existing Code of Ordinance into a new Code of Ordinance administered by the Municipal Code Corporation ("New Code"); and 
WHEREAS, the New Code includes the codification of the existing Town of Juno Beach Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance; and 
WHEREAS, in the course of adopting the New Code, certain existing code provisions and ordinances adopted on or before September 27, 2006 have been revised, deleted or modified to correct typographical errors, to read more clearly, to address inconsistencies, to conform with standard practice; and to conform to state law; and 
WHEREAS, the New Code does not include ordinances adopted after September 27, 2006, and all such ordinances will be codified in the first supplement to the New Code; and 
WHEREAS, the Town wishes to adopt the New Code and determines that its adoption is in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF JUNO BEACH, FLORIDA, as follows: 
    Section 1. The foregoing recitals are ratified as true and correct and are incorporated herein. 
    Section 2. The Town Council hereby adopts the New Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Town of Juno Beach, Florida," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 34, inclusive, a copy of which is on file with the Town. 
    Section 3. Any ordinance of a general and permanent nature, or part or provision thereof, enacted on or before September 27, 2006 and not included or referenced in the New Code or in conflict with the New Code, is hereby repealed, with the exception of Ordinance No. 214 enacted on December 12, 1979, setting forth the Town's subdivision and platting regulations. Ordinance No. 214 shall remain in full force and effect and copies are available for inspection in the Town Clerk's Office. 
    Section 4. The repeal provided for in section 3 above shall not be construed to revive any ordinance, or part or provision thereof, that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 5. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $500.00 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 60 days in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Town may pursue other remedies such as code enforcement proceedings, abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permit. 
    Section 6. Additional or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 7. Ordinances adopted after September 27, 2006 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 8. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this Ordinance is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, inoperative or void, such holding shall not affect the remainder of the Ordinance. 
    Section 9. This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon adoption. 
FIRST READING this 13th day of February, 2008. 
SECOND, FINAL READING AND ADOPTION this 27th day of February, 2008. 
 ?  
AYE ___ 
NAY /s/ LINDA S. HODGKINS, MAYOR  ? 
AYE ___ 
NAY /s/ JAMES LYONS, VICE MAYOR ___ 
AYE  ?  

NAY /s/ JOHN THOMAS, MAYOR PRO TEM ___ 
AYE  ?  

NAY /s/ FRANK P. FAHY, COUNCILMEMBER  ?  
AYE ___ 
NAY /s/ JOHN CALLAGHAN, 
COUNCILMEMBER  
ATTEST: 
      VANESSA M. DUNHAM 
      TOWN CLERK   APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGAL SUFFICIENCY: 
      LEONARD G. RUBIN 
      TOWN ATTORNEY   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Included/
Omitted Supp. No. 8 635  5-12-2010 Included 637  5-12-2010 Included Supp. No. 9 644  1-12-2011 Included 645  1-12-2011 Included Supp. No. 10 646  4-13-2011 Included Supp. No. 11 647  8-24-2011 Included Supp. No. 12 655  9-26-2011 Included Supp. No. 13 648 12-14-2011 Omitted 649  2- 8-2012 Included 650 11- 9-2011 Omitted 651 11- 9-2011 Omitted 657  2- 8-2012 Omitted Supp. No. 14 662 12-12-2012 Included 663  1-23-2013 Included Supp. No. 15 664  6-26-2013 Included Supp. No. 16 668  5-28-2014 Included 670  5-28-2014 Omitted Supp. No. 17 671  7-23-2014 Included 675  9- 9-2014 Included Supp. No. 18 676 11-18-2014 Included 677 11-18-2014 Included 678 12-10-2014 Included 679  1-28-2015 Included Supp. No. 19 685  5-25-2016 Included 686  8-10-2016 Included 687  8-10-2016 Included Supp. No. 20 689  1-25-2017 Included Supp. No. 21 694  5-24-2017 Included 695  5-24-2017 Omitted 696  5-24-2017 Omitted 699  8-23-2017 Included 700  8-23-2017 Included 701 10-25-2017 Included Supp. No. 22 693 10-26-2016 Included Supp. No. 23 702  9-27-2017 Omitted 703  9-27-2017 Omitted 704  9-27-2017 Omitted 2018-01(Res.)  1-24-2018 Omitted 2018-02(Res.)  3-28-2018 Omitted 2018-03(Res.)  5-30-2018 Omitted 2018-04(Res.)  6-26-2018 Omitted 2018-05(Res.)  8-22-2018 Omitted 2018-06(Res.)  8-22-2018 Omitted 705  9-12-2018 Included 706  9-26-2018 Omitted 707  9-26-2018 Omitted 708  9-26-2018 Omitted 2018-07(Res.) 10-24-2018 Omitted 2018-08(Res.) 10-24-2018 Omitted 2018-09(Res.) 11-14-2018 Omitted 2018-10(Res.) 11-14-2018 Omitted 2018-11(Res.) 12-12-2018 Omitted 2018-12(Res.) 12-12-2018 Omitted 710  1-23-2019 Included  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Part I contains the Charter of the Town as proposed by Ordinance No. 474, enacted November 29, 1995, and as approved at referendum held March 12, 1996. Formerly, Part I contained the Charter of the Town as enacted by Ord. No. 280, enacted March 6, 1985, and approved at referendum on March 12, 1985, as amended by Ord. No. 430, enacted October 28, 1992. Subsequent amendments will be worked into their proper places and amended or repealed provisions deleted. Subsequent amendments will be reflected by history notes enclosed in parentheses following the sections affected. The absence of such a history note indicates that the provision has not been amended, and is as originally enacted in 1996. The editors have added words and phrases in brackets where desirable to clarify meaning or facilitate use. Any bracketed catchlines or material included by the editor for clarity were not part of the Charter as approved. 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166. 

ARTICLE I. - CORPORATE NAME 

[Sec. 1. - Name of municipality.] 
    The municipality hereby established shall be known as the "Town of Juno Beach." 
ARTICLE II. - TERRITORIAL BOUNDARIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal annexation and contraction, F.S. ch. 171. 

[Sec. 1. - Established.] 
    The corporate boundaries of the town shall remain fixed and established as they exist on the date this Charter takes effect, provided that the town shall have the power to change its boundaries in the manner prescribed by law. The official legal description of the town shall be maintained by the town clerk. 
ARTICLE III. - LEGISLATIVE 

Sec. 1. - Form of government; town council; power and composition; qualification; residency. 
(a)  The town shall operate under the council-manager form of government, as provided herein. There shall be a town council vested with all legislative powers. The town council shall consist of five (5) members. 
(b)  Only electors of the town who have been continuous residents for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of filing of their notice of candidacy shall be eligible to hold the office of councilmember. All candidates shall submit an affidavit prior to qualification for office demonstrating that they meet the residency requirement. As used in this section and for the purpose of completing the affidavit, "residency" shall require: (1) a place of abode within the town; and (2) the intent of making that place of abode the person's permanent home. Additionally, the affidavit shall state that the candidate is registered to vote at the candidate's place of abode at the time of qualification. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 2, 5-12-2010) 
Sec. 2. - Election and terms. 
    On a date established by ordinance of the town, a general election shall be held in each year to elect members of the town council. The selection of members of the town council shall be by seats to be known as seats 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. Commencing with the 2011 general election and continuing thereafter, the councilmembers in seats 1 and 3 shall serve a term of three (3) years. The councilmember in seat 5 shall continue to serve a term of two (2) years. Commencing with the 2012 general election and continuing thereafter, the councilmembers in seats 2 and 4 shall serve a term of three (3) years. Commencing with the 2013 general election and continuing thereafter, the councilmember in seat 5 shall serve a term of three (3) years. The term of office of a councilmember shall commence upon election and qualification and shall continue until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 637, § 2, 5-12-2010) 
Sec. 3. - Mayor. 
    The council shall elect from among its members a mayor, a vice mayor, and a vice mayor pro tem to serve at the pleasure of the council. Election of the mayor, vice mayor and vice mayor pro tem shall be done annually at the first council meeting after the town election. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council, shall be recognized as head of town government for all ceremonial purposes, by the governor for purposes of military law, for service of process, execution of deeds and as the town official designated to represent the town in all agreements with other governmental entities or certifications to other governmental entities. The mayor shall have no administrative duties except as required to carry out the responsibilities herein. The vice mayor shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. The vice mayor pro tem shall preside over council meetings in the absence of the mayor and the vice mayor. 
Sec. 4. - Compensation and expenses. 
    The council may determine the annual salary of council members by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary shall become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of the councilmembers elected at the next regular election. 
Sec. 5. - Vacancies; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of a councilmember shall become vacant upon the death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law of such councilmember or if such councilmember ceases to be an elector of the town as determined by the remaining members of the council. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies. If there is a vacancy on the council, the council by a majority vote of the remaining members shall choose a successor to serve until the next regular town election at which time an election shall be held regardless of whether an election of the seats in which the vacancy occurred is scheduled. If the election for the seats in which the vacancy occurred is not scheduled, the election for those seats shall be for a term of one (1) year. 
(c)  Extraordinary vacancies. In the event that there is a vacancy in all five (5) seats of the council, the governor is authorized to appoint an interim council, such interim council to serve until the next regularly scheduled election. If the governor does not appoint an interim council within sixty (60) days, the town manager shall schedule a special election at the earliest practicable date. 
State Law reference- Mandate for establishing procedure for filling vacancies, F.S. § 166.031(6). 
Sec. 6. - Council appointed officials. 
    The council shall appoint a town attorney, and shall have the power to employ and retain other professional advisors and consultants. 
Sec. 7. - Procedure. 
(a)  Meetings. The council shall meet regularly at least once in every month at such times and places as the council may prescribe. Special meetings may be held on the call of the mayor or of a majority of the members and whenever practicable, upon no less than twelve (12) hours notice to each member and the public. 
(b)  Rules. The council shall determine its own rules and order of business. 
(c)  Voting. Voting on ordinances and resolutions shall be recorded. A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum; a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and subject to penalties prescribed by rules of the council. No action of the council, except as otherwise provided in this charter, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of the majority of the quorum present. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no ordinance shall be adopted unless by the affirmative vote of at least three (3) councilmembers, and no change to the land use classification or zoning designation of environmentally sensitive land shall be adopted unless by the affirmative vote of four (4) councilmembers. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 2, 12-29-2004) 
State Law reference- Procedures for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041; public meetings and records, F.S. § 286.011. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE 

Sec. 1. - Town manager. 
    There shall be a town manager who shall be the chief executive officer of the municipal corporation. The manager shall be responsible to the council for the administration of all town affairs placed in their charge by or under this charter. 
Sec. 2. - Appointment; removal; compensation. 
(a)  Appointment. The council shall appoint a town manager by a majority vote of all the councilmembers. 
(b)  Removal. The council may remove the manager by a majority of all the councilmembers and the manager shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. 
(c)  Compensation. The compensation of the manager shall be fixed by the council. 
Sec. 3. - Acting town manager. 
    By letter filed with the mayor, the manager shall designate a qualified town executive officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. During absence or disability, the council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the town to serve until the manager shall return or such disability shall cease. 
Sec. 5 [4]. - Powers and duties of the town manager. 
    The town manager shall: 
(a)  Appoint, suspend or remove all town employees. The town manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his or her direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, or office; 
(b)  Establish and supervise the administration of all departments and offices of the town, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(c)  Attend all council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion, but may not vote; 
(d)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter and acts of the council, subject to enforcement by the town manager or by officers subject to the town manager's direction and supervision are faithfully executed; 
(e)  Prepare and submit the annual budget, budget message and capital improvements program to the council; 
(f)  Submit to the council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances of the town as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(g)  Make such other reports as the council may require concerning the operations of town departments and offices; 
(h)  Keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the town and make such recommendation to the council concerning the affairs of the town as is deemed advisable; 
(i)  Sign contracts on behalf of the town; 
(j)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or may be required by the council. 
Sec. 7 [5]. - Town clerk. 
    There shall be a town clerk appointed by the town manager who shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the town coming under his or her control and to that end the powers and duties of the town clerk are and shall be: 
(a)  To attend all official meetings of the council in person or by deputy and keep minutes of its proceedings which, after being approved, shall be recorded in a well bound book and signed by the town clerk. 
(b)  To be the custodian of the town seal and of all records and papers of a general or permanent character pertaining to the affairs of the municipality. 
(c)  To attest all executory contracts made on behalf of the town as evidence of the authorization of such contracts by the council; and no executory contracts made on behalf of the town or to which the town is a party shall be valid unless attested by the town clerk or his or her designee. 
(d)  To preserve, file and index all contracts to which the town is a party. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 2, 12-29-2004) 
Sec. 7 [6]. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Appointment and removals. Neither the council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any town administrative officers or employees whom the manager or any subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(b)  Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations, the council or its members shall deal with town officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee either publicly or privately. Nothing in the foregoing is to be construed to prohibit individual members of the council from closely scrutinizing all aspects of town government operations so as to obtain independent information. It is the express intent of this charter, however, that recommendations for improvement in town government operations by individual council members be made to and through the town manager, so that the manager may coordinate efforts of all town departments to achieve the greatest possible savings through the most efficient and sound means available. 
ARTICLE V. - QUALIFICATION AND ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Florida Election Code, F.S. ch. 97 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Non-partisan election. 
    All qualifications and elections for the office of town council member shall be conducted on a non-partisan basis without regard for or designation of political party affiliation of any nominee on any nomination petition or ballot. 
Sec. 2. - Qualifications. 
    Candidates for the office of town council member shall qualify for such office by the filing of a written notice of candidacy with the town clerk at such time and in such manner as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 3. - Form of ballots. 
(a)  Candidates. The council by resolution shall prescribe the form of ballot including the method for listing candidates for town council elections and any other town election unless the form of a ballot is prescribed by state law. 
(b)  Charter amendments . Whenever a charter amendment is to be voted on by the town, the amendment shall be placed on that portion of the ballot following the candidates for town council, if any. The substance of such amendment shall be printed in clear and unambiguous language on the ballot and followed by the word "yes" and also by the word "no." The proposed amendment shall be styled in such a manner that a "yes" vote will indicate approval of the proposal and a "no" vote will indicate rejection. The wording of the substance of the amendment and the ballot title to appear on the ballot shall be embodied in the town ordinance approving such amendment to be placed before the voters. In accordance with Florida law, the substance of the amendment shall be an explanatory statement of the chief purpose of the measure. The ballot title shall consist of a caption by which the measure is commonly referred to or spoken of. 
(Ord. No. 580, § 2, 1-12-2005) 
Sec. 4. - General and run-off election. 
    Whenever a general or a special election is held to fill any elective office in the town, the candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast at such election to fill such office shall be declared to be duly elected; provided that in the event no candidate for a particular elective office shall receive a majority of the votes cast at such election to fill such office, then a run-off election shall be held on such date as is provided by ordinance of the town; provided further that in such event only the names of the two (2) candidates having received the greatest number of votes in the election for such office shall be submitted to the voters and the one receiving the majority number of votes in such run-off election shall be declared to be duly elected to such office; provided further, that should two (2) or more candidates receive an equal number of votes to any such office, so that it cannot be determined which two (2) had received the greatest and the next greatest number of votes, then the names of all such candidates shall be submitted at the run-off election and the candidate receiving the greatest number of votes at such election shall be declared elected to such office, regardless of whether such candidate received a majority of the votes cast to fill such office at such run-off election. 
Sec. 5. - Unopposed candidate: vacancies in candidacy. 
(a)  In the event only one person qualifies as a candidate for a designated seat on the town council to be filled at an election, that seat shall not be listed on the regular town election ballot. In the event a vacancy in candidacy caused by death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot leaves only one remaining qualified candidate, that candidate shall be treated in the same manner as an unopposed candidate. Each unopposed candidate shall be deemed to have voted for him or herself and thereafter declared to be duly elected to such office. 
(b)  If the death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot of a qualified candidate occurs after the close of the qualification period leaving no candidates for an open seat with at least twenty (20) days remaining before the election, the qualifying period for that seat shall be reopened for a period of five (5) business days following the date the vacancy occurs and all qualified candidates registering during that period shall be placed on the ballot. The town clerk shall advertise the reopening of the qualification period. 
(c)  If the death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot of a qualified candidate occurs after the close of the qualification leaving no candidates for an open seat with less than twenty (20) days remaining before the election, the election for such office shall be delayed for at least thirty (30) and no more than forty-five (45) days at which time the general election for that office shall take place. The town clerk shall advertise notice of the rescheduling of the election and the reopening of the qualifying period. Qualifying shall be reopened for a period of at least ten (10) business days. 
(Ord. No. 580, § 2, 1-12-2005) 
State Law reference- Mandate for establishing procedure for filling vacancies in candidacy, F.S. § 166.031(6). 
Sec. 6. - Recall. 
    The qualified voters of the town shall have the power to recall and remove from office any elected official of the town as provided by general law. 
State Law reference- Recall of members of governing body, F.S. § 100.361. 
ARTICLE VI. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 

[Sec. 1. - Procedures for initiative and referendum.] 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Initiative. Electors of the town shall have power to propose ordinances to the council and, if the council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a town election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital improvements program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes, salaries of town officers or employees, annexation of property, the rezoning of property, or the town's adopted comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Referendum. Electors of the town shall have power to require reconsideration by the council of any adopted ordinance and if the council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a town election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital improvements program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to the appropriation of money, levy of taxes, salaries of town officers or employees, annexation of property, the rezoning of property, or the town's adopted comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Commencement of proceedings. Any five (5) electors of the town may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the town clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought [to] be reconsidered. 
Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners committee is filed, the town clerk shall, at the committee's request, issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners committee at the committee's expense. 
(c)  Petitions. 
(1)  Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by electors of the town equal in number to at least fifteen (15) percent of the total number of electors registered to vote at the last regular town election. 
(2)  Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(3)  Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures where affixed in his presence, and that he believes them to be the genuine signature of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(4)  Time for filing referendum petitions. Referendum petitions must be filed within thirty (30) days after adoption by the council of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
(d)  Procedure for filing. 
(1)  Certificate of clerk; amendment. Within twenty (20) days after the initiative or referendum petition is filed the town clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specify if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners committee by registered mail. Grounds for insufficiency are only those specified in subsection (c). If the petitioners committee does not request council review under subsection (2) of this section within the time required, the clerk's certificate shall be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(2)  Council review. If a petition has been certified insufficient the committee may, within two (2) days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the council. The council shall review the certificate within thirty (30) days of the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the council's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(e)  Referendum petitions. When a referendum petition is filed with the town clerk the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall remain in effect until: 
(1)  The council repeals the ordinance, or; 
(2)  A vote of the town repealing the ordinance has been certified. 
(f)  Action on petitions. 
(1)  Action by council. When an initiative or referendum petition has finally been determined sufficient, the council shall consider the proposed initiative ordinance or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within sixty (60) days, a vote of the town on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held. 
(2)  Submission to voters. The election shall be held not less than ninety (90) days and not later than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date that the petition was determined sufficient. If no regular town election is scheduled to be held within the period described in this subsection, the council shall provide for a special election, within the described period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls. 
(3)  Withdrawals of petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the town by filing with the town clerk or other official designated by the council a request for withdrawal signed by at least four members of the petitioners committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
(g)  Results of election. 
(1)  Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the council; provided, however that the council may amend or repeal an ordinance enacted by initiative only upon the affirmative vote of at least four (4) councilmembers. 
If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(2)  Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRANSITION SCHEDULE 

Sec. 1. - Ordinances preserved. 
    All ordinances in effect upon the adoption of this Charter to the extent not inconsistent with it, shall remain in force until repealed or changed as provided herein. 
Sec. 2. - Pending matters. 
    All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings involving the town shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 3. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  In case any one or more of the sections or provisions of this Charter or the application of such sections or provisions to any situation shall for any reason be held to be unconstitutional, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other sections or provisions of this Charter or the application of such sections or provisions as to any other situation and it is intended that this charter shall be construed and applied as if such unconstitutional section or provision had not been included herein. 
(b)  As often as the council may deem necessary, but in any event, at least every five (5) years, the terms and provisions of this charter shall be reviewed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Charter 474 11-29-1995 arts. I-VII Arts. I-VII 578 12-29-2004 2 Art. III, § 7 579 12-29-2004 2 Art. IV, § 7 [5] 580  1-12-2005 2 Art. V, § 3 Art. V, § 5 635  5-12-2010 2 Art. III, § 1 637  5-12-2010 2 Art. III, § 2  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Town of Juno Beach, Florida," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Juno Beach Code." 
(Code 1980, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the town council: 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the Town of Juno Beach, Florida, as adopted by the electors on March 12, 1996, and any amendments thereto, a copy of which is printed in part I of this volume. 
    Code. The term "this Code" or "the Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Town of Juno Beach, Florida, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be excluded in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be included. Whenever any act required to be done pursuant to the provisions of this Code falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, that act shall be performed on the next succeeding business day. 
    Council; town council . The term "council" or "town council" shall be construed to mean the town council of Juno Beach, Florida. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Palm Beach. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring or authorizing an officer or head of a department of the town to do some act, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the authorized or required act unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    F.A.C. The abbreviation "F.A.C." means the latest edition of the Florida Administrative Code, as supplemented or amended. 
    F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." means the latest edition of the Florida Statutes, as supplemented or amended. 
    Gender. The masculine includes the feminine and neuter and vice versa. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(2). 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. The singular includes the plural and vice versa. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(1). 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmations. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(5). 
    Officer, department or agency. Wherever in this Code reference is made to any officer, department or agency, and the context does not indicate otherwise, it shall be construed to refer to the officer, department or agency of the town. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes individuals, children, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups or combinations. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(3). 
    Shall; may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription . The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
    Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other ways open to public travel in the town. 
    Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such buildings or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The term "the town" or "this town" shall be construed as if the words "of Juno Beach, Florida" followed them. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
    Writing. The term "writing" includes handwriting, printing, typewriting and all other methods and means of forming letters and characters upon paper, stone, wood or other materials. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(4). 
    Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1980, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Construction of statutes, F.S. § 1.01 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1980, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after provisions in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the provision. 
(Code 1980, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
State Law reference- Repealed statutes not revived by implication, F.S. § 2.04. 
(Code 1980, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or excluding territory as a part of the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right; 
(5)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument; 
(6)  Any administrative ordinance not inconsistent with this Code; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, constructing, repairing or otherwise affecting any specific street or public improvement; 
(8)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic or parking regulations for specific locations or on specific streets or portions of streets; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and making assessments therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or vacating or abandoning any public way, easement or right; 
(11)  Any ordinance relating to zoning map amendments; 
(12)  Any ordinance providing for the compensation of officers and employees; 
(13)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1980, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the town council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ___ of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Juno Beach, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Town of Juno Beach, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ___, which said section shall read as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1980, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the town council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the town council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; 
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty; recovery of fees and costs. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the town any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or a term of imprisonment not in excess of 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. The fine and/or term of imprisonment provided herein shall constitute the maximum penalty which may be imposed upon any person who shall be adjudged to have violated any provision of this Code or ordinance of the town; provided, however, that this section shall not conflict with any provisions for penalties imposed for any offense under the laws of the state or as otherwise provided in this Code. 
(b)  A violation of this Code shall be enforceable in accordance with article VI, chapter 2 of this Code or through the initiation of an action in the appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. The town is hereby authorized to recover its attorney's fees and costs, including, where applicable, special magistrate fees and costs, in successfully prosecuting violations of this Code pursuant to article VI, chapter 2 of the Code or any other lawful means. The recovery of any fines, administrative costs, or costs of prosecution may be secured by the filing of a lien against the property that is the subject of the violation or may be enforced against the property owner as a judgment. 
(Code 1980, § 1-10; Ord. No. 173, § 1, 12-8-1976; Ord. No. 675, § 2, 9-9-2014) 
Sec. 1-11. - Court costs assessed for law enforcement education and training program. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed by the town, in accordance with F.S. § 938.15, an additional $2.00 as court costs against every person convicted for violation of a state penal or criminal statute or convicted of a municipal or county ordinance, where such offense occurred within the town limits. In addition, $2.00 shall be deducted from every bond estreature or forfeited bail bond related to such penal statutes or ordinances. However, no such assessment shall be made against any person convicted for violation of any state statute, municipal or county ordinance relating to the parking of vehicles. 
(b)  All such assessments shall be collected by the appropriate court and shall be remitted to the town and earmarked for law enforcement personnel in accordance with F.S. § 943.14. 
(Code 1980, § 1-11) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Administrative, art. IV. 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; public records, F.S. ch. 119; public records and meetings, F.S. § 286.011. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWN COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Legislative, art. III. 

Secs. 2-21-2-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-44. - Civil actions against town officers, employees and board members. 
(a)  Defense of civil actions. The town covenants to pay court costs and a reasonable attorney's fee for the defense of any civil action arising from a complaint for damages or injury suffered as a result of any act or omission of action of: 
(1)  Any of its officials, whether elected or appointed; 
(2)  Any board member appointed by the town council; or 
(3)  Any employee of the town, for an act or omission arising out of and in the scope of his position or employment, unless, in the case of a tort action, the town determines that the official, board member or employee acted in bad faith, with malicious purpose, or in a manner exhibiting wanton and willful disregard of human rights, safety or property. 
(b)  Payment of judgments or settlements. In the event the town is excluded from participation in the insurance risk management trust fund, the town covenants to pay any final judgment, including damages, costs, and attorney's fees, or compromise or settlement of any claim, entered against an official, board member or employee in a civil action described in subsection (a) of this section, subject to the qualifications contained therein; provided, however, that: 
(1)  If the civil action arises under F.S. § 768.28, as a tort claim, the limitations and provisions thereof shall apply; and 
(2)  If the action is a civil rights action under 42 USC 1983 or similar federal statutes, payment may not be made if the official, board member or employee has been determined in the final judgment to have caused the harm intentionally. 
(c)  Provision of insurance. The town is authorized to purchase liability insurance in anticipation of any judgment or settlement which its officials, board members or employees may be liable to pay pursuant to legal action described herein. 
(d)  No waiver of sovereign immunity. Nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver of sovereign immunity or a waiver of any other defense or immunity to any legal action described herein. 
(Code 1980, § 2-2; Ord. No. 160, §§ 1, 2, 1-14-1976; Ord. No. 429, § 1, 10-28-1992) 
State Law reference- Payment of costs and attorney's fees in actions against law enforcement officers, F.S. § 111.065; defense of tort actions against public officers and employees, F.S. § 111.07. 
Secs. 2-45-2-61. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOWN MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Town manager, art. IV, § 1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-62. - Selection process. 
(a)  The town council shall select the town manager by majority vote at a duly called and noticed meeting. 
(b)  Prior to selection of the town manager, the town council may appoint a selection committee to review the applications submitted and make recommendations to the town council. 
(c)  The town council may, in its sole discretion, hold workshops, receptions and/or special meetings as deemed necessary to allow the citizens of the town an opportunity to participate in the selection process. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 2(2-121), 1-12-2005) 
Sec. 2-63. - Employment agreement. 
    The town council may enter into an employment agreement with the town manager; provided, however, that the term of such agreement, or any renewal or extension thereof, shall not exceed five years. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 2(2-122), 1-12-2005) 
Sec. 2-64. - Termination. 
    The town manager shall serve at the pleasure of the town council and may be terminated for any or no reason. However, the town council may only vote to remove the town manager at a duly called and noticed meeting. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 2(2-123), 1-12-2005) 
Secs. 2-65-2-86. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RETIREMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 2-87. - Participation in state system declared. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the town to extend, effective December 21, 1970, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or excepted herein, the benefits of the Florida Retirement System, as authorized by F.S. ch. 121, to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment as defined in F.S. § 121.021, performed in the employ of the town by employees and officials thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 2-13; Ord. No. 112, § 1, 12-21-1970) 
State Law reference- Authority to elect to participate in state retirement system, F.S. § 121.051(2)(b). 
Sec. 2-88. - State system adopted. 
    The town does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of the Florida Retirement System, for and on behalf of all officers and employees of its departments and agencies to be covered under the agreement provided for herein. 
(Code 1980, § 2-14; Ord. No. 112, § 7, 12-21-1970) 
Sec. 2-89. - Exclusion of employees covered by other plans. 
    There is hereby excluded from this division any authority to include in any agreement entered into under section 2-90 hereof any service, position, employee or official now covered by or eligible to be covered by an existing retirement system sponsored by the town, except social security, and such excluded employees and officials may only become covered hereunder after holding a referendum, in which all employees and officials in the affected units have the right to participate. Only those employees and officials electing coverage under the Florida Retirement System by affirmative vote in said referendum shall be eligible for coverage, and those not participating or electing not to be covered by the Florida Retirement System shall remain in their present system and shall not be eligible for coverage. After said referendum is held, all future employees shall be compulsory members of the Florida Retirement System. 
(Code 1980, § 2-15; Ord. No. 112, § 2, 12-21-1970) 
Sec. 2-90. - Agreements authorized for state system. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the administrator of the Florida Retirement System for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by the Florida Retirement System to the employees and officials of the town as provided in this division, which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan by the town, as are found by the administrator of the Florida Retirement System to be necessary and proper, and shall be effective with respect to services in employment covered by such agreement performed on and after December 21, 1970. 
(Code 1980, § 2-16; Ord. No. 112, § 3, 12-21-1970) 
Sec. 2-91. - Withholdings authorized for state system. 
    Withholding from salaries, wages or other compensation of employees and officials for the purposes provided in section 2-87 is hereby authorized, and shall be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the administrator designated by said laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1980, § 2-17; Ord. No. 112, § 4, 12-21-1970) 
Sec. 2-92. - Appropriations required for state system. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from the general fund of the town, such amounts and at such times as may be required to pay promptly the contributions and assessments required of the town, as employer, by applicable state laws or regulations, which shall be paid over to the lawfully designated administrator of the Florida Retirement System at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 1980, § 2-18; Ord. No. 112, § 5, 12-21-1970) 
Sec. 2-93. - Records, reports for state system. 
    The town shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations, and shall adhere to all laws and regulations relating to the Florida Retirement System. 
(Code 1980, § 2-19; Ord. No. 112, § 6, 12-21-1970) 
Sec. 2-94. - Local administrative officer designated for state system. 
    The town finance director is hereby designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees as authorized herein and of the appropriated funds for the employer's contributions as provided in section 2-92. Also, the town treasurer is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining records for the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 2-20; Ord. No. 112, § 8, 12-21-1970; Ord. No. 430, § 12, 10-28-1992) 
Sec. 2-95. - Adoption of deferred compensation plan. 
(a)  The town hereby establishes a deferred compensation plan for its employees and authorizes the mayor to execute the deferred compensation plan. 
(b)  The town council hereby authorizes the town finance director to act on its behalf with respect to said deferred compensation plan. 
(Code 1980, § 2-21; Ord. No. 242, §§ 1, 2, 9-9-1981; Ord. No. 430, § 12, 10-28-1992) 
Editor's note- The deferred compensation plan adopted by Ordinance No. 242, §§ 1, 2, enacted September 9, 1981, has not been set out herein at the direction of the town. Copies of the plan are available for inspection in the office of the town clerk. 
Secs. 2-96-2-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SOCIAL SECURITY 

Sec. 2-119. - Policy declared. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the town to extend, effective as of January 1, 1961, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law, nor excepted herein, the benefits of the system of Old Age and Survivors Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, and by F.S. ch. 650; and to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment as defined in F.S. § 650.02, performed in the employ of said town by employees and officials thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 2-31; Ord. No. 58, § 1, 9-11-1961) 
Secs. 2-120-2-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Secs. 2-137-2-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal borrowing, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; financial matters pertaining to political subdivisions, F.S. ch. 218. 

Secs. 2-156-2-178. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE ENFORCEMENT[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal code enforcement, F.S. ch. 162. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-179-2-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD AND SPECIAL MAGISTRATE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act, F.S. § 162.01 et seq. 

Sec. 2-210. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
    It is the intent of this division to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town by providing an equitable, expeditious, effective, and inexpensive method of enforcing any codes and ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1980, § 2-59; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 8-28-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.02. 
Sec. 2-211. - Applicability. 
    The code enforcement board or special magistrate duly authorized by the town shall hold hearings and assess fines against violators of all codes and ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1980, § 2-60; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 8-28-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.03. 
Sec. 2-212. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Clerk of the board means the town clerk or any employee of the town so designated by the town manager. 
    Code inspector means those authorized agents or employees of the municipality whose duty it is to ensure code compliance. 
    Enforcement board means the Juno Beach Code Enforcement Board. 
    Repeat violation means a violation of a provision of a code or ordinance by a person who has been previously found through a code enforcement board or any other quasi-judicial or judicial process, to have violated or who has admitted violating the same provision within five years prior to the violation, notwithstanding that violations occur at different locations. 
    Special magistrate means any individual designated by the town council, and authorized to hold hearings and assess fines against violators of the codes and ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1980, § 2-61; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 8-28-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, F.S. § 162.04. 
Sec. 2-213. - Appointment; organization. 
(a)  The town council may appoint a seven-member code enforcement board, two alternate members and a legal counsel for the board. 
(b)  Members of the code enforcement board shall be residents of the town. Appointment shall be made by the town council on the basis of experience or interest in the subject matter jurisdiction of the code enforcement board. The members of the code enforcement board shall, whenever possible, include an architect, a businessman, an engineer, a general contractor, a subcontractor and a realtor. 
(c)  The members of the code enforcement board shall elect a chairman, who shall be a voting member, from among the members of the board. The presence of four or more members shall constitute a quorum. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for such travel, mileage, and per diem expenses as may be authorized by the town manager and approved by the town council, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(d)  There is also hereby established a special magistrate who shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities and shall carry out the same functions and procedures as the code enforcement board. 
(e)  The town attorney shall either be counsel to the code enforcement board or shall represent the town by presenting cases before the code enforcement board or special magistrate, but in no case shall the town attorney serve in both capacities. 
(Code 1980, § 2-62; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 8-28-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.05. 
Sec. 2-214. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the code inspector to initiate enforcement proceedings of the various codes; however, no member of a board or special magistrate shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, if a violation of the codes is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator and give him a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the code inspector shall notify the enforcement board or special magistrate and request a hearing. The code enforcement board or special magistrate, through the clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be hand delivered or mailed as provided in section 2-219 to said violator. At the option of the code enforcement board or special magistrate, notice may additionally be served by publication or posting as provided in section 2-219. If the violation is corrected and then recurs, or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code inspector, the case may be presented to the enforcement board or special magistrate even if the violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(c)  If a repeat violation is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. The code inspector, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, shall notify the enforcement board or special magistrate and request a hearing. The code enforcement board or special magistrate, through the clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing and shall provide notice pursuant to section 2-219. The case may be presented to the enforcement board or special magistrate even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and the notice shall so state. If the repeat violation has been corrected, the code enforcement board or special magistrate retains the right to schedule a hearing to determine costs and impose the payment of reasonable enforcement fees upon the repeat violator. The repeat violator may choose to waive his rights to this hearing and pay said costs as determined by the code enforcement board or special magistrate. 
(d)  If the code inspector has reason to believe a violation or the condition causing the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately notify the enforcement board or special magistrate and request a hearing. 
(e)  If the owner of property that is subject to an enforcement proceeding before an enforcement board, special magistrate, or court transfers ownership of such property between the time the initial pleading was served and the time of the hearing, such owner shall: 
(1)  Disclose, in writing, the existence and the nature of the proceeding to the prospective transferee. 
(2)  Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the pleadings, notices, and other materials relating to the code enforcement proceeding received by the transferor. 
(3)  Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee that the new owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and with orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding. 
(4)  File a notice with the code enforcement official of the transfer of the property, with the identity and address of the new owner and copies of the disclosures made to the new owner, within five days after the date of the transfer. 
A failure to make the disclosures described in subsections (e)(1), (2) and (3) of this section before the transfer creates a rebuttable presumption of fraud. If the property is transferred before the hearing, the proceeding shall not be dismissed, but the new owner shall be provided a reasonable period of time to correct the violation before the hearing is held. 
(Code 1980, § 2-63; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 8-28-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.06. 
Sec. 2-215. - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)  Upon request of the code inspector, or such other time as may be necessary, the chairman of the code enforcement board or special magistrate may call hearings of the code enforcement board or special magistsrate; a hearing may also be called by written notice signed by at least three members of the code enforcement board. The enforcement board or special magistrate at any hearing may set a future hearing date. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings by the code enforcement board or special magistrate and all hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. The town shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by the code enforcement board or special magistrate for the proper performance of its duties. 
(b)  Each case before the code enforcement board or special magistrate shall be presented by either a code inspector or the town attorney. If the town prevails in prosecuting a case before the enforcement board or special magistrate, it shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred in prosecuting the case and such costs may be included in the lien authorized under section 2-217(c). 
(c)  The code enforcement board or special magistrate shall proceed to hear the cases and agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The code enforcement board or special magistrate shall take testimony from the code inspector and the alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(d)  At the hearing, the burden of proof shall be upon the town prosecuting the alleged violator to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a violation did occur or does exist, or has been repeated. Assuming proper notice of the hearing has been given to the alleged violator, either as actual notice, or as provided herein, a hearing may proceed in the absence of the alleged violator. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the code enforcement board or special magistrate shall issue findings of fact, based upon evidence of record and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with the powers granted herein. The findings shall be by the special magistrate or by motion approved by a majority of those members present and voting, except that at least four members of the code enforcement board must vote in order for the action to be official. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed if the order is not complied with by said date. A certified copy of such order may be recorded in the public records of the county and shall constitute notice to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns if the violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding upon the violator, and if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns. If an order is recorded in the public records pursuant to this subsection and the order is complied with by the date specified in the order, the code enforcement board or special magistrate shall issue an order acknowledging compliance which shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required to issue such an order acknowledging compliance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-64; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 8-28-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.07. 
Sec. 2-216. - Powers. 
    The code enforcement board or special magistrate shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings. 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may be issued by the police department. 
(3)  Subpoena evidence to its hearings. 
(4)  Take testimony under oath. 
(5)  Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance. 
(6)  Establish and enforce fines. 
(7)  Authorize the town attorney to foreclose on liens imposed which remain unpaid after a period of three months. 
(8)  Authorize the reduction of any fine it has imposed. 
(Code 1980, § 2-65; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 8-28-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.08. 
Sec. 2-217. - Administrative fines; liens. 
(a)  Failure to comply. 
(1)  The enforcement board or special magistrate, upon notification by the code inspector that an order of the enforcement board or special magistrate has not been complied with by the set time or upon finding that a repeat violation has been committed, may order the violator to pay a fine in an amount specified in this section for each day the violation continues past the date set by the enforcement board or special magistrate for compliance or, in the case of a repeat violation, for each day the repeat violation continues, beginning with the date the repeat violation is found to have occurred by the code inspector. 
(2)  In addition, if the violation is a violation described in section 2-214(d), the enforcement board or special magistrate shall notify the town council, which may make all reasonable repairs which are required to bring the property into compliance and charge the violator with the reasonable cost of the repairs along with the fine imposed pursuant to this section. Making such repairs does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the town council to make further repairs or to maintain the property and does not create any liability against the town council for any damages to the property if such repairs were completed in good faith. 
(3)  If a finding of a violation or a repeat violation has been made as provided in this division, a hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order imposing the fine. If, after due notice and hearing, the code enforcement board or special magistrate finds a violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may order the violator to pay a fine as specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(b)  Fine amounts. 
(1)  A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $250.00 per day for a first violation and shall not exceed $500.00 per day for a repeat violation, and, in addition, may include all costs of repairs pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. However, if the code enforcement board or special magistrate finds the violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may impose a fine not to exceed $5,000.00 per violation. 
(2)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the enforcement board or special magistrate shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The gravity of the violation; 
b.  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
c.  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(3)  The enforcement board or special magistrate may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Lien; foreclosure. A certified copy of an order imposing a fine, or a fine plus repair costs, may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order shall be enforceable in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of the state, including execution and levy against the personal property of the violator, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant to this division shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this section runs in favor of the town council, and the town council may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this section. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the enforcement board or special magistrate may authorize the town attorney to foreclose on the lien or to sue to recover a money judgment for the amount of the lien plus accrued interest. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this division may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under section 4, art. X of the state constitution. The money judgment provisions of this section shall not apply to real property or personal property which is covered under section 4(a), art. X of the state constitution. 
(Code 1980, § 2-66; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 8-28-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.09. 
Sec. 2-218. - Duration of lien. 
    No lien provided under the Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act shall continue for a period longer than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action is commenced pursuant to section 2-217(c) in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien or for a money judgment, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee, that it incurs in the action. The town council shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(Code 1980, § 2-67; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 8-28-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.10. 
Sec. 2-219. - Notices; delivery, publication and posting. 
(a)  All notices required by this division shall be provided to the alleged violator by: 
(1)  Certified mail, return receipt requested, provided if such notice is sent under this subsection (a) to the owner of the property in question at the address listed in the tax collector's office for tax notices, and at any other address provided to the town by such owner and is returned as unclaimed or refused, notice may be provided by posting as described in subsections (b)(2)a and b of this section and by first class mail directed to the addresses furnished to the town with a properly executed proof of mailing or affidavit confirming the first class mailing; 
(2)  Hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer, code inspector, or other person designated by the town council; 
(3)  Leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above 15 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice; or 
(4)  In the case of commercial premises, leaving the notice with the manager or other person in charge. 
(b)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, at the option of the code enforcement board or special magistrate, notice may also be served by publication or posting, as follows: 
(1)  Publication. 
a.  Such notice shall be published once during each week for four consecutive weeks (four publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under F.S. ch. 50 for legal and official advertisements. 
b.  Proof of publication shall be made as provided in F.S. §§ 50.041 and 50.051. 
(2)  Posting. 
a.  In lieu of publication as described in subsection (b)(1)a of this section, such notice may be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing, or prior to the expiration of any deadline contained in the notice, in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be at the town hall. 
b.  Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. 
(3)  Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (a) of this section. 
Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (a) of this section, together with proof of publication or posting as provided in subsection (b) of this section, shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this division have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Code 1980, § 2-68; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 8-28-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.12. 
Sec. 2-220. - Appeal. 
    An aggrieved party, including the town, may appeal the order of the enforcement board or special magistrate to the circuit court of the county. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the order to be appealed. Such appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the code enforcement board or special magistrate. 
(Code 1980, § 2-69; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 8-28-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.11. 
Sec. 2-221. - State authority. 
    The town, the enforcement board and the special magistrate shall have all the powers, duties and authority provided by F.S. §§ 162.01-162.13. 
(Code 1980, § 2-70; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 8-28-1996) 
Secs. 2-222-2-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ALTERNATE METHOD OF CODE ENFORCEMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 647, § 2, adopted August 24, 2011, repealed the former Art. VI, Div. 3, §§ 2-251-2-259, and enacted a new Div. 3 as set out herein. The former Div. 3 pertained to code enforcement officers and derived from Code 1980, §§ 2-101-2-109; Ord. No. 410, § 1, adopted May 15, 1992. 

Sec. 2-251. - Issuance of citations. 
    A code compliance officer or sworn police officer may issue a citation to a person when, based on personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted code or ordinance, and the town's special magistrate will hold a hearing on the violation if the citation is either contested or if the fine is not paid within the time specified in the citation. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 2, 8-24-2011) 
Sec. 2-252. - Form and contents of citation. 
(a)  The citation issued by the officer shall be in a form prescribed by the town, and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance; 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom this citation is issued; 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed; 
(4)  A brief description of the violation; 
(5)  The number of section of the code or ordinance violated; 
(6)  The name of the issuing officer; 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or contest the citation; 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation; 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation; and 
(10)  A conspicuous statement if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed or fails to appear before the town's special magistrate to contest the citation, the person shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(b)  After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, an officer shall provide the original citation and one copy of the citation to the town's code enforcement division for further processing. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 2, 8-24-2011) 
Sec. 2-253. - Codes to be enforced by citation. 
    The town council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of the code sections that, due to their nature, lend themselves to enforcement by means of the citation method, in addition to a schedule of penalties for violation of these sections. The schedule of code sections and penalties may be amended at the discretion of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 2, 8-24-2011) 
Sec. 2-254. - Right to hearing; maximum penalty. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a citation, a person alleged to have violated the Town Code may request a hearing before the town's special magistrate and present his or her case to the magistrate. 
(b)  All violations shall be considered civil infractions, and the special magistrate may assess a maximum civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 if the violation is contested. The maximum penalty is exclusive of the town's administrative costs. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 2, 8-24-2011) 
Sec. 2-255. - Failure to accept citation. 
    Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code compliance officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or F.S. § 775.083. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 2, 8-24-2011) 
Sec. 2-256. - Provisions additional and supplemental. 
    This division constitutes an additional and supplemental means of enforcing the provisions of the Town Code. Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the town from enforcing its codes or ordinances by other means. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 2, 8-24-2011) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Wildlife, F.S. ch. 372; damage by dogs, F.S. ch. 767; cruelty to animals, F.S. ch. 828. 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal rescue organization means a duly incorporated non-profit organization devoted to the rescue, care and adoption of stray, abandoned or surrendered animals and which does not breed animals. 
    Animal shelter means a public animal shelter or shelter operated by an animal rescue organization. 
    Cat means an animal of the Felidae family of the order Carnivora. 
    Dog means an animal of the Canidae family of the order Carnivora. 
    Pet store means any retail establishment whether operated separately or in conjunction with another business enterprise open to the public that sells or transfers, or offers for sale or transfer, dogs and/or cats regardless of the age of the animal. 
    Pet store operator means a person who owns or operates a pet store. 
    Puppy or kitten mill means a facility where dogs or cats are bred for the purpose of selling them and where any two of the following conditions are found to exist: 
(1)  More than 20 puppies under the age of 12 weeks or more than 20 kittens under the age of 16 weeks are kept at a single time; 
(2)  No genetic (heredity) health testing appropriate for the breed is conducted; 
(3)  No long-term (over one year) guarantees are offered; 
(4)  A single female is bred every cycle; 
(5)  A single female is bred over five times; 
(6)  There is no record of the dogs' or cats' parents; or 
(7)  More than eight dogs or kittens are kept in a single cage or kennel area. 
(Ord. No. 671, § 2, 7-23-2014) 
Sec. 4-2. - Dogs and cats running at large prohibited; license and leash required on public property. 
(a)  No owner or keeper of any dog or cat shall permit such dog or cat to run at large. 
(b)  No owner or keeper of any dog or cat shall permit such dog or cat on any public street, parkway, walkway or any public park or recreation area unless said dog or cat is properly licensed with a tag and collar and accompanied by a person who has a leash on such dog or cat. 
(Code 1980, § 3-1; Ord. No. 445, § 2, 1-26-1994; Ord. No. 671, § 2, 7-23-2014) 
Sec. 4-3. - Waste; pickup and disposal. 
    It shall be unlawful and prohibited for any person to aid, abet, assist or allow any dog or cat under his custody to leave any deposit of offal or excreta on any public or private premises, pavement or streets, parkways or walkways, or in any public parks or recreation areas, or ways on the oceanfront devoted to the use of the public, other than on premises owned by the owner or custodian or such dog or cat. All waste matter must be picked up and disposed of by the custodian walking such dog or cat. 
(Code 1980, § 3-2; Ord. No. 475, § 2, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 671, § 2, 7-23-2014) 
Sec. 4-4. - Breeding and retail sale of dogs and cats. 
(a)  Puppy or kitten mills. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to establish, operate or maintain a puppy or kitten mill within the corporate limits of the town. 
(b)  Sale or transfer of dogs or cats. It shall be unlawful for a pet store to display, sell, deliver, barter, lease, rent, auction, give away, transfer, offer for sale or transfer, or otherwise dispose of dogs or cats within the corporate limits of the town. 
(c)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A person who sells, deliver, offers for sale, trades, barters, leases, rents, auctions, gives away or otherwise transfers or disposes of a dog or cat that was bred and reared on property owned by the person provided that the person is not operating a puppy or kitten mill, the person is not a pet dealer as defined in F.S. ch. 828, and the property is not a pet store. 
(2)  An animal shelter; 
(3)  An animal rescue organization; or 
(4)  An animal shelter or animal rescue organization that operates out of or in conjunction with a pet store. 
(d)  Adoption of shelter and rescue animals. Nothing in this section shall prevent a pet store or its owner, operator or employee from providing space and appropriate care for animals owned by an animal shelter or animal rescue organization and maintained at the pet store for the purpose of offering the animals for adoption by members of the public. 
(e)  Violations, enforcement. 
(1)  Code enforcement personnel are authorized to enforce this article in accordance with all remedies set forth in division 2 of article II of chapter 2 of this Code. 
(2)  Law enforcement personnel are authorized to enforce this article in accordance with all remedies set forth in division 2 of article II of chapter 2 of this Code, section 1-14 of this Code, and any other provision of state or local law. 
(3)  In addition to the remedies set forth above, whether civil or criminal, the town may also pursue temporary or permanent injunctive relief or any other legal or equitable remedy authorized by law in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 671, § 2, 7-23-2014) 
Sec. 4-5. - Keeping of livestock and poultry prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to raise or keep any animal generally considered as livestock or poultry, such as chickens, horses, goats, sheep, pigs, cows or any other animal or fowl generally kept or maintained on a farm, within the town limits. 
(Code 1980, § 3-3; Ord. No. 475, § 2, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 671, § 2, 7-23-2014) 
Sec. 4-6. - Protection of turtles, beaches. 
    For the protection of turtles and of the beach and beach dune system, no mechanical beach-cleaning methods may be used within the incorporated limits of the town; provided, however, that the county may utilize mechanical beach-cleaning methods within county-owned parks. Hand cleaning methods to remove nonvegetative debris may be utilized without a town permit; however, no removal of seaweed from the beach and beach dune system shall be permitted. An annual town permit shall be required to relocate seaweed, in addition to any required state permit for beach cleaning. 
(Code 1980, § 3-17; Ord. No. 252, § 1, 3-10-1982; Ord. No. 511, § 1, 3-24-1999; Ord. No. 570, § 2, 3-16-2004; Ord. No. 671, § 2, 7-23-2014) 
State Law reference- Sea turtles, F.S. §§ 161.161, 370.12. 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Building construction standards, F.S. ch. 553. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Temporary structures or mobile units for business prohibited. 
    No temporary structure or mobile unit shall be permitted in the town for the purpose of conducting a business therein. 
(Code 1980, § 9-6; Ord. No. 77, § 3, 2-26-1965) 
Sec. 6-2. - Temporary buildings or structures prohibited between State Road A1A and ocean. 
    No temporary building or structure, including jetties or groins, shall be constructed within the town between the east right-of-way line of State Road A1A and the mean low water line of the Atlantic Ocean. 
(Code 1980, § 9-7; Ord. No. 77, § 2, 2-26-1965) 
Secs. 6-3-6-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLORIDA BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 6-23. - Adopted. 
    The Florida Building Code, as adopted by the state legislature, is hereby incorporated by reference as the building code for the town, subject to the administrative amendments set forth in section 6-24. 
(Code 1980, § 4-1; Ord. No. 278, § 2, 10-9-1984; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 396, § 1, 9-19-1990; Ord. No. 571, § 2, 6-23-2004; Ord. No. 588, § 2(4-1), 11-9-2005) 
State Law reference- Florida Building Code, F.S. § 553.70 et seq. 
Sec. 6-24. - Administrative amendments. 
    The town hereby amends and supplements chapter 1 of the Florida Building Code by the adoption of the following sections of said chapter. Chapter 1, as hereby amended, shall be in full force and effect within the town: 
105.4.1.5 Each permit issued is subject to and conditioned upon a maximum time schedule for completion of construction projects. Permits issued for projects 5,000 square feet or less in size shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such projects is commenced and completed within twelve (12) months after issuance of the permit. Permits for projects greater than 5,000 square feet in size and less than 10,000 square feet in size shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced and completed within twenty-four (24) months after issuance of the permit. Permits for projects 10,000 square feet in size or greater shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced and completed within thirty-six (36) months after the issuance of the permit. 
105.4.1.5.1 For projects in which only interior work remains to be performed, extensions of time for periods not exceeding 90 days each shall be allowed, provided that the request for an extension is in writing and the permit holder demonstrates justifiable cause. To qualify for these extensions, the work to be performed must not be visible from outside the project, the project property must be fully landscaped, all necessary driveways and walkways on the project property must be completed, all necessary drainage and related site improvements must be completed and installed, and all construction debris, dumpsters, and temporary construction fences must be removed from the project property. 
105.4.1.5.2 For all other projects, one extension of time for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days shall be allowed, provided the request for an extension is in writing and the permit holder demonstrates justifiable cause. 
105.4.1.5.3 All extensions shall be in writing and issued by the town manager or the town manager's designee. 
105.4.1.5.4 Failure of the permit holder and/or property owner to complete the construction within the construction time schedule and any extensions, if applicable, constitutes a violation of this code and shall be referred to the town's code enforcement special magistrate. If a fine is imposed by the special magistrate, the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be withheld until the fine is paid in full. 
105.6.2 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building or structure or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees, plus penalty fees up to 300 percent of the usual permit fee, as decided by the building official. Appeals of a permit fee incurred by a violation notice shall be made within fourteen (14) days of the notice of violation to the office of the town clerk for a hearing before the special magistrate. Notwithstanding the foregoing, and in an effort to encourage property owners to resolve violations consisting of any work requiring a building permit, if an application for a permit is made and no violation notice was issued, the penalty shall be double the applicable building permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 2(4-2), 11-09-2005) 
Sec. 6-25. - Approval of other government agencies. 
    Where required, the approval of jurisdictional governmental regulatory agencies is required to be endorsed on all plans submitted prior to issuance of a building permit by the town. 
(Code 1980, § 4-19; Ord. No. 182, § 5, 2-15-1978; Ord. No. 406, § 2, 3-20-1991) 
Sec. 6-26. - Property to be platted and recorded. 
    All parcels of land for which a building permit is requested must be platted or replatted and recorded prior to the approval of a building permit for construction thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 4-20; Ord. No. 182, § 5, 2-15-1978) 
Sec. 6-27. - Building permit application fees. 
(a)  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied at the time of filing with the appropriate fees as set forth in the applicable fee schedule, as it may be amended from time to time, together with a 25 percent administrative processing fee. Application fees are not refundable. The applicable fee schedule is on file in the office of the town clerk. 
(b)  In the event the applicant fails to pay all fees, charges, costs, and expenses relative to the property subject to a building permit application pursuant to this section or any other Code section, including, without limitation, application fees, occupational license fees, utility fees, payments, and connection charges, code enforcement board fines, and/or plan review fees, the town shall suspend all action on the permit application until all applicable fees, charges, costs and expenses have been paid by the applicant. 
(Code 1980, § 4-21; Ord. No. 406, § 2, 3-20-1991; Ord. No. 588, § 3, 11-9-2005) 
Sec. 6-28. - Interlocal agreements. 
    The town may enter into an interlocal agreement with another unit of local government to provide plan review, inspect construction projects and otherwise assist the town in enforcing and administering the provisions of the Florida Building Code within its corporate limits. In such event, the terms of the interlocal agreement shall control the enforcement and administration of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 4-3; Ord. No. 155, § 2, 11-12-1975; Ord. No. 406, § 2, 3-20-1991; Ord. No. 571, § 4, 6-23-2004; Ord. No. 588, § 2(4-4), 11-9-2005) 
Secs. 6-29-6-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 687 , § 2, adopted August 10, 2016, repealed ch. 6, art. III, § 6-41 and enacted a new ch. 7, §§ 7-1-7-27. Former ch. 6, art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1980; and Ord. No. 332, February 17, 1988. 

Secs. 6-41-6-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 

Sec. 6-60. - Criteria for designating as dangerous. 
    All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed dangerous buildings: 
(1)  Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of the supporting members, or 50 percent of the damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the residents of the town. 
(5)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein. 
(6)  Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic, or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication. 
(8)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)  Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the residents of the town. 
(10)  Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the building codes of the town, or any other applicable ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1980, § 4-93; Ord. No. 183, § 1, 2-15-1978) 
Sec. 6-61. - Nuisance declared. 
    All dangerous buildings as defined by section 6-60 are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as herein provided. 
(Code 1980, § 4-94; Ord. No. 183, § 3, 2-15-1978; Ord. No. 588, § 4, 11-9-2005) 
Sec. 6-62. - Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
    The following standards shall be followed in substance by the building official or enforcement officer and the special magistrate in ordering repair, vacation or demolition of dangerous buildings: 
(1)  If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the provisions of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)  In any case where a dangerous building is 50 percent damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished; 
and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the provisions of this article, it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the provisions of this article or any ordinance of the town or statute of the state, it shall be demolished. 
(Code 1980, § 4-95; Ord. No. 183, § 2, 2-15-1978; Ord. No. 588, § 4(4-95), 11-9-2005) 
Sec. 6-63. - Duties of building official or enforcement officer. 
    The building official or enforcement officer shall: 
(1)  Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Inspect any building, wall or structure reported as herein provided by the fire district or the police department of the town as probably existing in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the clerk of the circuit court of the county, of any building found to be a dangerous building as defined by this article, that: 
a.  The owner must vacate, repair or demolish said building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this article; 
b.  The occupant or lessee must vacate said building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession; 
c.  The mortgagee, agent or other person having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the clerk of the circuit court of the county, may at his own risk repair, vacate or demolish said building or have such work or act done; 
provided that any person notified as herein provided to repair, vacate or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time, not exceeding 30 days, as may be necessary to do, or have done, the work or act required by the notice provided for herein. 
(4)  Set forth in the notice provided for herein a description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply with the terms of this article within such length of time, not exceeding 30 days, as is reasonable. 
(5)  Report to the special magistrate any noncompliance with the notice as herein provided. 
(6)  Appear at hearings conducted by the special magistrate and testify as to the condition of dangerous buildings. 
(7)  Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows: 
"This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the building official or enforcement officer. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent of this building, and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the county. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with." 
(Code 1980, § 4-95; Ord. No. 183, § 4, 2-15-1978; Ord. No. 588, § 4(4-96), 11-9-2005) 
Sec. 6-64. - Hearing and action by special magistrate. 
    The special magistrate shall: 
(1)  Upon receipt of a report of the building official or enforcement officer, as herein provided, give written notice to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent, and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the county to appear before it on the date specified in the notice to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the building official's or enforcement officer's notice as herein provided. 
(2)  Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the building official or enforcement officer or the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or any other person having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the county, or any other person, shall offer relative to the dangerous building. 
(3)  Make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to such hearing herein provided as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building as defined by this article. 
(4)  Issue an order based upon findings of fact made as provided herein commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in said building, as shown by the land records of the county, to repair, vacate or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building as defined by this article and providing that any person so notified, except owners, shall have the privilege of either vacating or repairing said dangerous building; or any person not the owner of said dangerous building but having an interest in said building, as shown by the land records of the county, may demolish said dangerous building at his own risk to prevent the town acquiring a lien against the land upon which said dangerous building stands as provided herein. 
(5)  If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply with the order provided herein within ten days or such other timeframe established by the special magistrate in the order, the special magistrate shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated or demolished, as the facts may warrant, under the provision provided herein, and shall, with the assistance of the town attorney, cause the costs of such repair, vacation or demolition to be charged against the land on which the building existed as a municipal lien, or cause such costs to be levied as a special assessment against the land upon which the building stands or did stand, or to be recovered in a suit against the owner, mortgagee, lessee or other person having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the county. Provided that in cases where such procedure is desirable and any delay thereby caused will not be dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the residents of the town, the special magistrate shall notify the town attorney to take legal action to force the owner, mortgagee, lessees or other person having an interest in said building, as shown by the land records of the county, to make all necessary repairs or demolish the building. 
(6)  Report to the town attorney the names of all persons not complying with the order provided for herein for consideration of prosecution for violation of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 4-97; Ord. No. 183, § 5, 2-15-1978; Ord. No. 588, § 4(4-97), 11-9-2005) 
Sec. 6-65. - Decisions final, subject to judicial review. 
    Every decision of the special magistrate shall be final, subject to any aggrieved person filing within 30 days a petition in the circuit court seeking review by certiorari. 
(Code 1980, § 4-98; Ord. No. 183, § 12, 2-15-1978; Ord. No. 588, § 4(4-98), 11-9-2005) 
Sec. 6-66. - Abatement or correction in case of emergency. 
    In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building as defined herein is immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the building official or enforcement officer shall cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 4-99; Ord. No. 183, § 8, 2-15-1978) 
Sec. 6-67. - Fire district, police department to report violations. 
    Personnel of the fire district and police department are empowered to make a report in writing to the building official or enforcement officer of any buildings or structures which are, may be, or are suspected to be dangerous buildings within the provisions of this article. Such reports must be delivered to the building official or enforcement officer within 24 hours of the discovery of such buildings by any personnel of the fire district or police department. 
(Code 1980, § 4-100; Ord. No. 183, § 11, 2-15-1978) 
Sec. 6-68. - Duties of town attorney. 
    The town attorney shall: 
(1)  Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices and orders provided for in this article. 
(2)  Appear at all hearings before the town council in regard to dangerous buildings. 
(3)  Bring suit to collect all municipal liens, assessments, or costs incurred by the town in repairing or causing to be vacated or demolished dangerous buildings. 
(4)  Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 4-101; Ord. No. 183, § 7, 2-15-1978) 
Sec. 6-69. - Service of notices and orders. 
    In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or other person having an interest in such dangerous building is absent from the town, all notices or orders provided for in this article shall be sent by registered mail to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in said building, as shown by the land records of the county, to the last known address of each, and a copy of such notices or orders shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the dangerous building to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate service, or in lieu thereof, personal service of such notices or orders may be served. 
(Code 1980, § 4-102; Ord. No. 183, § 9, 2-15-1978) 
Sec. 6-70. - Protection of town agents from liability. 
    No officer, agent or employee of the town shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the town as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article shall be defended by the town until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Code 1980, § 4-103; Ord. No. 183, § 10, 2-15-1978) 
Sec. 6-71. - Provisions declared supplemental. 
    This article shall be in addition to, supplemental and cumulative to other existing codes, ordinances and laws as provided elsewhere relating to dangerous buildings. 
(Code 1980, § 4-104; Ord. No. 183, § 13, 2-15-1978) 
Sec. 6-72. - Violations. 
(a)  The owner, mortgagee or other person having an interest in any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish said building given by any person authorized by this article to give such notice or order shall be guilty of a violation of this Code for each offense. Each and every day such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for compliance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person removing the notice provided herein shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 4-105; Ord. No. 183, § 6, 2-15-1978) 
Secs. 6-73-6-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION SITE STANDARDS 

Sec. 6-103. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned means any building which has been started and partly finished, where the building permit authorizing the work has expired or been rendered null and void. 
    Building means any structure, whether to be used as a dwelling or a place of business, or accessory thereto, which is built above the ground. 
    Debris means any trash, building materials, whether used or unused, pipes, paper, wrapping, crates, boxes of any type, tin cans, wood, bottles, glass, animal and vegetable wastes, or other discarded materials. 
    Garbage or trash cans means receptacles used for the holding of garbage, debris or trash until the appropriate service may collect the contents at stated intervals. 
    Incomplete or unfinished building means any structure which reveals any blocks, studding, rafters, sills or part of a building, not finished according to the plans approved by the building authority. No building shall be deemed incomplete while the same is in the process of construction. 
    Inoperable vehicle means a vehicle that cannot be driven upon the public streets for reasons including, but not limited to, being unlicensed or unregistered, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or in a state of being incapable of being moved under its own power. 
    Lessee means any person other than the owner in possession of or occupying property with the permission of the owner. 
    Owner means the person in whose name is vested the title to the land on which a building is constructed. 
    Person means the owner or lessee of any real property within the town. 
    Personal property means all forms of personal property and chattel, other than real property. 
    Premises means any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, parking area, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building, or other structure. 
    Process of construction means construction-related activities being carried on a continuing basis pursuant to a valid permit, with regularly scheduled successful inspection. 
    Vegetation means plant life of any type or form, living or dead. 
(Code 1980, § 4-116; Ord. No. 63, § 2, 1-14-1963; Ord. No. 588, § 5(4-116), 11-9-2005) 
Sec. 6-104. - Property maintenance code. 
(a)  The town hereby adopts the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, published by the International Code Council, as the property maintenance code for the town and incorporates such code by this reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the enforcement provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, any violation of the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code shall be a violation of this Code and shall be enforced as provided in chapter 2. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code and the provisions of this Code, the provisions of this Code shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(Code 1980, § 4-2; Ord. No. 571, § 3, 6-23-2004; Ord. No. 588, § 2(4-3), 11-9-2005) 
Sec. 6-105. - Buildings to be completed or enclosed; incomplete buildings. 
    All buildings for which a building permit has been issued shall be completed or enclosed, so that no buildings shall appear to be incomplete. All incomplete buildings shall be deemed a public nuisance and a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 4-117; Ord. No. 63, § 5, 1-14-1963; Ord. No. 588, § 5(4-117), 11-9-2005) 
Sec. 6-106. - Abandoned buildings declared nuisance. 
    Abandoned buildings shall be deemed a public nuisance, a violation of this Code, and subject to the provisions of article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 4-118; Ord. No. 63, § 6, 1-14-1963; Ord. No. 588, § 5(4-118), 11-9-2005) 
Sec. 6-107. - Uses or activities constituting a public nuisance. 
    The following actions or activities by any person upon any improved or vacant parcel, lot, tract, land or premises within the town shall constitute a public nuisance and shall constitute a violation of this Code, subject to all methods of code enforcement available to the town, including, but not limited to, code enforcement proceedings and injunctive relief: 
(1)  The casting, throwing, sweeping, placing, depositing, or burial of any debris in any manner other than placing the same in a proper disposal facility or place, dumpster, garbage or trash can, or other approved garbage receptacle; 
(2)  The condition of ill repair or lack of maintenance of any real property such that such condition is deemed to be unsafe or creates a health, sanitation, or safety hazard; 
(3)  The growth of weeds, grass, or other similar ground cover which exceeds 12 inches in height, the uncontrolled growth of vegetation which fails to present a healthy appearance, or any vegetation or plant material growth which is conducive to harboring vermin, insects, reptiles, or other wild animal life; 
(4)  The keeping of animals or fowl in any manner which creates an unhealthy or unsanitary condition; 
(5)  The presence, accumulation, open storage, or otherwise keeping of debris or any abandoned, discarded, or unused personal property visible at ground level from adjoining properties or public rights-of-way; 
(6)  The parking, leaving, storing, or possession of any boat, trailer, or parts thereof, which are in a rusted, wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, inoperative, or abandoned condition, upon any public or private property unless the same is completely enclosed within a building or structure and is completely shielded from view from adjoining properties or rights-of-way; 
(7)  The parking, leaving, storing, or possession of any inoperable motor vehicle, or parts thereof, upon any public or private property unless the same is completely enclosed within a building or structure and is completely shielded from view from adjoining properties or rights-of-way; or 
(8)  The presence, accumulation, storage, or keeping of any building material on the ground, leaning against any building or structure, or upon the roof or top of any building or structure in the absence of ongoing construction activity conducted pursuant to a valid building permit when such material is visible at ground level from adjoining properties or public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 5(4-119), 11-9-2005) 
Sec. 6-108. - Concealment of garbage and trash receptacles. 
    All trash, garbage, and recyclables shall be placed in receptacles with tight covers and stored in positions where they shall not be noticeable from any street. The storing of such receptacles in enclosed bins or the use of fences or shrubbery shall constitute effective means of screening such articles. No earlier than the day prior to the scheduled day for collection, said receptacles may be moved into position where the collector may conveniently empty them. When emptied, said receptacles shall be returned to their storage places the same day. 
(Code 1980, § 4-121; Ord. No. 63, § 10, 1-14-1963; Ord. No. 588, § 5(4-120), 11-9-2005; Ord. No. 608, § 2, 5-9-2007) 
Sec. 6-109. - Construction site standards. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "construction" shall include lot clearing, grading, stockpiling of soil, demolition, and building construction, reconstruction, alteration or addition. 
(b)  It shall be the joint responsibility of any owner of real property upon which construction is occurring, or any contractor responsible for said construction, to ensure that all rights-of-way remain free at all times of all construction waste, trash or particulate matter associated with the construction activity. 
(c)  It shall be the joint responsibility of any owner of real property upon which construction is occurring, or any contractor responsible for said construction, to ensure that all construction vehicles are parked in such a manner so as to ensure the free flow of traffic utilizing generally accepted traffic maintenance techniques, the ingress and egress of emergency vehicles, and access to all driveways and residences located along public and private rights-of-way. 
(d)  It shall be the joint responsibility of any owner of real property upon which construction is occurring, or any contractor responsible for said construction, to ensure that all waste, trash or particulate matter associated with the construction activity is contained on the real property upon which the construction is occurring. Construction waste and trash shall be secured within an enclosed containment structure. In the case of stockpiled particulate materials, such materials shall be stabilized in a manner satisfactory to the building official. 
(e)  All areas surrounding the construction site which are affected by dust, dirt and debris from the construction site shall be swept clean of such dust, dirt and debris on a daily basis. 
(f)  During severe weather, it shall be unlawful for any owner of real property upon which construction is occurring or any contractor responsible for said construction, to have on or near his property loose construction debris or construction material, including, but not limited to, roof tiles that are not fastened or secured to the ground or any permanent structure. 
(g)  Media broadcasts or notices issued by the National Weather Service of severe weather are deemed sufficient notice to the owner of real property upon which construction is occurring, or any contractor responsible for said construction, to secure loose construction debris and loose construction materials against the effects of high winds. 
(h)  Materials stockpiled on the top of any structure under construction shall be permanently installed by the property owner or contractor upon warning of severe weather; provided, however, in the event such installation cannot be timely completed, then the property owner or contractor shall: 
(1)  Band together the construction materials and mechanically fasten them to the top of the structure in such a manner so as not to present a threat of their becoming airborne during severe weather; 
(2)  Remove the construction materials from the top of the structure and mechanically tie them down to the ground; 
(3)  Remove the construction materials from the job site; or 
(4)  Store the construction materials inside a protected structure. 
(i)  Any pool under construction shall be kept clean of any debris until such time as the pool is properly filtered. All sitting water in pools under construction must be properly treated to eliminate algae and insects. 
(j)  In addition to other remedies for violation of this Code, the building official or his designee may issue a stop work order for violation of this section. Prior to the issuance of a stop work order, the building official or his designee shall, where practicable, attempt to provide a verbal or written notice to the owner of the real property upon which construction is occurring, or any contractor responsible for said construction. That notice shall specifically set a time period for correction of the violation. In the event the town takes emergency action to secure a property in violation of this section, the property owner shall be responsible for all costs associated therewith and shall be billed for all charges and expenses of the town. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 5(4-121), 11-9-2005) 
Chapter 7 - FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 7-1. - General provisions. 
(a)  Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Floodplain Management Ordinance of the Town of Juno Beach," hereinafter referred to as "this section" or "this chapter." 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(c)  Intent. The purposes of this section and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, section 59.22. 
(e)  Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This section is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(f)  Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this section and the Florida Building Code, as amended by the town, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring the town to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this section. 
(g)  Disclaimer of liability. This section shall not create liability on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-2. - Applicability. 
(a)  In general. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Areas to which this section applies. This section shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the town, as established in subsection 7-2(c) below. 
(c)  Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The flood insurance study for Palm Beach County, Florida and incorporated areas dated October 5, 2017, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this section and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the town center. 
(d)  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to section 7-5 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the town indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this section and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as a special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(e)  Other laws. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(f)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this section and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This section shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this section. 
(g)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016; Ord. No. 700 , § 2, 8-23-2017) 
Sec. 7-3. - Duties and powers of the floodplain administrator. 
(a)  Designation. The planning and zoning director is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(b)  General. The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this section consistent with the intent and purpose of this section and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this section without the granting of a variance pursuant to section 7-7 of this chapter. 
(c)  Applications and permits. The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the town, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this section; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this section is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this section. 
(d)  Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; the determination requires: for proposed work to repair damage caused by flooding, evaluation of previous permits issued to repair flood-related damage as specified in the definition of "substantial damage;" and evaluation of previous permits issued for improvements and repairs as specified in the definition of "substantial improvement;" and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this section is required. 
(e)  Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to section 7-7 of this chapter. 
(f)  Notices and orders. The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this section. 
(g)  Inspections. The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in section 7-6 of this chapter for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(h)  Other duties of the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to subsection (d) above; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this section and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the town are modified; and 
(6)  Advise applicants for new buildings and structures, including substantial improvements, that are located in any unit of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) and the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-591) that federal flood insurance is not available on such construction; areas subject to this limitation are identified on flood insurance rate maps as "Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas" and "Otherwise Protected Areas." 
(i)  Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including flood insurance rate maps; Letters of map change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this section; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at the town center. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-4. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this section, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this section and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(b)  Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this section for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(c)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(2)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
(3)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(4)  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
(5)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(6)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
(7)  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(8)  Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(9)  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
(d)  Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the town. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in section 7-5 of this chapter. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(e)  Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this section shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this section, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of the town. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(f)  Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(g)  Suspension or revocation. The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this section or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of the town. 
(h)  Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The South Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065, and Chapter 64E-6, Florida Administrative Code. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for construction, reconstruction, changes, or physical activities for shore protection or other activities seaward of the coastal construction control line; F.S. § 161.141. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(5)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(6)  Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-5. - Site plans and construction documents. 
(a)  Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this section shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance with subsection 7-5(b)(2) or (b)(3) below. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with subsection 7-5(b)(1) below. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal high hazard areas, new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Delineation of the coastal construction control line or notation that the site is seaward of the coastal construction control line, if applicable. 
(8)  Extent of any proposed alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, provided such alteration is approved by the state Department of Environmental Protection. 
(9)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
    The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this section but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this section. 
(b)  Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(c)  Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection 7-5(d) below and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the town. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as zone AO or zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection 7-5(d) below. 
(4)  For activities that propose to alter sand dunes or mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas (zone V), an engineering analysis that demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. 
(d)  Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-6. - Inspections. 
(a)  In general. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(b)  Development other than buildings and structures. The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(c)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(1)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
a.  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
b.  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 7-5(b)(3)b of this section, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(2)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in subsection (c)(1) above. 
(d)  Manufactured homes. The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-7. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  In General. The zoning board of adjustment and appeals shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this section. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the zoning board of adjustment and appeals shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. This section does not apply to section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(b)  The zoning board of adjustment and appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this section. Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(c)  Limitations on authority to grant variances. The zoning board of adjustment and appeals shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in subsection (g) below, the conditions of issuance set forth in subsection (h) below, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The zoning board of adjustment and appeals has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this section. 
(d)  Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in section 7-5(c) of this chapter. 
(e)  Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(f)  Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this section, provided the variance meets the requirements of subsection (d) above, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(g)  Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the zoning board of adjustment and appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this section, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the town; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(h)  Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this section or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the zoning board of adjustment and appeals that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-8. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this section that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this section, shall be deemed a violation of this section. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this section or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(b)  Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this section and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(c)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed for violations of this Code or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Secs. 7-9, 7-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 7-11. - In general. 
(a)  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(b)  Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this section and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(c)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this section or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-12. - Definitions. 
    Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this section. 
    ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Base flood. A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, section 1612.2.] 
    Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, section 1612.2.] 
    Coastal construction control line. The line established by the state pursuant to F.S. § 161.053, and recorded in the official records of the town, which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a 100-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions. 
    Coastal high hazard area. A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V zones" and are designated on flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) as zone V1-V30, VE, or V. 
    Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the town's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the town's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, section 1612.2.] 
    Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
    Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before December 1, 1978. [Also defined in FBC, B, section 1612.2.] 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 1, 1978. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, section 1612.2.] 
    Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas:[Also defined in FBC, B, section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the town's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).The official map of the town on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the town. [Also defined in FBC, B, section 1612.2.] 
    Flood Insurance Study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, section 1612.2.] 
    Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this section (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the town, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this section. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, section 1612.2.] 
    Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings. 
    Letter of Map Change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
    Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
    Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
    Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F). A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
    Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR). A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle; or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, Florida Administrative Code ] 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this section, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
    New construction. For the purposes of administration of this section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after December 1, 1978 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 1, 1978. 
    Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in F.S. § 320.01] 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [See F.S. § 320.01) 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Sand dunes. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V.[Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Start of construction. The date of issuance of permits for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
    Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. The term also includes flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of the repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Substantial improvement. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure taking place during a ten year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the ten year period begins on the date of the first permit issued for improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to June 1, 1993. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this section, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this section or the Florida Building Code. 
    Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Secs. 7-13-7-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 7-21. - Buildings and structures. 
(a)  Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to section 7-4(c) of this chapter, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of section 7-27 of this chapter. 
(b)  Buildings and structures seaward of the coastal construction control line. If extending, in whole or in part, seaward of the coastal construction control line and also located, in whole or in part, in a flood hazard area: 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed to comply with the more restrictive applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building section 3109 and section 1612 or Florida Building Code, Residential section R322. 
(2)  Minor structures and non-habitable major structures as defined in F.S. § 161.54, shall be designed and constructed to comply with the intent and applicable provisions of this section and ASCE 24. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-22. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 7-5(b)(1) of this chapter; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of section 7-23 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-23. - Site improvements, utilities and limitations. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in chapter 64E-6, Florida Administrative Code, and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(c)  Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, Florida Administrative Code, and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(d)  Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or re-grading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in section 7-5(c)(1) of this chapter demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(e)  Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this section, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(f)  Limitations on sites in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be permitted only if such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and only if the engineering analysis required by section 7-5(c)(4) of this chapter demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. Construction or restoration of dunes under or around elevated buildings and structures shall comply with section 7-27(h)(3) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-24. - Manufactured homes. 
(a)  In general. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of chapter 15C-1, Florida Administrative Code, and the requirements of this section. If located seaward of the coastal construction control line, all manufactured homes shall comply with the more restrictive of the applicable requirements. 
(b)  Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that: 
(1)  In flood hazard areas (zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential section R322.2 and this section. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to subsection (d)(2) below are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. 
(2)  In coastal high hazard areas (zone V), are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential section R322.3 and this section. 
(c)  Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(d)  Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with subsection (d)(1) or (d)(2) below, as applicable. 
(1)  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of subsection (d)(2) below, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential section R322.2 (zone A) or section R322.3 (zone V). 
(2)  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to subsection (d)(1) above, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
a.  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential section R322.2 (zone A) or section R322.3 (Zone V); or 
b.  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 54 inches in height above grade. 
(e)  Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential section R322.2 or R322.3 for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(f)  Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential section R322, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-25. - Recreational vehicles and park trailers. 
(a)  Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(b)  Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in subsection (a) above for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of Section 7-24 of this chapter for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-26. - Tanks. 
(a)  Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(b)  Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of subsection (c) below shall: 
(1)  Be permitted in flood hazard areas (zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(2)  Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
(c)  Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(d)  Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 7-27. - Other development. 
(a)  General requirements for other development. All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this section or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of section 7-23(d) of this chapter if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(b)  Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of section 7-23(d) of this section. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 7-23(d) of this chapter. 
(e)  Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 7-23(d) of this chapter. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of section 7-5(c)(3) of this chapter. 
(f)  Concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be: 
(1)  Structurally independent of the foundation system of the building or structure; 
(2)  Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any structure; and 
(3)  Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four inches. 
(g)  Decks and patios in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following: 
(1)  A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck. 
(2)  A deck or patio that is located below the design flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than 12 inches or that is constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave run-up and wave reflection that would increase damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(4)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of 12 inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave run-up and wave reflection. 
(h)  Other development in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the appropriate federal, state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave run-up and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control structures; 
(2)  Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters; and 
(3)  On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems defined in 64E-6.002, Florida Administrative Code, as filled systems or mound systems. 
(i)  Nonstructural fill in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). In coastal high hazard areas: 
(1)  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings. 
(2)  Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than one unit vertical to five units horizontal shall be permitted only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave run-up and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  Where authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the diversion of floodwater or wave run-up and wave reflection if the scale and location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the lowest horizontal structural member of the building. 
(Ord. No. 687 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Qualifications and elections, art. V. 
State Law reference- Florida Election Code, F.S. ch. 97 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - State law to apply when not inconsistent. 
    Except as herein provided, all matters pertaining to elections, including but not limited to qualification and registration of electors; registration, officers and procedures; candidates, campaign expenses; general, primary, special bond and referendum elections; voting and voting procedures; absentee ballots; conduct of elections and ascertaining results; unfair practices; and violations and penalties, shall be governed by the requirements of the town Charter and the Florida Election Code, F.S. chs. 97-106. In the event of a conflict between an election provision set forth in the Charter or this chapter, the Florida Election Code shall apply. 
(Code 1980, § 2-71; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 8-12-1992; Ord. No. 506, § 1, 11-18-1998) 
Sec. 8-2. - Candidate qualification procedure. 
    Any qualified elector within the town may become a candidate for any office to be filled at any election by paying to the town clerk a qualifying fee in the sum of $35.00 and by filing with the town clerk, not less than four weeks prior to the primary election, a written notice stating that he or she intends to be a candidate at such election, identifying for what group, and requesting that his or her name be placed upon the ballot to be prepared for said election. The notice shall be signed by such candidate and acknowledged by a notary public or other officer duly authorized to administer oaths. The town clerk is authorized to administer the oath in such cases. 
(Code 1980, § 2-72; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 8-12-1992) 
Sec. 8-3. - Qualifying period. 
    The qualifying period for candidates will be from 12:00 noon on the first Tuesday in December to 12:00 noon on the third Tuesday in December. 
(Code 1980, § 2-73; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 8-12-1992; Ord. No. 699 , § 1, 8-23-2017) 
Sec. 8-4. - Sample ballot. 
    Upon completion of the list of qualified candidates, a sample ballot shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, prior to the day of election. 
(Code 1980, § 2-74; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 8-12-1992) 
Sec. 8-5. - Municipal election dates. 
    The town election will be held on the second Tuesday in March, with any runoffs required to be held two weeks later. 
(Code 1980, § 2-75; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 8-12-1992) 
Sec. 8-6. - Notice of special election or referendum. 
    Whenever any special election for any purpose is required to be held, the town council shall, by resolution, declare on what day the same shall be held, whereupon notice thereof shall be published at least 30 days prior to the election or referendum by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. The publication shall be made at least twice, once in the fifth week and once in the third week prior to the week in which the election or referendum is to be held. 
(Code 1980, § 2-76; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 8-12-1992) 
Sec. 8-7. - Polling places. 
    The polling places of the town, for municipal elections, shall be designated from time to time by the town or the county supervisor of elections, as appropriate. 
(Code 1980, § 2-77; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 8-12-1992) 
Sec. 8-8. - Duties of town clerk. 
    Town elections shall be conducted under the supervision of the town clerk. Subject to the approval of the town council, the town clerk may delegate any or all of the responsibilities for administering the elections to the county supervisor of elections. 
Sec. 8-9. - Certification and announcement of results. 
    Based on the resolution of any town election or referendum vote, as certified by the canvassing board appointed by the county, the town council shall officially proclaim the results of the election by appropriate resolution at the next regularly scheduled meeting following the election. 
(Code 1980, § 2-88; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 8-12-1992; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 2-23-1994; Ord. No. 506, § 1, 11-18-1998) 
Sec. 8-10. - Assumption of office. 
    All newly elected officials of the town shall take office at the next scheduled town council meeting immediately following receipt of the certified results for such election, except, however, if a runoff election is held, all newly elected officials shall take office at the next scheduled town council meeting immediately following the receipt of the certified results of the runoff election. 
(Code 1980, § 2-91; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 8-12-1992) 
Sec. 8-11. - Early voting. 
    The town council hereby exercises its right to opt out of the early voting requirements of F.S. § 101.657 to the extent that such requirements apply to municipal elections. The town may contract with the supervisor of elections to conduct early voting for the town at those locations established by the supervisor of elections and authorized by statute. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 2, 1-26-2005) 
Chapter 10 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Medical transportation services, F.S. § 401.2101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTRUSION ALARM CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Electrical and alarm system contracting, F.S. § 489.501 et seq. 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm means any device which is designed and used in or on a structure for detecting and alerting others of unauthorized entry, trespass or any other crime by emitting a sound, visible signal or electronically transmitted message, when activated. 
    Alarm business means any self-employed person, firm or corporation engaged in or causing the installing, maintaining, selling, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing or removing alarm systems on any building, place or premises. 
    Alarm user means any person or business using an alarm system whether as an alarm business subscriber or proprietor. 
    Caused alarms means those alarms which are not activated by an unauthorized intrusion but which are caused by unusual events or elements not under the control of the alarm user or alarm business (e.g., severe weather conditions, machinery failure, other than the alarm system itself, or other external events which will activate the alarm). These exceptions do not include unremarkable events such as passing vehicles that normally operate in the area of the alarm. Caused alarms will not be charged against the alarm user as a false alarm unless determined otherwise by the chief of police or his designated representative. 
    False alarm means: 
(1)  Those that are activated by mechanical, technical or adjustment faults within the alarm system itself; 
(2)  Those that are activated due to faulty maintenance, lack of repair or service errors for any part of the installed alarm system; or 
(3)  Those that result from accidental or deliberate misuse or operator error on the part of the alarm user or his employees which occur without justification of a real and imminent danger to the premises or persons on or near the premises. 
    Grace period means a 30-day period which will be allowed for new alarm installations to provide for proper adjustments to the system before false alarms will be charged to the alarm user. In order to qualify for the grace period, the alarm user must have registered the alarm system with the police department per section 10-24 and provided documents on the new installation to confirm that the system is within the 30-day period. 
    Proprietor alarm means an alarm system which is not installed, serviced or maintained by an alarm business. 
    True alarms are a result of actual unauthorized intrusions, unlawful entry attempts or other criminal acts. 
(Code 1980, § 9-31; Ord. No. 417, § I, 10-16-1991) 
Sec. 10-20. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article are not applicable to: 
(1)  Audible alarms affixed to automobiles. 
(2)  Signal lights mounted on a private dwelling or business not used in conjunction with an alarm system. 
(Code 1980, § 9-32; Ord. No. 417, § II, 10-16-1991) 
Sec. 10-21. - Violations/service charges. 
    Five false alarms within 12 consecutive months is considered excessive and constitutes a public nuisance. Should the police department respond to five or more false alarms at the same location within 12 consecutive months, the alarm user may be issued a violation citation. The schedule of fines for excessive false alarms is as follows: 
(1)  Fifth false alarm: $25.00. 
(2)  Sixth false alarm: $50.00. 
(3)  Seventh and subsequent false alarms: $100.00. 
(Code 1980, § 9-33; Ord. No. 417, § III, 10-16-1991) 
Sec. 10-22. - Code enforcement; summons to appear; appeals. 
    An alarm user may be summoned to appear before the code enforcement special magistrate for excessive false alarms or other Code violations. The user shall be notified of the summons by certified mail, or by town code enforcement personnel or by a member of the police department designated to issue a summons. If an alarm user fails to respond to a summons to appear before the code enforcement special magistrate, a fine of $100.00 will automatically be charged against the violator for each cited offense occurring after failing to appear. Failure to pay the fine may result in filing a lien against the alarm violator's property. If an alarm user wishes to appeal a citation or fine for Code violations, the user may petition the town code enforcement special magistrate for a hearing. An alarm business representative may appear with the user to explain relevant service history or technical systems corrections in progress or already completed. If the code enforcement special magistrate determines that the explanation is not valid, the magistrate can recommend that an additional fine be charged to the alarm user based on outstanding citations for excessive false alarms. The additional fine, not to exceed $250.00, shall be paid to the town as a service charge for each excessive alarm so signaled. 
(Code 1980, § 9-34; Ord. No. 417, § IV, 10-16-1991) 
Sec. 10-23. - Inspection by the chief of police. 
    Upon 24-hour notice to the alarm user, the chief of police or his designated representative is authorized to inspect an installed alarm system to determine the cause of excessive false alarms or other violations which may be due to faulty installation, maintenance or system operation. 
(Code 1980, § 9-35; Ord. No. 417, § V, 10-16-1991) 
Sec. 10-24. - Registering alarm systems and servicing information. 
    The town will not charge a registration fee to alarm users; however, each alarm user shall provide timely information regarding their system to the police department. This information must include the alarm user's name, address and telephone number as well as the name, address and telephone number of the person who can render service to the alarm system at any hour of the day or night. Information on new alarm systems must be submitted within 30 days of system installation. Failure to submit required information will make the user liable for a $50.00 fine for each alarm, of any type, to which the police respond after expiration of the respective alarm registration periods. Alarm users shall immediately inform the police department of all changes in the information regarding their alarm systems on file with the police department. The police department will maintain records of police responses to alarm calls and determine whether they are false, caused or true alarms. 
(Code 1980, § 9-36; Ord. No. 417, § VI, 10-16-1991) 
Sec. 10-25. - Silencing of audible alarm systems. 
    All audible alarms on the outside of a building or structure must be either automatically or manually silenced no longer than 30 minutes after being activated. If an alarm system continues to sound for a period of time in excess of 30 minutes, it will be considered a public nuisance and may be abated by the chief of police or his designated representative by disabling the alarm. 
(Code 1980, § 9-37; Ord. No. 417, § VII, 10-16-1991) 
Sec. 10-26. - Limitations of liability. 
    Neither the town nor the police department shall be under any obligation or duty to an alarm user or to any other person hereunder by reason of this article. The town and the police department specifically disclaim any liability for damages which may be caused by failure to respond to an alarm or abatement of a public nuisance by disabling an alarm system. 
(Code 1980, § 9-38; Ord. No. 417, § VIII, 10-16-1991) 
Chapter 12 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Environmental control, F.S. ch. 403. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Disposal of toxic and hazardous substances. 
(a)  Generally. Any toxic or hazardous substances, including, without limitation, those identified by the county public health unit, shall be disposed of in a lawful and proper manner at officially designated locations. It shall be unlawful to improperly dispose of, eliminate, and/or dispense any toxic or hazardous substance within the jurisdictional limits of the town. 
(b)  Distribution of information on disposal. The town manager is directed to take all actions necessary to assemble and distribute to town residents information on the lawful and proper disposal of toxic and hazardous substances, including the provision of such information in the town newsletter and at town hall. 
(c)  Penalties. Each violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-10, and in addition any cleanup costs or remedial action required shall be borne by the violator, provided this section shall not conflict with any provision for penalties imposed for any offense under the laws of the state. The unlawful disposal of each individual toxic or hazardous substance as prohibited herein shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 9-11; Ord. No. 404, §§ 2-4, 2-20-1991) 
Sec. 12-2. - Air pollution; odors; vibrations. 
(a)  Generally. No use or activity shall be operated except in full compliance with the standards controlling air pollution as provided in the laws of the state, the county public health unit (PBCPHU) and the ordinances of the town. 
(b)  Dust and particulates. Every use shall be operated to prevent the emission into the air of dust or other solid particulate matter which may cause danger to the land and the health of persons or animals at or beyond the lot line of the premises on which the use is located. 
(c)  Smoke. In all districts, unless otherwise covered by a specific visible emission limiting standard by a state department of environmental protection (DEP) rule or town ordinance, every use shall be operated so as to prevent the emission of smoke from any source whatsoever, the density of which is equal to or greater than that designated as number 1 on the Ringlemann Chart, or the opacity of which is equal to or greater than 20 used by the United States Bureau of Mines, or Method 9, as published in F.A.C. ch. 62-204 et seq.,and used by DEP, which is incorporated herein by reference. All measurements shall be at the point of emission. 
(d)  Odors. No use shall be operated so as to produce the emission of objectionable or offensive odors in such concentration as to be readily perceptible at any point at or beyond the lot line of the land on which the use is located. Table III, chapter 5, Air Pollution Abatement Manual of the Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., is hereby adopted as a guide in determining the quantities of offensive odors, as are the guides and standards contained in the prohibitions against air pollution of DEP. 
(e)  Vibration. In all districts, no use shall be operated so as to produce ground vibration noticeable without instruments at the lot line of the premises on which the use is located. 
(Code 1980, § 9-12; Ord. No. 515, § 2(exh. A), 5-26-1999) 
State Law reference- Pollution control, F.S. § 403.011 et seq. 
Sec. 12-3. - Floating balloons and sky lanterns. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed herein, except where the contact clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Floating balloon means a balloon of any type inflated with a gas that is lighter than air. 
    Sky lantern means a device that requires a flame which produces heated air trapped in a balloon-type covering allowing the device to float in the air. Sky lanterns shall not include hot air balloons used for transporting persons. 
(b)  Prohibition. On any property located within the town's corporate limits, no person shall: 
(1)  Display, possess or release one or more floating balloons; or 
(2)  Display, possess or release one or more sky lanterns. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit the following activities: 
(1)  Possession of floating balloons or sky lanterns where such items are moved from a vehicle or structure to another structure where the resulting exposure of such items to the outdoors is de minimis; 
(2)  Display, possession or release of floating balloons indoors; 
(3)  Display, possession or release of sky lanterns indoors; or 
(4)  Display, possession or release of floating balloons by a governmental agency for scientific or meteorological purposes. 
(Ord. No. 693 , § 2, 10-26-2016) 
Secs. 12-4-12-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Lost or abandoned property, F.S. ch. 705. 

Sec. 12-23. - Abandoned property declared public nuisance. 
    Lost or abandoned property having no market value other than for salvage of parts or as scrap metal abandoned on public or private property within the town in an inoperable condition is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Members of the police department are hereby authorized to summarily abate the nuisance by removing or causing to be removed junk property directly to a dump or other location specified by the police department. Sections of this article providing for notice and sale as to abandoned property shall not apply to junk property as herein defined. 
(Code 1980, § 2-4.1; Ord. No. 346, § 2, 10-19-1988) 
Sec. 12-24. - Authority to remove property. 
    Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed any vehicle, vessel, bicycle or other similar property from a street, highway, other public property or from private property when the vehicle, vessel, bicycle or other similar property has been left on public or private property for a period of time in excess of 72 hours, and the property is rusted, wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, inoperative or in an abandoned condition, unless it is completely enclosed within a building or unless it is in connection with a business enterprise lawfully situated and licensed for the same. The police department shall remove or cause the removal of the property to the next garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department or by the town under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When any property is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, causeway or tunnel, where the property constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  When property upon a street is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or the person in charge of the property is by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody and removal. 
(3)  When property is found being operated upon the streets in an unsafe condition. 
(4)  When any property is left unattended upon a street continuously for more than 24 hours and may be presumed to be abandoned. 
(5)  When any property is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(6)  When the driver of the property is taken into custody by the police department, the person responsible for the property does not sign a waiver and the property would thereby be left unattended upon a street. 
(7)  When removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because of fire, flood, storm or other emergency reason. 
(Code 1980, § 2-4.2; Ord. No. 346, § 2, 10-19-1988) 
Sec. 12-25. - Notice of violation to be affixed to abandoned property. 
    Whenever any vehicle or other property is to be removed under the authority of this article, a notice thereof shall be affixed thereto. This notice shall contain substantially the following language: 
NOTICE OF VIOLATION 
Town of Juno Beach, Florida 
You are hereby notified that you are in violation of chapter 12, article II of the Code of the Town of Juno Beach, Florida, and it is hereby ordered by authority granted thereunder to the police department that this property (setting forth brief description) located at (setting forth brief description of location) shall be removed from the town within 72 hours from the date and time stated herein for violation of section 12-23 of the Code of the Town of Juno Beach, Florida. You are hereby notified that you must remove the above-described property, failing in which the Town of Juno Beach, Florida, will have it done and the removal cost thereof shall be liened as an assessment against such property. 
DATED: 
TIME: 
BY:________ 
(Code 1980, § 2-4.3; Ord. No. 346, § 2, 10-19-1988) 
Sec. 12-26. - Notice of removal; written report. 
(a)  Whenever a police officer removes or causes to be removed property from a street as authorized in section 12-24, and when the officer knows or is able to ascertain the name and address of the owner thereof, he shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to the owner of the fact of the removal and the reason therefor and the place to which the property has been removed. In the event of the property being stored in an authorized garage, a copy of the notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage. 
(b)  Whenever an officer removes or causes to be removed property from a street, as authorized in section 12-24 and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner or for any other reason is unable to give notice to the owner, and in the event the property is not returned to the owner within a period of three days, then the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of the removal and shall file a copy of the report with the proprietor of any authorized garage in which the property may be stored. This report shall include a complete description of the property; the date, time and place from which removed; the reasons for its removal; and the name of the garage or place where the property is stored. 
(Code 1980, § 2-4.4; Ord. No. 346, § 2, 10-19-1988) 
Sec. 12-27. - Towing and storage charges to be paid before release of property. 
    No property impounded in an authorized garage in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be released therefrom until the charges for towing the property into the garage and storage charges have been paid. The charge for towing or removal of any property and storage charges shall be based upon a computation of all actual expenses entering into the current cost of these services. The charge or charges shall be posted for public inspection in the office of the town clerk and in any authorized garage. 
(Code 1980, § 2-4.5; Ord. No. 346, § 2, 10-19-1988) 
Sec. 12-28. - Sale of impounded property. 
(a)  If the residence or address of the owner or any person holding a lien upon property impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article cannot be ascertained, or if the owner or person holding a lien upon the property fails to take possession of the property within 90 days after the date of impoundment, the property shall be sold at public auction by the police chief or his designee at some place within the town. Prior to the sale, a notice shall be posted in three conspicuous places within the town at least ten days prior to the date of sale. This notice shall give the time and place of the sale and shall describe the property to be sold. A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the owner and each person holding a lien on the property, if their address is known, at least ten days before the date of the sale. The town shall not guarantee title to the property or to deliver a title of ownership, but shall furnish the purchaser a certificate in substantially the following form: 
CERTIFICATE NO. 
CERTIFICATE OF SALE 
    Town of Juno Beach Police Department, Juno Beach, Florida. 
    THIS IS TO CERTIFY that the following described property was abandoned and was placed in the custody of the police department, where it was held for 90 days, after which time, it having been impossible to find the owner of the same, or if found, he failed to repossess same, this property was sold to the highest bidder after legal advertisement, in "as is" condition without any warranty from the Town of Juno Beach as to use, condition or merchantability. 
    This certificate of sale is therefore issued to___________, residing at _____ 
    _____ . 
    Description of property: _____ 
    _____ . 
    Dated at Juno Beach, Florida, this_______ day of _______, 20___. 
___________ 
Police Chief 
(b)  The certificate provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be in duplicate. The original shall be given to the purchaser and the duplicate bound in a book of record. 
(Code 1980, § 2-4.6; Ord. No. 346, § 2, 10-19-1988) 
Sec. 12-29. - Owner may reclaim property prior to sale. 
    The owner or any person having a lien upon property impounded pursuant to this article may take possession of the property at any time prior to the sale provided for in section 12-28. However, the person shall reimburse the town for all reasonable expenses for storage, advertising or other expenses incurred in connection therewith. 
(Code 1980, § 2-4.7; Ord. No. 346, § 2, 10-19-1988) 
Sec. 12-30. - Holding period prior to sale; disposition of proceeds of sale. 
    Impounded property shall be held for a period of 90 days after the date of impounding. During this period, the owner or any person having an interest in the property may, upon proof of ownership or interest, recover the property from the police department, in accordance with section 12-29. If the property is unclaimed at the end of this 90-day period it shall be sold in accordance with section 12-28 and any proceeds turned over to the general fund of the town. 
(Code 1980, § 2-4.8; Ord. No. 346, § 2, 10-19-1988) 
Secs. 12-31-12-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Florida Litter Law, F.S. § 403.413. 

Sec. 12-49. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Litter means garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash, paper, paper sacks, boxes, ashes, wrappings, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, vegetable wastes, dead animals, fruit peelings and parings or any other discarded materials usually considered trash. 
(Code 1980, § 6-1; Ord. No. 60, § 16, 2-12-1962) 
Sec. 12-50. - Provisions declared supplemental. 
    This article does not repeal any other ordinances but is supplemental to any other ordinances covering the same subject matter. 
(Code 1980, § 6-2; Ord. No. 60, § 17, 2-12-1962) 
Sec. 12-51. - Prohibited. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the town except in public receptacles for collection. 
(Code 1980, § 6-3; Ord. No. 60, § 1, 2-12-1962) 
Sec. 12-52. - Manner of deposit in receptacles. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1980, § 6-4; Ord. No. 60, § 2, 2-12-1962) 
Sec. 12-53. - Depositing into streets, sidewalks. 
(a)  From abutting property. No person shall sweep into or deposit or throw in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(b)  From places of business. No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the town shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Code 1980, §§ 6-5, 6-6; Ord. No. 60, §§ 3, 4, 2-12-1962) 
Sec. 12-54. - Throwing from vehicle. 
    No person, while a driver or a passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the town or upon private property. 
(Code 1980, § 6-7; Ord. No. 60, § 5, 2-12-1962) 
Sec. 12-55. - Disposal-In parks. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the town except in public receptacles and in such manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. 
(b)  Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the persons responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Code 1980, § 6-8; Ord. No. 60, § 7, 2-12-1962) 
Sec. 12-56. - Same-In body of water. 
    No person shall deposit or throw litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the town. 
(Code 1980, § 6-9; Ord. No. 60, § 8, 2-12-1962) 
Sec. 12-57. - Distribution of handbills. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbills in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the town, or in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, or upon or in any private premises which are inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States Postal Service, or to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1980, § 6-10; Ord. No. 60, § 9, 2-12-1962) 
State Law reference- Throwing advertisements into motor vehicles, distributing to vehicle occupants, F.S. § 316.2055. 
Sec. 12-58. - Posting bills. 
    No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost, building, utility pole or tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Code 1980, § 6-11; Ord. No. 60, § 10, 2-12-1962) 
Sec. 12-59. - Disposal on occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the town, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of any private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Code 1980, § 6-12; Ord. No. 60, § 11, 2-12-1962) 
Sec. 12-60. - Disposal of garden trash. 
    No person shall throw or deposit in or upon any street, street right-of-way, sidewalk, private property of other people or other public place, grass clippings, branches, leaves, and such accumulations, but such clippings, branches, leaves, and such accumulations shall remain on the property on which it originates, and shall be so arranged, placed and made accessible so that the appropriate services may remove the same at specified intervals. 
(Code 1980, § 6-13; Ord. No. 60, § 14, 2-12-1962) 
Sec. 12-61. - Construction debris. 
    No person shall throw or permit to be deposited or scattered upon any sidewalk, alley, street, bridge or public passageway or upon any adjoining lot or upon any private property any waste or other material of any kind during the construction of any building, except on the building site itself. As soon as possible after construction is finished, all such debris shall be removed so as to keep the premises clean and neat at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 6-14; Ord. No. 60, § 15, 2-12-1962) 
Secs. 12-62-12-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOT CLEANING 

Sec. 12-83. - Real estate lots to be kept clean, sanitary. 
    It is hereby found and declared to be expedient and necessary to the preservation of the public health, comfort, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the town, that all real estate lots within the town shall henceforth be kept clean, sanitary and free from all weeds, brush exceeding 12 inches in height, trash, filth or obnoxious growth. It is hereby required that all such lots within the town be kept clean, sanitary and free of all obnoxious matters as enumerated in this section. The existence of such growth or trash and filth is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 7-1; Ord. No. 73, § 2, 9-14-1964) 
Sec. 12-84. - Lots to be free from trash or filth. 
    All real estate lots in the town shall be kept free from any kind of trash or filth, including specifically but without limitation any broken tree limbs, leaves or branches, any uncontained garbage or refuse, or any other type of materials which might conceal pools of water, create breeding grounds for mosquitoes, rodents or snakes, or which might be otherwise detrimental to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the town. The existence of any such trash or filth is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 7-2; Ord. No. 73, § 3, 9-14-1964) 
Sec. 12-85. - Lands to be free from trash and filth. 
    Lands, other than lots referred to in sections 12-83 and 12-84, within the town, shall also be kept free from all kinds of trash or filth, including specifically but without limitation any broken tree limbs or branches, any uncontained garbage or refuse, or any other type of materials which might conceal pools of water, create breeding grounds for mosquitoes, rodents or snakes, or which might be otherwise detrimental to the health and safety of the inhabitants of the town. The existence of any such trash or filth is declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3; Ord. No. 73, § 5, 9-14-1964) 
Sec. 12-86. - Lands and lots to be free from possible hurricane hazards. 
    All lots and other lands in the town shall be kept free from debris, vegetation (including trees), or any other matter which, by reason of height, proximity to neighboring structures, physical condition, or other peculiar characteristic might, in time of hurricane winds prevalent in the region, cause damage to life or property within the immediate area surrounding the same. The existence of any debris, vegetation or other matter as may create such a hazard is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 7-4; Ord. No. 73, § 4, 9-14-1964) 
Sec. 12-87. - Cleanliness of lands near property lines; property not to be left barren. 
(a)  It is hereby found and declared to be expedient and necessary to the preservation of the public health, comfort, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the town that all lands, other than lots as referred to in this article, within the town, shall henceforth be kept clean, sanitary and free from all weeds, brush exceeding 18 inches in height, trash, filth or other obnoxious growth for 50 feet from all property lines. 
(b)  In the cleaning of lots and lands of weeds and other obnoxious growth, the same shall not be done in such a manner as to leave the lots or lands barren of growth, but shall be cleaned in a way to avoid the erosion of sand by the wind. 
(Code 1980, §§ 7-5, 7-6; Ord. No. 73, §§ 6, 7, 9-14-1964) 
Sec. 12-88. - Inspections; notice to clean; cleaning by town billed to owner. 
    The enforcement officer shall, from time to time, ascertain whether lots and other lands within the town are kept clean and free from weeds, brush, trash, filth and other obnoxious growth as required herein. If he shall ascertain that any lot or land is not so kept, he shall obtain an estimate of the cost to clean and clear away such brush, trash, filth or other obnoxious growth, and shall notify the owner of said land, at the owner's last known address, which is the address shown on the tax records, by certified mail with a return receipt requested, that said land needs to be cleaned. He shall in said notice order the owner of said land to clean the same within ten days from the date of the mailing of such notice to said owner. Said notice shall also state what the estimated cost of such clearing work shall be, and that there will be added to such cost ten percent for administration and accounting costs, if the owner does not clean the land. In case the owner of any land, so notified, shall fail to comply with the order of the enforcement officer within said ten-day period so prescribed, the enforcement officer shall proceed to have such land cleaned and cleared, at the price quoted, and the town shall cause such bill to be paid, and he shall report his action to the town council, signifying the amount paid for such work, and shall add thereto ten percent of such cost for administration and accounting costs. The enforcement officer shall have the authority to extend such deadline for such cleaning, if he shall determine that the owner is away on vacation, or absent because of illness, but in no event shall such deadline be extended more than ten days. 
(Code 1980, § 7-7; Ord. No. 73, § 8, 9-14-1964) 
Sec. 12-89. - Assessment of abatement costs. 
    The town council shall, as soon as feasible after the abatement provided for in section 12-88, by resolution, assess such cost against each parcel respectively. Such resolution shall describe the land, state the cost of abatement actually incurred by the town and add ten percent for administration and accounting costs and state that the total thereof shall bear eight percent interest per annum from the date of the resolution until paid. 
(Code 1980, § 7-8; Ord. No. 73, § 9, 9-14-1964) 
Sec. 12-90. - Notice of assessment. 
    As soon as possible after the adoption of the resolution provided for in section 12-89, the town clerk shall record a certified copy of such resolution in the office of the clerk of the circuit court in and for the county, and the town clerk shall mail a notice to each record owner, respectively, of the parcel of land described in the resolution belonging to him at the said last available address for such owner, which notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE 
Date: ___________ 
To: _____ Address: _____ Property: _____  
    You, as the record owner of the property above described, are hereby advised, that, after due notice to you, because of your failure to abate such nuisance whereupon it was abated by the town at a cost of $_______ to which sum there has been added ten percent for administration and accounting costs. Such total shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum from the date of the resolution until paid. Such cost has been, by said resolution of the town council dated _______, levied and assessed against the above property. 
    Such lien appears in the public records of Palm Beach County, Florida. 
    BY ORDER OF THE TOWN COUNCIL. 
________ 
Town Clerk 
(Code 1980, § 7-9; Ord. No. 73, § 10, 9-14-1964) 
Sec. 12-91. - Protest of assessment. 
    Any aggrieved party who wishes to protest against the amount or justice of any assessment made under this article shall have the right to file a complaint or protest within 15 days of the day the assessment is made known to him. The complaint or protest shall be filed with the town clerk in writing. The town council shall sit in a special meeting to hear and determine any complaints or protests of any aggrieved party. Said meeting shall be held within ten days from the date the protests are filed in the office of the town clerk. Upon the hearing of said complaint, the town council shall make such adjustments as it deems just and proper. 
(Code 1980, § 7-10; Ord. No. 73, § 11, 9-14-1964) 
Sec. 12-92. - Enforcement of assessments. 
    Assessments pursuant to this chapter, together with interest, shall be enforceable by the town as provided by the general law of the state. 
(Code 1980, § 7-11; Ord. No. 73, § 12, 9-14-1964) 
State Law reference- Foreclosure of municipal liens, F.S. ch. 173. 
Secs. 12-93-12-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle noise, F.S. §§ 316.293, 403.415. 

Sec. 12-115. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acoustical terminology . All acoustical terminology and all definitions thereof shall be that contained in ASA S1.1-1960, as amended, American Standard Acoustical Terminology of the American National Standards Institute. 
    Ambient noise means the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from many sources, near and far. For the purpose of this Code, ambient noise level is that level which is exceeded only 50 percent of the time during an observation period of not less than seven minutes, excluding random or intermittent noises and the alleged offensive noise at the location and the time of day at which a comparison with an alleged offensive noise is to be made. The evaluation of the ambient noise level may be done in accordance with American National Standard S1.4-1983, as amended, or may be done manually as follows: 
(1)  Observe a sound level meter and at either five-second or ten-second intervals and record the A-weighted level indicated by the meter needle with the meter on fast response. 
(2)  Repeat the observations and measurements over a period of not less than seven minutes and of a sufficient time period so as to make at least 50 readings. 
(3)  Calculate the A-weighted sound pressure level that is exceeded 50 percent of the observation period. This level shall also be referred to as the L50. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments, public service corporations operated by private corporations, and the department of transportation as are designated or authorized by the department or the chief of police of an incorporated city or any sheriff of any of the various counties. 
    Decibel means a unit for measuring the intensity of a sound, the mathematical formula for which is expressed as the volume of a sound which is equal to ten times the logarithm of the ratio of the intensity of the sound to the intensity of a specified standard sound, abbreviated "dB." 
    Discrete tone means a pure tone or a single-frequency sound. This is expressed technically as a sound wave whose instantaneous sound pressure varies essentially as a single sinusoidal function of time. 
    Emergency work means: 
(1)  Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a natural disaster or public calamity; 
(2)  Work required to protect persons or property from imminent danger caused by hurricanes, tornados, floods or other natural disasters or public calamity; or 
(3)  Work by private or public utilities when installing or restoring utility service; or other unavoidable work necessary to protect property. 
    Fixed source means a machine or device capable of creating a noise level at the property line upon which it is located, including, but not limited to, industrial and commercial process machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, air conditioning apparatus, refrigeration machines or pool heaters. 
    Fluctuating noise or nonsteady noise means a noise in which the loudness varies with time. This is expressed technically as a noise whose sound pressure level varies significantly and exceeds the ambient noise level. 
    Impulsive noise means a very short duration noise. It is a noise characterized by brief exertions of sound pressure which significantly exceed the ambient sound pressure. 
    Intermittent noise means an interrupted noise which occurs at either regular or irregular intervals, excluding an impulsive noise. The sound pressure level of an intermittent noise will equal the ambient environmental level two or more times during the period of observation. 
    Noise means any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings. 
    Period of observation means the time interval during which acoustical data and facts are obtained. 
    Sound means a temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical quantity in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant points. 
    Sound pressure level , in decibels, of a sound is 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to the reference sound pressure. The reference is 0.0002 microbar. The sound pressure level may be evaluated using flat, A, B, or C scales, as defined by the American National Standards Institute, and shall be labeled dB, dBA, dBB or dBC, respectively. The A-weighted sound pressure level measured with fast response on an instrument meeting American National Standards Institute specifications or its successor bodies, except that only the A-weighting and fast dynamic response need be provided, shall be called the sound level. 
    Steady noise means a nonfluctuating noise or a noise whose level remains essentially constant during the period of observation. 
    Unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise means any sound or noise conflicting with the criteria, standards or levels set forth in this article for permissible noise. In the absence of specific maximum noise levels, a noise level which exceeds the ambient sound level by five dBA or more, when measured at the nearest property line or, in the case of multifamily residential buildings, when measured anywhere in one dwelling unit or from common space in the same building, shall be deemed an unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. 
    Zoning district means any of the several designated categories in chapter 34, the zoning regulations of the town. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(a); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-116. - Noise control policy. 
    In furtherance of the mandate of the people, as expressed in article II, section 7 of the constitution of the state, it shall be the policy of the town to conserve and protect its natural resources and scenic beauty, and adequate provision shall be made by ordinance for the abatement of unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(b); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-117. - Unlawful to make unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully, or through his culpable negligence to make or create unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise within the town as heard by persons. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(c); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-118. - Noise from buildings, premises or property. 
    No person owning, or in possession or control of any building or premises, shall use the same, or rent the same to be used for any business or employment or residential use, or for any purpose of pleasure or recreation, if such use shall, by its nature, create unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise, and thereby disturb or destroy the peace of the neighborhood in which such building or premises is situated, or be dangerous or detrimental to health. This article shall not prohibit the operation or periodic testing of emergency engines, generators and other equipment necessary to maintain or restore regulated public utilities service or other necessary public services. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(d); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-119. - Horns and signal devices. 
    No persons shall sound any horn or audible signal device of any motor vehicle, boat, engine, machine or stationary boiler of any kind while not in motion, nor shall such horn or signal device be sounded under any circumstances except as required by law, or as a danger warning, nor shall it be sounded for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. This section shall not be construed as forbidding the use of a signal device on a vehicle as a warning signal during the use thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(e); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-120. - Radios, electronic audio equipment and musical instruments. 
    No person shall use, operate or play any radio, phonograph, stereo set, tape player, television set, sound amplifier or other electronic audio device or any musical instrument which produces or reproduces sound, at an unnecessary, excessive, or offensive noise level so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighborhood in the vicinity. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(f); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-121. - Loudspeakers and devices for advertising. 
    No person shall use, operate or play any loudspeaker, sound amplifier or musical instrument which produces or reproduces sound which is cast or emitted upon the public streets and sidewalks for the purpose of commercial advertising or for attracting the attention of the public to any building, structure or place or to the activity which is being carried on thereon. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(g); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-122. - Noisy and boisterous conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful to knowingly and willfully cause or create unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise by engaging in boisterous, noisy and loud conduct while upon a public street, sidewalk or parkway so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, store, dwelling, hotel, motel or residence within the range of hearing. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(h); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-123. - Animal or bird noises. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any animal or bird within residential zones of the town unless the owner thereof shall provide and maintain adequate precautions and sound control techniques to eliminate any unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. It shall not be a violation of this section, however, for any animal or bird to give a sound of danger or warning under particular circumstances reasonably requiring the need for warning. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(i); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-124. - Engine exhaust. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, turbine or reciprocating internal combustion engine of any kind, whether on a motor vehicle, boat or any machine of any kind, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(j); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-125. - Vehicle defect or condition of load. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor-propelled boat that is defective, in need of repair, or under any condition of load, acceleration or deceleration, as to create unnecessary, excessive or offensive noises. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(k); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-126. - Loading, unloading and unpacking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in loading, unloading, packing, unpacking or opening crates, boxes or containers, including the loading or unloading of any motor vehicles or truck trailers onto any truck transport, to create unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(l); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-127. - Permissible time for construction activity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do, perform or engage in any construction work, building, excavating, hoisting, grading, pile driving, pneumatic hammering, demolition, dredging, building alteration or repair work of any nature to any building or structure or upon any site for same, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. on Saturday. Interior work which does not cause noise beyond ambient noise is permitted at all times. No construction activity shall be permitted on Sundays or legal holidays. Any person desiring to engage in the aforesaid activity beyond the stated hours of limitation, based upon cases of urgent necessity or upon the interests of public health, safety and ultimate convenience, may apply to the town manager or representative for a special permit. Such permits, if granted, shall be limited to a certain period, but may be renewed for additional periods if the emergency or need therefor continues. In the issuance of such permits, the town manager or designated representative shall weigh all facts and circumstances and shall determine whether the reasons given for the urgent necessity are valid and reasonable, whether public health, safety and ultimate convenience will be protected or better served by granting the permit requested, and whether the manner and amount of loss or inconvenience to the party in interest imposes a significant hardship. Upon an affirmative finding of the foregoing considerations, the town manager or designee is authorized to issue the permit requested and any extensions thereof, as may be required. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the town manager or designated representative may appeal the decision of the town manager to the town council. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the use of any power-driven machinery, tools or equipment in any portion of the town zoned and designated as a residential district or section other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. on Saturdays except New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, or as excepted in section 12-135. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(m); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-128. - Fixed mechanical equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful to create any unnecessary, excessive or offensive loud noise in excess of the limits set forth in section 12-133 by the use or operation of any fixed mechanical equipment including, but not limited to, air conditioners, compressor units, power fans or blowers or the electric motor or any engine used to drive such device, and such noise shall be muffled and deadened by adequate noise suppression and muffling devices to eliminate annoyance and disturbance to persons within the range of hearing as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(n); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-129. - Noise measurement procedure. 
    For the purpose of determining and classifying any noise, except operating motor vehicle noise under section 12-133, as unnecessary, excessive or offensive or as an unusually loud noise, which is hereby declared to be unlawful and prohibited by this article, the test measurements, requirements and provisions in this article shall be applied; provided, however, a violation of this article may occur without the occasion of the measurements being made as hereinafter provided if circumstances are such that a violation would be obvious to an ordinary, reasonable, prudent person. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(o); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-130. - Periods of observations. 
    All periods of observation made hereunder shall be determined with regard to the character of the noise being measured, and the particular instrument used to make the measurement, and shall be made in accordance with the standards contained in ANSI S1.4-1983, as amended, of the American National Standards Institute. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(p); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-131. - Voluntary compliance. 
    The town will permit, whenever possible, those persons creating unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise to conform to the standards as provided in this article through voluntary compliance within a reasonable time. A reasonable time is such length of time as may fairly, properly and reasonably be allowed or required having regard to the nature of offending, excessive or unnecessary noise and the attending circumstances. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(q); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-132. - Compliance procedure. 
(a)  Operating motor vehicle noise. The procedure for enforcing operating motor vehicle noise standards shall be as established in F.S. ch. 403, and applicable rules and regulations of the department of pollution control with the cooperation of the department of highway safety and motor vehicles. 
(b)  All other noises. In all other cases, the procedure for enforcing the provisions of this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  The police officer or designated persons in the code enforcement office shall investigate and determine if the level is in excess of that stated in section 12-133 or other applicable section of this article. 
(2)  If the noise level is found to be in violation of this article, the police officer or designated person in the code enforcement office shall give a warning to the person responsible for the unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. 
(3)  If the unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise is not abated within a reasonable time after the warning, a notice of violation by the code enforcement officer or a police officer shall be issued or the person in possession or control of the cause of the unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise may be arrested by the police department and charged with violating this article. A reasonable time is such length of time as may fairly, properly and reasonably be allowed or required having regard to the nature of the unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise and the attending circumstances. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(r); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-133. - Noise control measurement standards other than motor vehicle noise standards. 
    The noise from any activity or from any permissible use of property within the meaning of the applicable zoning district classifications of the town shall be deemed to be unnecessary, excessive, or offensive if the total noise level as measured on the A-scale due to both ambient noise level and the alleged source of the unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise exceeds the noise levels which are herein prescribed, the measurement of which is based upon decibels, i.e., 0.0002 microbar, and day conditions referring to the time between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and night conditions referring to the time between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All such measurements as well as the method employed shall be consistent with the regulations of the American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies and shall represent the A-weighted sound pressure level which is exceeded 50 percent of the time (L50) during the observation period as described in the definition of ambient noise in section 12-115. 
(1)  At no point on the boundary of or within a historical or residential area zoned RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, RS-4, RS-5, R-DUP, RM-1, RM-2, RMT, RH, RM-00, RV Park, MH, Hist-S, Hist-B, Hist-Z, BCH, REC-PUB, REC-PRIV or any PUD according to the zoning regulations in chapter 34 and official zoning map of the town and as a result of any noise source outside of the property in question may the following sound pressure levels be exceeded: 
a.  Day: 55 dBA. 
b.  Night: 50 dBA. 
(2)  At no point on the boundary of or within the area zoned CG or CO, according to the zoning regulations in chapter 34 and official zoning map of the town, may the following sound pressure levels be exceeded as a result of any noise source outside the property in question: 
a.  Day: 60 dBA. 
b.  Night: 60 dBA. 
(3)  For any source of sound which emits a discrete tone, the sound level limits set in subsections (1)a and b and (2)a and b of this section shall be reduced by five dB. 
(4)  For any source of sound measured at the source, the maximum sound levels shall not exceed the sound level limits in subsections (1)-(3) of this section by: 
a.  Ten dBA from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. in a residential area. 
b.  Five dBA from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. in a residential area. 
c.  Ten dBA at all times in commercial land use work. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(s); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-134. - Special permits excepted. 
    The operational performance standards established by this article except for operating motor vehicle noise shall not apply to any public performance being conducted in accordance with the provisions of a special permit granted by the town for the conduct of a public performance nor for any emergency work. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(t); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Sec. 12-135. - Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  All public parks, playgrounds and recreation areas specifically designated for such activity in performance of that activity including town-sponsored events at the town center. 
(2)  All equipment tests required by law. 
(3)  All procedures or processes required by law. 
(4)  All accidental soundings of equipment or mechanical failure of equipment making noise prohibited in this article. 
(5)  The operation of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3(u); Ord. No. 453, § 2, 9-7-1994) 
Chapter 14 - MOBILE HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Mobile home and recreational vehicle parks, F.S. ch. 513; manufactured buildings, F.S. § 553.35 et seq.; Florida Mobile Home Act, F.S. ch. 723. 

Sec. 14-1. - County ordinance adopted. 
    Palm Beach County Ordinance No. 81-10, as codified in chapter 7, article VII of the Palm Beach County Code, is hereby adopted by the town as the Mobile Home Inspection and Tie Down Ordinance and is incorporated by reference. 
(Code 1980, § 8-1; Ord. No. 430, § 14, 10-28-1992) 
State Law reference- County inspection of mobile homes, F.S. § 320.8285; tie-down and installation standards, F.S. § 320.8325. 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes, F.S. ch. 775 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Adoption of state provisions that recognize certain acts as misdemeanors. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit, within the town limits, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor, and the commission of such acts is hereby forbidden. Whoever shall violate the provisions of this chapter, shall be punished as for a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1; Ord. No. 172, § 2, 12-8-1976) 
Annotations- Municipal authority to adopt state misdemeanors, MacFarland v. Roberts , 74 So.2d 88 (Fla. 1954); Jaramillo v. City of Homestead , 322 So.2d 496 (Fla. 1975); adoption includes future enactments and amendments, State v. Smith , 189 So.2d 846 (4th DCA 1966). 
Sec. 16-2. - Alcoholic beverage establishment hours. 
(a)  Hours generally. No alcoholic beverages may be sold, consumed, served or permitted to be sold, served or consumed in any place in the town holding a beverage license under the state, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day in the week; except to the limited extent as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Special hours. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "New Year's Eve hours" shall be defined as 11:59 p.m. December 31, through and including 3:30 a.m. January 1. During New Year's Eve hours, alcoholic beverages may be sold, consumed, served or permitted to be sold, served or consumed in any place in town holding a beverage license under the state, up to and including 3:30 a.m. 
(Code 1980, § 9-2; Ord. No. 159, § 1, 1-14-1976; Ord. No. 331, § 1, 1-20-1988) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate hours, F.S. § 562.45(2). 
Sec. 16-3. - "No trespassing" or "keep off the grass" areas. 
(a)  Posting. The town chief of police shall erect "no trespassing" or "keep off the grass" signs wherever he determines: 
(1)  That property is being used to the detriment of the health, safety, welfare or morals of persons or property in the vicinity of the property to be posted; 
(2)  That property is being used for illegal purposes, or disorderly conduct; or 
(3)  That property is being used in such a manner that its use entails unusual extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the town. 
(b)  Obedience. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to walk, loiter, gather or assemble on any property of the town which has not been designated as a park and which has been posted with "no trespassing" or "keep off the grass" signs. 
(c)  Permits. A permit will be required from the town clerk before an assembly will be allowed on any such posted property. The application for a permit shall be filed with the town clerk and shall be in the form provided for special permits in parks. 
(Code 1980, § 9-4; Ord. No. 111, § 11, 11-9-1970) 
State Law reference- Burglary and trespass, F.S. ch. 810. 
Sec. 16-4. - Spear guns and similar devices prohibited in public places. 
    It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession or under his or her control any loaded spear gun, dart gun or similar device which is propelled by rubber bands or metal springs on any public street, way, beach or other public place, or on any pier, jetty, dock or similar structure where persons gather for recreation or sightseeing. 
(Code 1980, § 9-5; Ord. No. 3, § 1, 8-18-1953; Ord. No. 655, § 2, 9-26-2011) 
Sec. 16-5. - Permit required for beach fires. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to cause a fire upon the beaches of the town, without having first obtained a permit from the police department. 
(Code 1980, § 9-9; Ord. No. 261, § 1, 12-8-1982) 
Sec. 16-6. - Settling, trespassing or lodging on private or public property without consent of owner. 
(a)  Private lands. It shall be unlawful for any person to settle, trespass or lodge upon the private lands of another within the town without having been authorized, licensed or invited to do so by an authorized agent, or lessee of said property. 
(b)  Posting of notice; fencing; cultivation. Notice against entering or remaining on the premises, or against settling, trespassing or lodging thereon, given by actual posting of the premises or by the fencing or cultivation thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the lack of such consent to do so by the owner, authorized agent or lessee of said property. 
(c)  Public lands. It shall be unlawful for any person to settle, trespass or lodge upon public lands or real property owned by the town, the county, the state or the government agencies located within the town without the consent of such governmental owner, its duly authorized agent or its tenant, authorizing, licensing or inviting such person to do so. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "public lands or real property" includes but is not limited to the following: public streets, public roads, highways, swales, drainageways, alleyways and other rights-of-way, public parks, parkways, open spaces, conservation and preservation areas, recreational land and parking lots, including any buildings or structures located thereon. 
(d)  Violation; notice. Any person found violating the provisions of this section shall be given 24 hours' notice to cease and desist in such settling, trespassing or lodging. 
(Code 1980, § 9-10; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 5-16-1990) 
Sec. 16-7. - Sleeping in public areas or motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep upon public benches, streets, alleys, parks or within any other public area located within the corporate limits of the town. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to lodge or sleep in, on or about any motor vehicle parked in any public street, right-of-way, parking lot or other public property within the corporate limits of the town. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep on any public beach within the corporate limits of the town between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 679, § 2, 1-28-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 679, § 2, adopted Jan. 28, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 16-6. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers, these provisions have been included as § 16-7. 
Secs. 16-8-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note- Section 6 of Ord. No. 663 states that this article shall become effective immediately upon adoption, provided, however, that any commercial establishment utilizing simulated gambling devices in existence upon the effective date of this article shall be treated as a nonconforming use pursuant to section 34-1355 of the Town Code. 

Sec. 16-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means an individual, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any other type of organization whether conducted for profit or not for profit or a director, executive, officer or manager of an association, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other organization. 
    Simulated gambling device means any device that, upon connection with an object, is available to play or operate a computer simulation of any game, and which may deliver or entitle the person or persons playing or operating the device to a payoff. The following rules of construction apply to this definition of simulated gambling device: 
(1)  The term "device" means any mechanical or electrical contrivance, computer, terminal, video or other equipment that may or may not be capable of downloading games from a central server system, machine, computer or other device or equipment. The term device also includes any associated equipment necessary to conduct the operation of the device, or in the case of a password, inputting the password. 
(2)  The term "upon connection with" means inserting, swiping, passing in range, or any other technical means of physically, electronically, or electromagnetically connecting an object to a device, or inputting a password, code, account or user number or user name, into a device. 
(3)  The term "object" means a coin, bill, ticket, token, card, password, account or user number, name or code obtained directly or indirectly through payment of consideration or a donation, or obtained as a bonus or supplement to another transaction involving the payment of consideration or a donation. 
(4)  The terms "play or operate" or "play or operation" include any activation of a device whether involving the use of skill, the application of an element of chance, or both, or neither, or the implementation of an outcome unpredictable to the person activating the device. 
(5)  The term "simulation" includes simulation by means of a computer, computer system, video display, video system or any other form of electronic video presentation. 
(6)  The term "game" includes slot machines, poker, cards, bingo, craps, keno, any other type of game ordinarily played in a casino; a game involving the display of the results of a raffle, drawing, contest, game promotion, lotto or sweepstakes; or any other game associated with gambling or which could be associated with gambling. The term "game" does not necessarily imply or require actual gambling, as that term may be defined elsewhere. 
(7)  The term "payoff" means cash, monetary or other credit, tickets, tokens, or electronic credits to be exchanged for cash or to receive merchandise or anything of value whatsoever, whether made automatically from the machine or manually, from the owner or operator of the device, or any affiliate, associate, person, or entity acting in concert or connection with the owner or operator of the device, or from any person, entity, or device at the premises or building where such device is located. 
(8)  The use of the "gambling" in the term "simulated gambling device" is for convenience of reference only. The term "simulated gambling device" as used in this article is defined exclusively by this section and does not incorporate or imply any other legal definition or requirement applicable to gambling that may be found elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 2, 1-23-2013) 
Sec. 16-22. - Intent. 
    The intent of the council acting as the governing body of town in adopting this article is to prohibit broadly the use of simulated gambling devices, including any related activity or behavior which can be reasonably construed to be the use of simulated gambling devices. Further, the council, in prohibiting simulated gambling devices, in no way intends to approve the use of actual slot machines or other forms of casino gambling or other types of gambling devices. In addition, this prohibition is aimed directly at devices that simulate gambling activity, regardless of whether the devices or the simulations in and of themselves can be said to constitute gambling as that term may be defined elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 2, 1-23-2013) 
Sec. 16-23. - Prohibition of simulated gambling devices. 
    It is unlawful for any person to design, develop, manage, supervise, maintain, provide, produce, possess or use one or more simulated gambling devices in a commercial or nonprofit establishment or to knowingly lease, operate or maintain any premises for the use of simulated gambling devices. Each individual act to design, develop, manage, supervise, maintain, provide, produce, possess or use a simulated gambling device constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 2, 1-23-2013) 
Sec. 16-24. - Exemptions. 
    This article does not prohibit: 
(1)  An individual's personal, recreational, and non-commercial ownership, possession, play, operation or use of a device which could be construed to be a simulated gambling device; 
(2)  The operation of a game room or recreational facility which provides opportunities for casual entertainment by patrons of all ages and does not utilize devices that fall within the definition of a simulated gambling device; 
(3)  The ownership, possession, play, operation or use of any device expressly permitted by a Florida Statute and not otherwise prohibited by another Florida Statute or the Florida Constitution, except that this exemption shall not apply to devices permitted in Broward and Miami-Dade Counties only pursuant to Article X, Section 23 of the Florida Constitution and Chapter 551, Florida Statutes; 
(4)  A religious, charitable or non-profit organization conducting a fundraising activity involving gaming, provided that such activity is not conducted more than twice in any one year period and is not otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 2, 1-23-2013) 
Sec. 16-25. - Conflict with state law. 
    Nothing in this article is intended to conflict with the provisions of the Florida Constitution or Chapter 849, Florida Statutes, concerning gambling. In the event of a direct and express conflict between this article and either the Florida Constitution or Chapter 849, Florida Statutes, then the provisions of the Florida Constitution or Chapter 849, Florida Statutes, as applicable, shall control. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 2, 1-23-2013) 
Sec. 16-26. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Code enforcement personnel are authorized to enforce this article in accordance with all remedies set forth in division 2 of article II of chapter 2 of this Code. 
(b)  Law enforcement personnel are authorized to enforce this article in accordance with all remedies set forth in division 2 of article II of chapter 2 of this Code, section 1-14 of this Code, and any other provision of state or local law. 
(c)  In addition to the remedies set forth above, whether civil or criminal, the town may also pursue temporary or permanent injunctive relief or any other legal or equitable remedy authorized by law in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 2, 1-23-2013) 
Chapter 18 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Recreation, F.S. ch. 418. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE AND CONDUCT REGULATIONS OF PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other area in the town owned or used by the town and devoted to active or passive creation. 
    Park official means a person immediately in charge of any park area. 
    Recreation official means a person immediately in charge of any recreation program or area. 
    Vehicle means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn, or self-propelled. The term "vehicle" shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. Baby carriages and vehicles in the service of the town parks shall be excepted from this definition. 
(Code 1980, § 10-11; Ord. No. 111, § 1, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-20. - Authority to eject violators. 
    The park attendant or any law enforcement officer of the state shall have the authority to eject from a park any person acting in violation of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 10-14; Ord. No. 111, § 10, 11-9-1970; Ord. No. 430, § 15, 10-28-1992) 
Sec. 18-21. - Park hours of operation. 
    Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for public information. 
(Code 1980, § 10-15; Ord. No. 111, § 8, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-22. - Closing of specific areas. 
    Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the town manager at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, daily or otherwise, and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the town manager shall find reasonably necessary to protect grass or other planted areas or to protect park property. 
(Code 1980, § 10-16; Ord. No. 111, § 8, 11-9-1970; Ord. No. 430, § 15, 10-28-1992) 
Sec. 18-23. - Entering closed or posted areas. 
    No person in a park shall enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices. 
(Code 1980, § 10-17; Ord. No. 111, § 6, 11-9-1970) 
State Law reference- Burglary and trespass, F.S. ch. 810. 
Sec. 18-24. - Disorderliness. 
    No person in a park shall engage in loud, boisterous, threatening or abusive language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace. 
(Code 1980, § 10-18; Ord. No. 111, § 6, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-25. - Loitering. 
    No person in a park shall protractedly lounge on seats, benches, or other areas so as to obstruct other members of the public after having been asked to move on by a police officer or park official. 
(Code 1980, § 10-18; Ord. No. 111, § 6, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-26. - Language or gestures causing public disorder. 
    No person in a park shall, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if his conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, willfully use abusive or obscene language or make an obscene gesture to any other person when such words or gestures, by their utterance, inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace and invade the right of others to pursue their lawful activities. 
(Code 1980, § 10-18; Ord. No. 111, § 6, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-27. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    No person in a park shall possess or drink alcoholic beverages at any time. 
(Code 1980, § 10-19; Ord. No. 111, § 6, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-28. - Intoxication prohibited. 
    No person in a park shall be under the influence of alcoholic beverages to the extent that his faculties are impaired, and who is a danger to themselves, other persons or property. 
(Code 1980, § 10-20; Ord. No. 111, § 6, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-29. - Damaging property. 
    No person in a park shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts of appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(Code 1980, § 10-21; Ord. No. 111, § 2, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-30. - Removing natural resources. 
    No person in a park shall dig, or remove any soil, rocks, stones, shrubs or plants, downed timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency. 
(Code 1980, § 10-22; Ord. No. 111, § 2, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-31. - Damaging or removing trees, shrubbery, lawns. 
    No person in a park shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or walk upon or otherwise disturb grass areas or planted areas which have been posted with "No Trespassing," "Keep Off the Grass," or "Do Not Walk on the Grass" signs, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(Code 1980, § 10-23; Ord. No. 111, § 2, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-32. - Climbing trees or fixtures. 
    No person in a park shall climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences, gun carriages or any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 10-24; Ord. No. 111, § 2, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-33. - Erecting structures. 
    No person in a park shall construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except with a special written permit issued under this article. 
(Code 1980, § 10-25; Ord. No. 111, § 2, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-34. - Polluting waters. 
    No person in a park shall throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(Code 1980, § 10-26; Ord. No. 111, § 3, 11-9-1970) 
State Law reference- Pollution control, F.S. § 403.011 et seq. 
Sec. 18-35. - Disposal of refuse and trash. 
    No person in a park shall bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, water, garbage or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where such receptacles are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1980, § 10-27; Ord. No. 111, § 3, 11-9-1970) 
State Law reference- Florida Litter Law, F.S. § 403.413. 
Sec. 18-36. - Molesting, harming animals. 
    No person in a park shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird, or give, offer or attempt to give to any animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substance. The prohibitions set forth herein are not intended to regulate the use of a firearm as defined by Florida Statute. 
(Code 1980, § 10-28; Ord. No. 111, § 2, 11-9-1970; Ord. No. 655, § 3, 9-26-2011) 
State Law reference- Animal cruelty, F.S. ch. 828. 
Sec. 18-37. - Weapons and shooting. 
    No person in a park shall use, carry or possess air rifles, spring-guns, bow-and-arrows, slings or similar forms of weapons (excluding firearms) potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety or any kind of trapping device. Shooting firearms into park areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden. 
(Code 1980, § 10-29; Ord. No. 111, § 5, 11-9-1970; Ord. No. 655, § 3, 9-26-2011) 
State Law reference- Weapons and firearms, F.S. ch. 790. 
Sec. 18-38. - Fireworks and explosives. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person in a park shall bring or have in his possession or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedos, rockets or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable material. 
(b)  Exception. Special permits may be issued by the chief of police for fireworks displays, subject to the provision that such fireworks displays have adequate supervision and approval of the local fire chief. 
(Code 1980, § 10-30; Ord. No. 111, § 6, 11-9-1970; Ord. No. 430, § 15, 10-28-1992) 
State Law reference- Sale of fireworks, F.S. ch. 791. 
Sec. 18-39. - Picnic areas and use. 
(a)  Regulated. No person in a park shall picnic in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. 
(b)  Availability. No person in a park shall violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces together with tables and benches follows generally the rules of "first come, first served." 
(c)  Use nonexclusive; time limit. Except as otherwise authorized by permit under this article, no person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(d)  Duties of picnicker. No person in a park shall leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles, where provided. If no trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1980, § 10-31; Ord. No. 111, § 5, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-40. - Camping. 
    No person shall be permitted to camp in a park. No person shall set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person sleep in a park, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp vehicle, or the like. 
(Code 1980, § 10-32; Ord. No. 111, § 5, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-41. - Games, roller skating and skateboarding. 
    No person in a park shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball and quoits is prohibited except on the fields and courts or areas provided therefor. Roller skating and skateboarding shall be confined to those areas specifically designated for such activities. 
(Code 1980, § 10-33; Ord. No. 111, § 5, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-42. - Animals. 
    No person in a park shall be responsible for the entry of any animal, other than guide or service animals, into any park areas. For the purposes of this section the term "animal" means any mammal, domestic or wild, other than man. 
(Code 1980, § 10-35; Ord. No. 111, § 6, 11-9-1970; Ord. No. 335, § 2, 4-20-1988) 
Sec. 18-43. - Fires. 
    No person in a park shall build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the fire district. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 10-36; Ord. No. 111, § 6, 11-9-1970) 
State Law reference- Fire prevention and control, F.S. ch. 633. 
Sec. 18-44. - Sales prohibited. 
    No person in a park shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. 
(Code 1980, § 10-37; Ord. No. 111, § 7, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-45. - Advertising prohibited. 
    No person in a park shall announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire. 
(Code 1980, § 10-38; Ord. No. 111, § 7, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-46. - Signs. 
    No person in a park shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park except by permission of the town clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 10-39; Ord. No. 111, § 7, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-47. - Lost and found articles. 
    The finding of lost articles by park attendants shall be reported to the police department, which shall make every reasonable effort to locate the owners. The chief of police shall make every reasonable effort to find articles reported as lost. 
(Code 1980, § 10-40; Ord. No. 111, § 8, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-48. - Balloons prohibited. 
    For the protection of sea turtles and other wildlife, no person shall display, release or distribute balloons of any kind in any park. This prohibition shall not apply to the display, release or distribution of balloons by a governmental agency for scientific or meteorological purposes. 
(Ord. No. 693 , § 3, 10-26-2016) 
Secs. 18-49-18-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles, F.S. ch. 316 et seq. 

Sec. 18-68. - Compliance with state, local traffic regulations. 
    No person in a park shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles, together with such regulations as are contained in this division and other town ordinances. 
(Code 1980, § 10-51; Ord. No. 111, § 4, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-69. - Obedience to traffic signs. 
    No person in a park shall fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all other signs posted for the proper control of traffic and to the safeguarding of life and property. 
(Code 1980, § 10-52; Ord. No. 111, § 4, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-70. - Vehicles confined to roads, parking areas. 
    No person in a park shall drive any vehicle on any area except the established park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary roads or parking areas by the town. 
(Code 1980, § 10-53; Ord. No. 111, § 4, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-71. - Location, manner of parking. 
    No person in a park shall park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions in such area and with the instructions of any attendant who may be present. 
(Code 1980, § 10-54; Ord. No. 111, § 4, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-72. - Notice of vehicle emergencies. 
    No person in a park shall fail to immediately notify an attendant of an emergency in the nature of a breakdown requiring the assistance of a towtruck, mechanic or other person. 
(Code 1980, § 10-55; Ord. No. 111, § 4, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-73. - Double parking. 
    No person in a park shall double park any vehicle on any road or parkway unless so directed by a park official. 
(Code 1980, § 10-56; Ord. No. 111, § 4, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-74. - Bicycles. 
(a)  Place of operation. No person in a park shall ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use. 
(b)  Passenger prohibited. No person in a park shall ride with any other person on a bicycle. 
(c)  Use of designated racks. No person in a park shall leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is space available. 
(Code 1980, § 10-57; Ord. No. 111, § 4, 11-9-1970) 
Secs. 18-75-18-91. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SWIMMING AND BOATING 

Sec. 18-92. - Use of swimming areas. 
    No person in a park shall swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are set forth in this division or may be hereafter adopted. Nor shall any person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or boating, or congregate thereat, when such activity is prohibited by the town upon a finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable. 
(Code 1980, § 10-68; Ord. No. 111, § 5, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-93. - Obedience to designated hours for swimming. 
    No person in a park shall frequent any waters or places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except between such hours of the day as shall be designated by the town for such purposes for each individual area. 
(Code 1980, § 10-69; Ord. No. 111, § 5, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-94. - Structures in swimming areas. 
    No person in a park shall erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or bathing area any tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there shall be an unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or structure from at least two sides; nor shall any guidewire, rope or extension or exterior brace or support be connected or fastened from any such structure to any other structure, stake, rock or other object outside thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 10-70; Ord. No. 111, § 5, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-95. - Bathing attire regulated. 
    No person in a park shall appear in a bathing costume at any place in the park except within the limits of designated bathing places or areas, and all bathing costumes shall not expose specified anatomical areas as defined in section 34-949(c). 
(Code 1980, § 10-71; Ord. No. 111, § 5, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-96. - Dressing, undressing. 
    No person in a park shall dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in such bathinghouse or structure as may be provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1980, § 10-72; Ord. No. 111, § 5, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-97. - Boating confined to certain areas; compliance with regulations. 
    No person in a park shall bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters except at places designated for boating by the town. Such activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are now or may be hereafter adopted. 
(Code 1980, § 10-73; Ord. No. 111, § 5, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-98. - Operation of boats. 
    No person in a park shall navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the occupants of any other boat. 
(Code 1980, § 10-74; Ord. No. 111, § 5, 11-9-1970) 
State Law reference- Reckless or negligent operation of a vessel, F.S. § 327.33. 
Sec. 18-99. - Boating during closing hours. 
    No person in a park shall launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any waters between the closing hours of the park at night and the opening hours the following morning, nor shall any person be on, or remain on or in, any boat during the said closed hours of the park. 
(Code 1980, § 10-75; Ord. No. 111, § 5, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-100. - Beach storage of watercraft. 
(a)  Permit required. Storage of any nonmotorized watercraft on the beach requires a permit from the town. No motorized watercraft are permitted to be stored on the beach or dune area. The intent of this section is to allow the town residents to enjoy the beach and use of their nonmotorized watercraft while protecting the residents from any noise and other nuisances caused by such watercraft, protecting the dune and dune vegetation, and protecting sea turtles and their nesting areas. 
(b)  Permit application requirements. The following information is required on the application for a permit required by subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  The name and address of the boat owners (town residents and property owners only). 
(2)  The home and work phone numbers of the boat owners. 
(3)  A description of the boat, including make, size (hull length), hull color, serial number, photograph. 
(4)  Written permission from the property owner for boat storage, if the applicant is not the property owner. 
(c)  Watercraft storage requirements. 
(1)  Watercraft must not be carried over, stored or secured on dunes or dune vegetation, even during storm conditions. However, watercraft may be carried over dunes via a dune walkover structure. 
(2)  No storage is permitted on town-owned or town-leased property. 
(3)  Watercraft must be stored with the hulls perpendicular to the shoreline and no items stored underneath. 
(4)  Watercraft must be stored in a noiseproof manner so that no sound is generated from the rigging under any wind conditions. 
(5)  Watercraft must be dispersed along the beach so that no more than 15 percent of the width of any individual property is occupied by watercraft. 
(6)  Anchors, if used, must be of the screw- or auger-type only and may not be installed on the dune. Anchors may not be installed between May 1 and October 31 (turtle season) unless otherwise approved by the county's department of environmental resources management. 
(7)  A town permit sticker must be visibly displayed on the watercraft. 
(8)  Watercraft must be maintained in a safe and operable condition. 
(9)  Watercraft must not exceed 18 feet in length. 
(d)  Regulation, administration and enforcement. 
(1)  A maximum of 12 permits will be issued for the town's shoreline limits, thereby minimizing the impact on both wildlife and residents. 
(2)  Permits shall be issued only to town residents or property owners. Only one permit shall be issued per household or nonresidential property owner. 
(3)  The town manager shall set the permit fee, which shall be approved by the town council prior to the fee being assessed. Permits shall be issued each year on November 1, and shall expire annually on October 31, regardless of the date of issuance. Renewal of current permits will have priority over new permits up until October 31 of each year. Renewals shall be for one year at a time. 
(4)  Upon notification of a hurricane watch from the county's division of emergency management or the area's news weather stations, the owner shall remove the watercraft. 
(5)  Upon notification from the town code enforcement or police personnel, the owner must immediately correct any noise or other nonconformance with this section. 
(6)  Failure to respond to notification or failure to comply with this section within 48 hours shall result in revocation of the beach storage permit, and may result in boat impoundment. 
(Code 1980, § 10-76; Ord. No. 400, § 1, 10-17-1990; Ord. No. 422, § 1, 2-19-1992) 
Secs. 18-101-18-128. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL PERMITS 

Sec. 18-129. - Required. 
    Any person or group desiring to use any park or portion thereof for any special or organized purpose, or for the purpose of assembly, or for any purpose or function from which the general public is to be excluded, or to use any park or portion thereof during times such use is not otherwise permitted, or for purposes not otherwise permitted, shall first obtain a permit therefor from the town clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 10-86; Ord. No. 111, § 8, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-130. - Approval of town council required. 
    No permit required by this division shall be issued until the issuance thereof has been approved by the town council. 
(Code 1980, § 10-87) 
Sec. 18-131. - Application. 
    A person seeking issuance of a permit under this division shall file an application with the town clerk. The application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the person, corporation or association sponsoring the activity, if any. 
(3)  The day and hours for which the permit is desired. 
(4)  The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired. 
(5)  An estimate of the anticipated attendance. 
(6)  Any other information which the town clerk or town council shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued hereunder. 
(Code 1980, § 10-88; Ord. No. 111, § 8, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-132. - Standards of issuance. 
    The town council shall authorize the issuance of a permit hereunder when it finds: 
(1)  That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public's enjoyment of the park. 
(2)  That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation. 
(3)  That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct. 
(4)  That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the town, or that the applicant will defray any extraordinary expense which will be incurred by the town. 
(5)  That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application. 
(Code 1980, § 10-89; Ord. No. 111, § 8, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-133. - Permittee bound by regulations. 
    A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in the permit, except for such rules and regulations as may be waived by such permit. 
(Code 1980, § 10-90; Ord. No. 111, § 8, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-134. - Liability of permittee. 
    The person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person by reason of the negligence of the person to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
(Code 1980, § 10-91; Ord. No. 111, § 8, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-135. - Duty to exhibit. 
    No person in a park shall fail to produce and exhibit any permit he claims to have, upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule. 
(Code 1980, § 10-92; Ord. No. 111, § 6, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-136. - Interference with permittees. 
    No person in a park shall disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit. 
(Code 1980, § 10-93; Ord. No. 111, § 6, 11-9-1970) 
Sec. 18-137. - Revocation. 
    The town manager or the manager's designee shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown. 
(Code 1980, § 10-94; Ord. No. 111, § 8, 11-9-1970; Ord. No. 430, § 5, 10-28-1992) 
Chapter 20 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulations Act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.; planning and development, F.S. ch. 186 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD 

Sec. 20-23. - Established; membership; terms and removal. 
(a)  Establishment and membership. A planning and zoning board is hereby established and shall consist of five members and one alternate members who shall be residents of the town. Alternate members shall act in the absence, disability or disqualification of any regular member. No regular or alternate member of the board shall be an employee or elected official of the town. 
(b)  Terms. The term of each regular and alternate planning and zoning board member serving as of the effective date of this ordinance shall expire on March 31, 2008. Thereafter, the town council shall appoint all regular and alternate members for one-year terms commencing on April 1st and ending on March 31st. 
(c)  Method of appointment. Each member of the town council shall nominate one member for appointment to the planning and zoning board, subject to approval by vote of the town council. One alternate member may be nominated by any member of the town council and shall be appointed by vote of the town council. 
(d)  Removal. Members of the board shall serve at the pleasure of the town council and may be removed by vote of the council with or without cause. Any board member who is absent from three scheduled meetings during his or her term shall be sent, by hand delivery, a letter from the town manager notifying the member that he or she shall be removed from the board unless the member provides a written explanation for the absences within three (3) working days of receipt of the letter. If the member fails to provide such written explanation within the time allocated, the member shall be automatically removed from the board. If the member does provide such written explanation, the matter shall be forwarded to the town council to determine whether the member should be removed or retained. 
(e)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by the town council within 30 days to serve unexpired terms. 
(Code 1980, § 11-17; Res. No. 7-76, § 1, 5-19-1976; Ord. No. 307, § 2, 8-13-1986; Ord. No. 430, § 16, 10-28-1992; Ord. No. 609, § 2, 7-25-2007) 
Sec. 20-24. - Duties. 
    The duties of the planning and zoning board shall be as assigned to it from time to time by the town council. 
(Code 1980, § 11-18; Res. No. 7-76, § 2, 5-19-1976; Ord. No. 430, § 16, 10-28-1992) 
Sec. 20-25. - Officers; procedures. 
    The planning and zoning board shall appoint its own chairman and vice chairman, as well as adopt such procedures as it deems necessary for the efficient conduct of its meetings which are to be conducted in public. Minutes of all such meetings will be kept and made a matter of public record. The town clerk's office shall perform all secretarial and administrative duties of the board. 
(Code 1980, § 11-19; Res. No. 7-76, § 3, 5-19-1976; Ord. No. 609, § 2, 7-25-2007) 
Sec. 20-26. - Meetings; quorum; majority vote required. 
    The planning and zoning board shall meet twice per month, unless cancelled by the town manager. Additional meetings shall be held at its own discretion, or if required of the board by the town council or the town manager. A quorum of three attending members shall be necessary for any meeting, and a majority vote shall be required for all determinations of the planning and zoning board at any of its meetings. 
(Code 1980, § 11-20; Res. No. 7-76, § 4, 5-19-1976; Ord. No. 609, § 2, 7-25-2007) 
Sec. 20-27. - Use of services of town attorney and engineer. 
    The planning and zoning board may from time to time utilize, in an advisory capacity only, the services of either the town attorney or the town engineer, subject to the prior approval, in each instance, of the town manager. 
(Code 1980, § 11-21; Res. No. 7-76, § 5, 5-19-1976; Ord. No. 430, § 16, 10-28-1992) 
Secs. 20-28-20-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT OR REDEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-58. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all new development and redevelopment permit applications in the incorporated area of the town. 
(Code 1980, § 11-30; Ord. No. 399, § 1, 10-17-1990) 
Sec. 20-59. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Implementation of comprehensive plan. This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the comprehensive plan by requiring that all development in the town is served by adequate public facilities. 
(b)  Establishment of management/monitoring and regulatory program. The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Establish a management and monitoring system to evaluate and coordinate the timing and provision of necessary public facilities to serve new development and redevelopment; and 
(2)  Establish a regulatory program to ensure each public facility is available to serve new development and redevelopment concurrent with the impacts of development on public facilities. 
(Code 1980, § 11-31; Ord. No. 399, § 1, 10-17-1990) 
Sec. 20-60. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adequate public facilities determination means an administrative determination issued by the planning department pursuant to the terms of this article that, based upon existing public facility capacity and/or planned public facility capacity, adequate public facilities are available to serve new development or redevelopment at the time of the adequate public facilities determination. 
    Application for development order means an application submitted to the town requesting the issuance of a development order. 
    Capital improvements element means the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
    Capital potable water facilities means the planning of, engineering for, acquisition of land for, or construction of potable water facilities necessary to maintain the level of service (LOS) for capital potable water facilities. 
    Capital recreation and open space facilities means the planning of, engineering for, acquisition of land for, or construction of buildings and park equipment necessary to maintain the LOS for capital recreation and open space facilities. 
    Capital road facilities means the planning of, engineering for, acquisition of land for, or construction of potable water facilities necessary to maintain the LOS for capital potable water facilities. 
    Capital sanitary sewer facilities means the planning of, engineering for, acquisition of land for, or construction of sanitary sewer facilities necessary to maintain the LOS for capital sanitary sewer facilities. 
    Capital solid waste facilities means the planning of, engineering for, acquisition of land for, or construction of solid waste facilities necessary to maintain the LOS for capital solid waste facilities. 
    Certificate of concurrency reservation means a certificate approved administratively by the planning department pursuant to the terms of this article which constitutes proof that adequate capital facilities to serve the proposed development exist. 
    Comprehensive plan means the Town of Juno Beach Comprehensive Plan, as amended, where referenced in this article. 
    Developer means any person, including a government agency, undertaking any development subject to an application for development order as defined in this section. 
    Development means the carrying out of any building activity or mining operation, the making of any material change in the use of or appearance of any structure or land, or the dividing of land into three or more parcels, except for the clearing of land or the deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, except when a development order is required. 
    Development agreement means an agreement entered into between a capital facility provider and a person associated with the development of land, including but not limited to development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220, or an agreement on a development order issued pursuant to F.S. § 380.01 et seq. 
    Development order means any order granting, or granting with conditions, an application for site plan review, rezoning, special exception, minor plat, preliminary plan, master plan, preliminary plat, subdivision plat, building permit, settlement agreement, or any other official action of the town having the effect of permitting the development of land, the subject of which includes the determination of density and/or intensity of use. 
    Level of service (LOS) means an indicator of the extent or degree of service provided by or proposed to be provided by a capital facility based on and related to the operational characteristics of the capital facility. 
(1)  LOS for capital potable water facilities. 
a.  Northern/central planning areas. 
1.  Average day water consumption rate: 97.3 gallons/capita/day. 
2.  Maximum day water consumption rate: 171.1 gallons/capita/day. 
3.  Storage requirements domestic demand: 0.75 + fire demand: 120 min. × 1,000 gpm = required storage capacity. 
b.  Southern planning area. 
1.  Average day water consumption rate: 116.6 gallons/capita/day. 
2.  Maximum day water consumption rate: 181.7 gallons/capita/day. 
3.  Storage requirements domestic demand: maximum daily flow × 0.75 + fire demand: 120 min. × 1,000 gpm = required storage capacity. 
(2)  LOS for capital recreation and open space facilities. 
a.  Active (user-oriented). 
Recreation Activity Level of Service (LOS) Tennis 1 court/2,000 Basketball 1 court/2,000 Shuffleboard 1 court/5,000 L.L. baseball 1 field/3,000 Sr. baseball 1 field/6,000 Adult softball 1 field/6,000 Football/soccer 1 field/4,000 Exercise trail 10 station/10,000 Handball and racquetball 1 court/5,000 Playground 1 area/3,000 Volleyball 1 court/6,000  
b.  Passive (resource-oriented). 
Recreation Activity Level of Service (LOS) Picnicking 1 area/6,000 Fishing (nonboat) 1 site/5,000 Hiking/nature trail 1 mile/10,000 Bicycling 1 mile/5,000  
(3)  LOS for capital road facilities. For general transportation planning purposes, the town shall support and maintain a level of service C standard and D at peak hour for collector and arterial roads serving the town. 
(4)  LOS for capital sanitary sewer facilities. 
Area Level of Service (LOS) Northern/central planning area Maximum month daily generation rate: 85 gallons/capita/day Southern planning area Maximum month daily generation rate: 93.3 gallons/capita/day  
(5)  LOS for capital solid waste facilities. 
Year Level of Service (LOS) Average Generation Rate 1989* 5.1 lbs/capita/day 1994 5.6 lbs/capita/day 1999 6.1 lbs/capita/day  
(6)  LOS for capital storm drainage facilities. 
a.  Design storm. 
1.  In existing developed area: 
Area Level of Service (LOS) Northern/southern 5-year frequency, 24-hour (1-day) duration; rainfall intensity curve Central drainage area 3-year frequency, 24-hour (1-day) duration; rainfall intensity curve  
2.  Future development in existing vacant areas: 
Area Level of Service (LOS) Northern/southern drainage areas 1.9 acres and below 5-year frequency, 24-hour (1-day) duration; rainfall intensity curve 2.0-5.9 acres 5-year frequency, 72-hour (3-day) duration; rainfall intensity curve 6.0-9.9 acres 10-year frequency, 72-hour (3-day) duration; rainfall intensity curve 10.00 acres + 25-year frequency, 72-hour (3-day) duration; rainfall intensity curve Central drainage area 1.9 acres and below 3-year frequency, 24-hour (1-day) duration; rainfall intensity curve 2.0-5.9 acres 5-year frequency, 24-hour (1-day) duration; rainfall intensity curve 6.0-9.9 acres 10-year frequency, 72-hour (3-day) duration; rainfall intensity curve 10.0 acres + 25-year frequency, 72-hour (3-day) duration; rainfall intensity curve  
b.  Flood protection, all areas. Finished floor elevation for all buildings shall be above the 100-year frequency, 72-hour duration (three-day); rainfall intensity curve. 
c.  Water quality, all areas. The town shall comply with the South Florida Water Management District's (SFWMD) requirements as identified under F.S. ch. 372, part IV and F.A.C. chs. 40E-4 and 40E-40, as well as F.A.C. ch. 17.25, which has been delegated to the SFWMD by the department of environmental regulation for stormwater quality management and F.A.C. ch. 17-3, which addresses water quality criteria for surface waters. 
    Major roads means all roads within the incorporated area of the town listed on the state highway functional classification system. 
    Public facilities means capital storm drainage facilities, capital park and recreation facilities, capital potable water facilities, capital road facilities, capital sanitary sewer facilities, and capital solid waste facilities. 
    Service provider means the public or private entity responsible for the provision of public facilities to the residents of the town. 
(Code 1980, § 11-32; Ord. No. 399, § 1, 10-17-1990; Ord. No. 412, § 2, 6-19-1991) 
Secs. 20-61-20-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 20-79. - Establishment of management programs. 
    In order to implement the provisions of the comprehensive plan to require that adequate public facilities are to be made available to accommodate development concurrent with the impacts of development on such public facilities, the town hereby establishes, pursuant to the terms of this article: 
(1)  A management and monitoring program; and 
(2)  A regulatory program. 
(Code 1980, § 11-40; Ord. No. 399, § 1, 10-17-1990) 
Sec. 20-80. - Management and monitoring program. 
(a)  Generally. To ensure proper planning for adequate public facilities concurrent with the impacts of development, the town shall establish and maintain management and monitoring practices to: 
(1)  Adequately plan for and fund public facilities; and 
(2)  Evaluate the capacity of public facilities for use in the regulatory program to ensure no development orders are issued unless adequate public facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of development or that no development orders are issued unless they are conditioned on the availability of public facilities concurrent with development impacts. 
(b)  Annual public facilities update report. 
(1)  By March 1 of each year, commencing in 1991, the planning department shall complete and submit to the town council an annual public facilities update report (AUR) for the period ending December 31 of the previous year. The AUR shall state the current available capacity of public facilities based on a determination made by the service providers, and shall forecast the availability of capacity of existing public facilities and planned capital improvements for the upcoming year and for the five succeeding years. The forecasts shall be based on the most recently available schedule of capital improvements for each public facility. The AUR shall also revise population estimates and projections and update public facility inventories, unit costs, and revenue forecasts, as necessary for inclusion within the capital improvements element. 
(2)  The findings of the AUR shall form the basis for any proposed amendments to the capital improvements element, any proposed amendments to the town's operating or capital budgets for public facilities, and the review and issuance of adequate public facilities determinations and certificates of concurrency reservation during the next year. Until the initial AUR is prepared, data and analyses within the comprehensive plan shall be used for the purposes described in this subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(c)  Recommendations on amendments to capital improvements element and annual budget. Based upon an analysis of the AUR, the planning department shall propose to the town council each year any necessary amendments to the capital improvements element, and any proposed amendments to the town's annual budget for public facilities. 
(d)  Annual notification to service providers. Prior to December 31 of each year, commencing in 1990, the planning department shall submit an annual report to the service providers summarizing development orders issued by the town during the previous 12-month period. The annual report shall include a list of development orders issued by type and descriptions of use, including density or intensity. Further, a map shall be included indicating the location of each development. 
(Code 1980, § 11-41; Ord. No. 399, § 1, 10-17-1990) 
Sec. 20-81. - Regulatory program. 
(a)  Generally. In order to ensure adequate public facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of development, the following development review procedures are established: 
(b)  Review to determine public facility adequacy. 
(1)  Generally. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, no application for a development order shall be approved without receipt of either an adequate public facilities determination or a certificate of concurrency reservation. No application for a building permit shall be approved without receipt of a certificate of concurrency reservation. 
(2)  Rules of general applicability. 
a.  Submission of application. An application for an adequate public facilities determination or a certificate of concurrency reservation may be submitted at any time during the year in a form established by the planning department. Review of the application shall be initiated by the planning department pursuant to subsections (b)(3)b or (b)(4) of this section upon receipt of a complete application. The review and adequate public facilities determination or denial thereof shall be completed within 30 days from the date of the application. The review and issuance or denial of a certificate of concurrency reservation shall be made within ten days from the date of the application. 
b.  Filing fees. Filing fees associated with the issuance of an adequate facilities determination shall be determined and administered by the application of the provisions of sections 34-204 and 34-205, as appropriate. Filing fees associated with the issuance of a certificate of concurrency reservation shall be determined and administrated by the provisions of section 24-25. 
c.  Effect and expiration. 
1.  Adequate public facilities determination. An adequate public facilities determination shall state that, based upon existing public facility capacity and planned public facility capacity, adequate public facilities are available to serve the development at the time of the approval of the adequate public facilities determination. An adequate public facilities determination is initially valid for six months. During the six-month period, an application for an associated development order must be submitted for the proposed development. If a development order is approved, the adequate public facilities determination is valid for the life of the initial development order. Each subsequent application for a development order for the development shall apply for a new adequate public facilities determination, or a certificate of concurrency reservation, whichever is appropriate. All applications for development orders, with the exception of exemptions pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, and building permits shall be subjected to an adequate public facilities determination. 
2.  Certificate of concurrency reservation. Receipt of a certificate of concurrency reservation shall constitute proof that adequate public facilities exist to serve the proposed development. A certificate of concurrency reservation is valid for the life of the development order for which it is approved. The expiration of a development order shall result in the expiration of the certificate of concurrency reservation. 
d.  Amendment to adequate public facilities determination or certificate of concurrency reservation. An amendment to an adequate public facilities determination or certificate of concurrency reservation shall be required prior to the approval of any amendment to a development order for which an adequate public facilities determination or certificate of concurrency reservation has been approved if the amendment increases the demand for additional capacity for any public facility. The amendment shall only require evaluation and reservation of the additional public facility capacity demanded by the proposed development. 
(3)  Procedure for review of application for adequate public facilities determination. 
a.  Determination of completeness. After receipt of an application for adequate public facilities determination, the planning department shall determine within ten days of initiation of processing whether it is complete and includes the data necessary to evaluate the application. If the planning department determines that the application is not complete, written notice shall be served to the applicant specifying deficiencies. The planning department shall take no further action on the application until the deficiencies are remedied. 
b.  Adequate public facilities determination. When the application is determined to be complete, the application shall be reviewed by the planning department. Within 15 days, the planning department shall make a determination as to whether or not adequate public facilities are available, pursuant to the standards of subsection (b)(5) of this section. The basis of the review and recommendation shall be the annual update report prepared pursuant to section 20-80(b) and statements from service providers (supplied by applicant as part of the application) and appropriate town departments as to whether or not adequate public facilities are available, pursuant to the standards in subsection (b)(5) of this section. If the application complies with all of the public facility component standards in subsection (b)(5) of this section, the planning department shall issue an adequate public facilities determination. 
c.  Conditional adequate public facilities determination. A conditional adequate public facilities determination may be approved by the town council at a regular meeting if it is demonstrated that one of the following conditions is met: 
1.  Existing available public facility capacity up to an amount sufficient to serve the proposed development has been reserved by the service provider; 
2.  There is reasonable likelihood that the balance of the public facility capacity needed for the proposed development can be provided pursuant to a development agreement; and 
3.  A request has been made for consideration and approval of a development agreement concurrent with the application for a development permit to accommodate the balance of public facility capacity needs for the proposed development. The purpose of a conditional adequate public facilities determination is to allow a proposed development to continue with the development approval process if adequate public facility capacity to accommodate the proposed development can be provided through the execution of a development agreement. 
(4)  Procedure for review of application for certificate of concurrency reservation. The issuance of all building permits, with the exception of the exemptions pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, shall be conditioned upon the receipt of a certificate of concurrency reservation. Application for a certificate of concurrency reservation shall be made concurrent with that for a building permit to the town in a form established by the planning department and made available to the public. The planning department shall issue a certificate of concurrency reservation for all developments which were previously issued an adequate public facilities determination, provided the standards in subsection (b)(6) of this section have been met. Upon receipt of the application for a certificate of concurrency reservation, the planning department shall review the application within ten days to determine if it complies with the public facility component standards of subsection (b)(6) of this section. If the application complies with all of the public facility component standards of subsection (b)(6) of this section, the planning department shall issue a certificate of concurrency reservation. If the planning department determines the application fails to meet any one of the public facility component standards of subsection (b)(6) of this section, the applicant shall be notified of the deficiency, and may remedy the application through a development agreement or other means within 90 days. If during the 90-day period the applicant resolves the deficiencies, the application shall be reconsidered by the planning department and approved or denied, consistent with the standards of subsection (b)(6) of this section. 
(5)  Standards for review of application for adequate public facilities determination. The planning department shall use the following standards to determine whether to issue or deny an adequate public facilities determination: 
a.  Potable water facilities. The potable water component shall be approved if either of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Capital potable water supply, treatment and transmission facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital potable water facilities as determined by a letter from the service provider; or 
2.  The capital potable water supply, treatment and transmission facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital potable water facilities are under construction and bonded as determined by a letter from the service provider. 
b.  Sanitary sewer facilities. The sanitary sewer component shall be approved if either of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Capital sanitary sewer, transmission treatment and disposal facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital sanitary sewer facilities as determined by a letter from the service provider; or 
2.  The capital sanitary sewer, transmission treatment and disposal facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital sanitary sewer facilities are under construction and bonded as determined by a letter from the service provider. 
c.  Solid waste facilities. The solid waste component shall be approved if either of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Capital solid waste facilities are in place, as determined by a letter from the service provider, to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital solid waste facilities; or 
2.  The capital solid waste facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital solid waste facilities are under construction and bonded as determined by a letter from the service provider. 
d.  Drainage facilities. The drainage component approval shall be conditioned upon the design and construction of drainage facilities that meet the LOS standard for capital storm drainage facilities as per subsection (6) of the definition of "level of service (LOS)" provided in section 20-60. 
e.  Recreation and open space facilities. The recreation and open space component shall be approved if either of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Capital recreation and open space facilities are in place, as determined by the planning department, to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital recreation and open space facilities; or 
2.  The capital recreation and open space facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital recreation and open space facilities are under construction and bonded as determined by the planning department. 
f.  Road facilities. The road component shall be approved if the proposed development complies with the required Traffic Performance Standards Ordinance of Palm Beach County, Florida, and the LOS for capital road facilities. Building permit applications for individually owned and platted single-family lots shall be found to have no significant impact. 
(6)  Standards for review of application for certificate of concurrency reservation. The following standards shall be used in the determination of whether to issue, issue with conditions, or deny a certificate of concurrency reservation. Before issuance of a certificate of concurrency reservation, the application shall fulfill the following public facility standards: 
a.  Potable water facilities. The potable water component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Capital potable water facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital potable water facilities, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the service provider; 
2.  The capital potable water facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital potable water facilities are under construction and bonded, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the service provider; or 
3.  The capital potable water facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital potable water facilities are committed to be provided by the applicant pursuant to a development agreement. 
b.  Sanitary sewer facilities. The sanitary sewer component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Capital sanitary facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital sanitary sewer facilities, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider; 
2.  The capital sanitary sewer facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital sanitary sewer facilities are under construction and bonded, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider; 
3.  The capital sanitary sewer facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital sanitary sewer facilities are committed to be provided by the applicant pursuant to a development agreement. 
c.  Solid waste facilities. The solid waste component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Capital solid waste facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital solid waste facilities; or 
2.  The capital solid waste facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital solid waste facilities are under construction and bonded as determined by a letter from the service provider. 
d.  Drainage facilities. The drainage component shall be approved if the proposed development meets the LOS standard for capital storm drainage facilities as per subsection (6) of the definition of "level of service (LOS)" provided in section 20-60. 
e.  Recreation and open space facilities. The recreation and open space component shall be approved if any of the following conditions have been met: 
1.  Capital recreation and open space facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for capital recreational and open space facilities, and a reservation of capacity has been provided for the facilities; 
2.  The capital recreation and open space facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for the capital recreation and open space facilities are under construction and bonded, and a reservation of capacity has been provided for the facilities; or 
3.  The capital recreation and open space facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services on the LOS for capital recreation and open space facilities shall be provided pursuant to the terms of a development agreement. 
f.  Road facilities. The road component shall be approved if the proposed development complies with the requirements of the Traffic Performance Standards Ordinance of Palm Beach County, Florida. Building permit applications for individually owned and platted single-family lots shall be found to have no significant impact. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following developments shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Normal public facilities maintenance and repair activities that are consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Construction or reconstruction of public facilities exempted from obtaining town development approvals; 
(3)  Alteration or expansion of an existing dwelling unit that does not create additional impact on public facilities; 
(4)  Construction of accessory buildings and structures that does not create additional dwelling units and does not create additional impact on public facilities; 
(5)  Replacement of an existing dwelling unit when no additional dwelling units are created; 
(6)  To the extent of current approvals, properties subject to development orders in effect as of the adoption date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, subject to the expiration criteria of those orders; and 
(7)  Any official action of the town not having the effect of issuing a development order. 
(Code 1980, § 11-42; Ord. No. 399, § 1, 10-17-1990; Ord. No. 412, § 2, 6-19-1991) 
Secs. 20-82-20-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROPROTIONATE FAIR SHARE PROGRAM 

Sec. 20-91. - Proportionate fair-share program. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to establish a method whereby the impacts of development on transportation facilities can be mitigated by the cooperative efforts of the public and private sectors, to be known as the proportionate fair-share program, as required by state statute. 
(b)  Applicability. The proportionate fair-share program shall apply to all developments that fail to meet the standards of this chapter and the town's comprehensive plan on a roadway within the town that is not the responsibility of the county, the state or another agency. The proportionate fair-share program does not apply to the following: 
(1)  Collector and arterial roads which are not the responsibility of the town pursuant to Section 1.3(4) of the County Charter; 
(2)  Developments of regional impact using proportionate fair-share pursuant to F.S. § 163.3180(12); 
(3)  Projects exempted from this chapter by state law; 
(4)  Projects that received traffic concurrency approval prior to December 1, 2006; 
(5)  Individual single-family homes; and 
(6)  Vested projects. 
(c)  General requirements. An applicant may choose to satisfy the level of service for capital road facilities by making a proportionate fair-share contribution, so long as each of the following requirements is met: 
(1)  The proposed development is consistent with the comprehensive plan and applicable land development regulations. 
(2)  The road improvement necessary to maintain the level of service for capital road facilities is identified in the five-year schedule of capital improvements in the capital improvements element. 
(3)  Any improvement project proposed to meet the developer's fair-share obligation shall meet the town's design standards for locally maintained roadways. 
(d)  Intergovernmental coordination. In accordance with the intergovernmental coordination element of the town's comprehensive plan, the town shall coordinate with the county and other affected jurisdictions, such as the state department of transportation, regarding mitigation to impacted facilities not under the jurisdiction of the local government receiving the application for proportionate fair-share mitigation. 
(e)  Application process. 
(1)  In the event of a lack of capacity to maintain the level of service for capital road facilities, the applicant shall have the opportunity to satisfy the level of service for capital road facilities requirements through the proportionate fair-share program subject to the requirements of subsection (c). 
(2)  Prior to the submittal of an application, eligible applicants shall schedule a pre-application meeting with town staff. Subsequent to the pre-application meeting, eligible applicants shall submit a completed development application and all documentation requested by the town. The applicant shall be required to pay a reasonable fee for the cost of reviewing the application as established by the town council. If the impacted facility is on the strategic intermodal system (SIS), then the state department of transportation will be notified and invited to participate in the pre-application meeting 
(3)  Town staff shall review the application and certify that the application is sufficient and complete within 14 working days. If an application is determined to be insufficient, incomplete or inconsistent with the general requirements of the proportionate fair-share program as indicated in subsection (c), then the applicant will be notified in writing of the reasons for such deficiencies. If such deficiencies are not remedied by the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the written notification, then the application will be deemed withdrawn and all fees forfeited to the town, unless the town determines that the applicant is working in good faith to remedy the stated deficiencies, in which case the town may extend the deadline as deemed appropriate in the sole discretion of the town. 
(4)  In accordance with statutory requirements, proposed proportionate fair-share mitigation for development impacts to facilities on the SIS requires the concurrency of the state department of transportation. The applicant shall submit evidence of an agreement between the applicant and the department of transportation for inclusion in the proportionate fair-share agreement. 
(5)  When an application is deemed sufficient and complete in accordance with subparagraph (3) above, the applicant shall be advised in writing and a proposed proportionate fair-share obligation and binding agreement prepared by the town shall be executed by the applicant and delivered to the appropriate parties for review, including a copy to the department of transportation for any proposed proportionate fair-share mitigation on a SIS facility, no later than 60 days from the date on which the applicant received the notification of a sufficient and complete application. If the agreement is not received by the town within these 60 days, then the application will be deemed withdrawn and all fees forfeited to the town, unless the town determines that the applicant is working in good faith to remedy the stated deficiencies, in which case the town may extend the deadline as deemed appropriate in the sole discretion of the town. 
(6)  No proportionate fair-share agreement will be effective until approved by the town. 
(f)  Determining proportionate fair-share obligation. 
(1)  Proportionate fair-share mitigation for capital road facilities level of service impacts may include, without limitation, separately or collectively, private funds, contributions of land, and construction and contribution of facilities. 
(2)  A development eligible for participation under the proportionate fair-share program shall not be required to pay more than its proportionate fair-share. The fair market value of the proportionate fair-share mitigation for the impacted facilities shall not differ regardless of the method of mitigation. 
(3)  The methodology used to calculate a development's proportionate fair-share obligation shall be as provided by state statute: 
The cumulative number of trips from the proposed development expected to reach roadways during peak hours from the complete build out of a stage or phase being approved, divided by the change in the peak hour maximum service volume (MSV) of roadways resulting from construction of an improvement necessary to maintain the adopted level of service, multiplied by the construction cost, at the time of developer payment, of the improvement necessary to maintain the adopted level of service. 
OR 
Proportionate Fair Share = S[ [(Development Trips;sub \sub;) / (SV Increase;sub \sub;)] x Cost;sub \sub; ] 
Where: 
Development Trips;sub \sub;       = Those trips from the stage or phase of development under review that are assigned to roadway segment "i" and have triggered a deficiency per the concurrency management system (the "CMS"); SV Increase;sub \sub;       = Service volume increase provided by the eligible improvement to roadway segment "I"; Cost;sub \sub;       = Adjusted cost of the improvement to segment "i". Cost shall include the cost of all project phases (preliminary engineering or alignment study, design, rights-of-way acquisition and construction) in the years said phases will occur with all associated costs.  
(4)  For the purposes of determining proportionate fair-share obligations, the town shall determine improvement costs based upon the actual and/or anticipated cost of the improvement in the year that construction will occur. 
(5)  If an improvement is proposed by the applicant, then the value of the improvement shall be based on an engineer's certified cost estimate provided by the applicant and approved by the town or by some other method approved by the town. 
(g)  Impact fee credit for proportionate fair-share mitigation. 
(1)  Proportionate fair-share contributions shall be applied as a credit against road impact fees to the extent that all or a portion of the proportionate fair-share mitigation is used to address the same capital infrastructure improvements contemplated by road impact fees which may hereafter be established by the town. 
(2)  The proportionate fair-share obligation is intended to mitigate the transportation impacts of a proposed project. As a result, any road impact fee credit based upon proportionate fair-share contributions for a proposed project cannot be transferred to any other project. 
(h)  Proportionate fair-share agreements. 
(1)  Upon execution of a proportionate fair-share agreement, the applicant shall receive a certification of concurrency reservation for capital road facilities. Should the applicant fail to apply for a development permit within 12 months, then the agreement shall be considered null and void, and the applicant shall be required to reapply, unless the town and the applicant mutually agree to an extension. 
(2)  Payment of the proportionate fair-share contribution is due in full no later than issuance of the first building permit, and shall be non-refundable. If the payment is submitted more than 90 days from the date of execution of the agreement, then the proportionate fair-share cost shall be recalculated at the time of payment, pursuant to subsection (f) and adjusted accordingly. 
(3)  In the event an Agreement requires the applicant to pay or build 100 percent of one or more road improvements, all such improvements shall be commenced prior to issuance of a building permit and assured by a binding agreement that is accompanied by a performance security, as determined by the town, which is sufficient to ensure the completion of all required improvements. 
(4)  Dedication of necessary rights-of-way for facility improvements pursuant to a proportionate fair-share agreement shall be completed prior to issuance of the first building permit. 
(5)  Any requested change to a development subsequent to the issuance of a development order may be subject to additional proportionate fair-share contributions to the extent the change would generate additional traffic that would require additional mitigation. 
(6)  Applicants may submit a letter to withdraw from the proportionate fair-share agreement at any time prior to the execution of the agreement. The application fee and any associated advertising costs paid to the town will be non-refundable. 
(i)  Appropriation of fair-share revenues. 
(1)  Proportionate fair-share revenues shall be placed in the appropriate project account for funding of scheduled improvements in the capital improvements element, or as otherwise established in the terms of the proportionate fair-share agreement. Proportionate fair-share revenues may be used as the local match for any matching requirement for state and federal grant programs as may be allowed by law. 
(2)  In the event a scheduled facility improvement is removed from the capital improvements element, then the revenues collected for its construction may be applied toward the construction of another improvement within the town that would mitigate the impacts of development pursuant to the requirements of subsection (c). 
(Ord. No. 603, § 2, 1-24-2007) 
Chapter 22 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Resource recovery and management, F.S. § 403.702 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Debris removal from all public and private streets and rights-of-way in the event of a disaster hindering public safety operations and causing unsafe conditions. 
(a)  The accumulation of debris within public and private streets and rights-of-way resulting from disasters constitutes a public emergency and a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and the town hereby exercises its authority to implement the measures set forth herein. 
(b)  In the event of a disaster causing the conditions outlined above, the mayor or the mayor's designee has the authority to declare a state of emergency within the town. Upon the declaration of such state of emergency, the town and its agents, employees and contractors have the authority and responsibility to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to enter upon and clear debris from public and private streets and rights-of-way to permit access by its public emergency service providers and to prevent the accumulation of debris causing unsafe conditions throughout the town. 
(c)  In order to respond to such emergency conditions, the town shall take all necessary measures to expeditiously clear debris from all roads, including roads within private communities and private roads and rights-of-way providing access to residential units. The owners of such private roadways or rights-of-way shall hold the town and its agents, employees, and contractors harmless from any damage or injury caused by or resulting from the entry upon such roadways and rights-of-way to provide debris removal and abate unsafe conditions. The town's removal of debris from private roads and rights-of-way shall be limited to actions necessary to eliminate an imminent threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 598, §§ 2-4, 9-14-2006) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 598, §§ 2-4, adopted September 14, 2006, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 22-1 was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Emergency services, ch. 10. 
Secs. 22-2-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND RECYCLING 

Sec. 22-19. - Adoption of mandatory solid waste collection and recycling. 
    Effective October 1, 1991, all uses within the corporate boundaries of the town generating solid waste, said uses including, without limitation, residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, public and semipublic, shall be required to participate in and pay the requisite fees for mandatory solid waste collection and recycling programs. The town manager, upon receipt of a request for same, may modify or waive the mandatory solid waste collection and recycling requirement when such requirement is demonstrated by the applicant to create an undue and unnecessary hardship. The town manager shall render a final decision on the requested waiver within 30 days of receiving all necessary materials from the applicant for a waiver. The decision of the town manager may be appealed to the town council in writing in a manner specified by the town manager. The town council shall act on the appeal within 60 days of receipt of same from the town manager. 
(Code 1980, § 13.5-21; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 12-19-1990) 
Chapter 24 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local improvements, F.S. ch. 170; municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180; uniform minimum standards, F.S. § 336.045. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 24-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Construction work means any work in the course of or incidental to erecting, altering, moving or demolishing any structure, or any work in the course of constructing, installing, altering, removing or repairing any street, sidewalk or public way or any utility line, pipe, conduit or other fixture. 
(Code 1980, § 14-11) 
Sec. 24-20. - Exemption for governmental agencies, public utilities. 
    This article shall not apply to any governmental agency, or to any public utility authorized by franchise to obstruct or impede the use of streets, sidewalks or public ways. 
(Code 1980, § 14-12) 
Sec. 24-21. - Prohibited. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person, in the course of doing any construction work, to cause, place or maintain any obstruction in or impediment to the use of any street, sidewalk or other public way. 
(Code 1980, § 14-13) 
Sec. 24-22. - Temporary permits authorized. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, a temporary obstruction or impediment may be allowed upon obtaining a permit therefor from the building official. 
(Code 1980, § 14-14) 
Sec. 24-23. - Conditions to permit. 
    Permits authorized by this article shall be issued upon a finding by the building official that the obstruction or impediment will not unduly inconvenience the public, will not result in substantial hazard, and either will not significantly increase the exposure of the town to liability or that appropriate steps have been taken to protect the town from liability arising therefrom. 
(Code 1980, § 14-15) 
Sec. 24-24. - Regulations authorized. 
    In issuing a permit hereunder, the building official may impose reasonable terms and regulations including, without limitation: 
(1)  The extent and exact location of the obstruction or impediment; 
(2)  The duration of such obstruction or impediment, including the hours that it will be permitted to continue; 
(3)  Safety precautions required to be taken, such as warning signs, lights, barricades, temporary detours or other measures to protect the public. 
(Code 1980, § 14-16) 
Sec. 24-25. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a permit required by this article shall be such as is prescribed by the town council by resolution from time to time. 
(Code 1980, § 14-17) 
Secs. 24-26-24-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Trench Safety Act, F.S. § 553.60 et seq. 

Sec. 24-54. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person making written application to the building official for an excavation permit hereunder. 
    Excavation means any removal of earth in excess of six inches below the existing grade of surrounding land, for any reason whatsoever, except on private property where excavation is to be made and earth restored to its original condition within eight consecutive hours. 
    Excavation work means the excavation and other work permitted under an excavation permit and required to be performed under this article. 
    Permittee means any person who has been granted and has in full force and effect an excavation permit issued under this article. 
    Street means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue or other public way or public grounds in the town. 
(Code 1980, § 14-29; Ord. No. 54, § 2, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-55. - Disclaimer of town liability. 
    This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the town or any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation permit is issued under this article; nor shall the town or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized under this article, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any excavation work. 
(Code 1980, § 14-30; Ord. No. 54, § 43, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-56. - Exemption for town work. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any excavation work under the direction of competent town authorities by employees of the town or by any contractor of the town performing work for and in behalf of the town necessitating openings or excavations in streets. 
(Code 1980, § 14-31; Ord. No. 54, § 40, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-57. - Applicability to franchised utilities. 
    All persons operating public utilities in the town under franchises granted by the town and having the right either by general or special permission to enter upon streets and open and excavate pavements, sidewalks or disturb the surface thereof by excavation or other work shall not be required to apply for a permit but shall be required to perform the work and bring it to completion as promptly as practicable and to that end shall employ an adequate standing force. Any person operating any such public utility shall, however, comply with other requirements of this article, including the surety bond and deposit requirements. 
(Code 1980, § 14-32; Ord. No. 54, § 41, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-58. - Permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break up any street or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose, or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefor from the building official as provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 14-33; Ord. No. 54, § 3, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-59. - Same-Application required; contents. 
    No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application for the issuance of an excavation permit is submitted to the building official. The written application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the nature, location and purpose of the excavation, the date of commencement and date of completion of the excavation, and other data as may reasonably be required by the building official. The application shall be accompanied by plans showing the extent of the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of both the existing ground prior to said excavation and of the proposed excavated surfaces, the location of the excavation work, and such other information as may be prescribed by the building official. 
(Code 1980, § 14-34; Ord. No. 54, § 4, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-60. - Same-Fees. 
    A permit fee shall be charged by the town building official for the issuance of an excavation permit which shall be in addition to all other fees for permits or charges relative to any proposed construction work. The excavation permit fee shall be in an amount varying with the type of surface to be opened, dug or excavated under the permit issued, as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the town council from time to time. 
(Code 1980, § 14-35; Ord. No. 54, § 5, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-61. - Placard to be furnished and displayed. 
    The building official shall provide each permittee at the time a permit is issued hereunder a suitable placard plainly written or printed in English letters at least one inch high with the following notice: 
"Town of Juno Beach, Permit No. _______ Expires _______" 
In the first blank space there shall be inserted the number of said permit and after the word "expires" shall be stated the date when said permit expires. It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the placard posted in a conspicuous place at the site of the excavation work. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such placard at or about any excavation not covered by such permit, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(Code 1980, § 14-36; Ord. No. 54, § 6, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-62. - Surety bond required. 
(a)  Before an excavation permit is issued as provided for in this article, the applicant shall deposit with the town clerk a surety bond in an amount equal to at least 150 percent of the estimated cost of repairing the excavation and replacing the surface in accordance herewith. Such amount shall be determined by the building official and shall be payable to the town. The required surety bond must be: 
(1)  With good and sufficient surety. 
(2)  Issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state. 
(3)  Satisfactory to the town attorney in form and substance. 
(4)  Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this article and to secure and hold the town and its officers harmless against any and all claims, judgments, or other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the town, the town council or any city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the permittee, either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee. The surety bond is and further conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the building official, all openings and excavations made in streets or other property, and to maintain any street where excavation is made in as good condition as it was in before said work shall have been done for a period of 24 months after said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted. Any settlement of the surface within said two-year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the town if such repairs should prove defective. 
(b)  Any owner of real estate repairing or engaging another to repair his own sidewalk shall not be required to give such bond. 
(c)  Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond but it shall in its entirety cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given. 
(d)  In the event of any suit or claim against the town by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the town's giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the town requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and his surety. 
(e)  An annual bond may be given under this section which shall remain in force for one year conditioned as set forth in subsection (a)(4) of this section, in the amount specified in this section but applicable as to all excavation work in streets reasonably to be anticipated by the principal in such bond during the term of one year from said date. 
(Code 1980, § 14-37; Ord. No. 54, § 7, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-63. - Liability insurance required. 
    A permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work under this article, shall furnish the building official satisfactory evidence in writing that the permittee has in force and will maintain in force during the performance of the excavation work and the period of the excavation permit insurance of not less than limits as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the town council from time to time and duly issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state. 
(Code 1980, § 14-38; Ord. No. 54, § 42, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-64. - Routing of traffic. 
    The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during the performance of the excavation work traffic conditions as nearly normal as practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general public; provided that the building official may permit the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him if in his opinion it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic, including his own vehicles, as directed by the police department. The following steps shall be taken before any highway may be closed or restricted to traffic: 
(1)  The permittee must receive the approval of the building official and the police department therefor; 
(2)  The permittee must notify the town clerk and police department of any street so closed; 
(3)  Upon completion of construction work the permittee shall notify the town clerk and town police department before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any adjustments may be made; 
(4)  Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the building official they shall be furnished by the permittee at his own expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible; however, in instances in which this would not be feasible the building official will designate detours. The town shall maintain roadway surfaces of existing highways designated as detours without expense to the permittee but in cases where there are no existing highways the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformance with the specifications of the building official. 
(Code 1980, § 14-39; Ord. No. 54, § 9, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-65. - Permittee responsible for damage caused by equipment. 
    The permittee shall be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any street by the operation of its equipment. 
(Code 1980, § 14-40; Ord. No. 54, § 9, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-66. - Clearance for fire equipment. 
    The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire plugs. Passageways leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of piles of material or other obstructions. 
(Code 1980, § 14-41; Ord. No. 54, § 10, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-67. - Confinement of encroachments on streets; traffic and pedestrian crossings required. 
    The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable barriers to confine earth from trenches or other excavations in order to encroach upon highways as little as possible. The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections. Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers and blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safely. Decking shall be not less than four inches thick and shall be securely fastened together with heavy wire and staples. Pedestrian crossings shall consist of planking three inches thick, 12 inches wide and of adequate length, together with necessary blocking. The walk shall be not less than three feet in width and shall be provided with a railing as required by the building official. 
(Code 1980, § 14-42; Ord. No. 54, § 11, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-68. - Removal and protection of utilities. 
    The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the building official, and the utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility, it shall be done by the owner. No utility owned by the town shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across said work. In case any said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the permittee, and his bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewers, gas pipes, electric conduits or other utility facilities and his bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform himself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. 
(Code 1980, § 14-43; Ord. No. 54, § 12, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-69. - Protection of adjoining property. 
    The permittee shall at all times and at his own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain a license from the owner of such private property for such purpose and if he cannot obtain a license from such owner the building official may authorize him to enter the private premises solely for the purpose of making the property safe. The permittee shall at his own expense shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from his failure to protect and carry out said work properly. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled as required in this article. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or, in the case of public property, the appropriate town department or town official having control of such property. 
(Code 1980, § 14-44; Ord. No. 54, § 13, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-70. - Bridge required for sidewalk excavations. 
    Any excavation made in any sidewalk or under a sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over said excavation on the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that pedestrians can pass over safely at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 14-45; Ord. No. 54, § 14, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-71. - Protective measures. 
    The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers around the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until the work has been completed or the danger removed. At twilight there shall be placed upon such place of excavation and upon any excavated materials or structures or other obstructions to streets suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the night during the maintenance of such obstructions. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove or tear down the fence or railing or other protective barriers or any lights provided for the protection of the public. 
(Code 1980, § 14-46; Ord. No. 54, § 15, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-72. - Attractive nuisance prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the permittee to suffer or permit to remain unguarded at the place of excavation or opening any machinery, equipment or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children and hazardous to their safety or health. 
(Code 1980, § 14-47; Ord. No. 54, § 16, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-73. - Handling of excavated material. 
    All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such a manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, or pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as might be the case in a narrow alley, the building official shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites. 
(Code 1980, § 14-48; Ord. No. 54, § 17, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-74. - Responsibility for damage to existing improvements. 
    All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform with the requirements of any applicable code or ordinance. If upon being ordered the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the building official shall have the authority to cause said necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the town, and the cost shall be charged against the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable on his bond therefor. 
(Code 1980, § 14-49; Ord. No. 54, § 18, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-75. - Confinement of work to property lines and easement limits. 
    Property lines and limits of easements shall be indicated on the plan submitted with the application for the excavation permit and it shall be the permittee's responsibility to confine excavation work within these limits. 
(Code 1980, § 14-50; Ord. No. 54, § 19, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-76. - Cleanup required. 
(a)  As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(b)  From time to time as may be ordered by the building official, and in any event immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall at his own expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from said work and upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the building official, said work may be done by the town and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder. 
(Code 1980, § 14-51; Ord. No. 54, § 20, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-77. - Protection of watercourses, sewers, drains. 
    The permittee shall provide for the flow of all watercourses, sewers or drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall replace the same in as good condition as he found them or shall make such provisions for them as the building official may direct. The permittee shall not obstruct the gutter of any street but shall use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of surface water. 
(Code 1980, § 14-52; Ord. No. 54, § 21, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-78. - Duty to provide for runoff resulting from operations. 
    The permittee shall make provision to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from his failure to so provide. 
(Code 1980, § 14-53; Ord. No. 54, § 21, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-79. - Manner of breaking through pavement. 
    Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for excavation purposes and where trenches are to be four feet or more in depth, the pavement in the base shall be removed to at least six inches beyond the outer limits of the subgrade that is to be disturbed in order to prevent settlement, and a six-inch shoulder of undisturbed material shall be provided in each side of the excavated trench. The face of the remaining pavement shall be approximately vertical. A power-driven concrete saw shall be used so as to permit complete breakage of concrete pavement or base without ragged edges. Asphalt paving shall be scored or otherwise cut in a straight line. No pile driver may be used in breaking up the pavement. 
(Code 1980, § 14-54; Ord. No. 54, § 22, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-80. - Permission required for tunneling; support. 
    Tunnels under pavement shall not be permitted except by permission of the building official and if permitted shall be adequately supported by timbering and backfilling under the direction of the building official. 
(Code 1980, § 14-55; Ord. No. 54, § 23, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-81. - Backfilling-Generally; use of town water. 
    Backfilling in any opening or excavation pursuant to an excavation permit issued hereunder shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug. Compacting shall be done by mechanical tappers or vibrators, by rolling in layers, or by water settling, as required by the soil in question and sound engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry. The decision as to whether a trench shall be backfilled by water-settling shall be based upon such engineering practices and shall be made by the building official. When water is taken from a fire hydrant the permittee shall assign one man to operate the hydrant and shall make certain that said man had been instructed by the town water department in the operation of the hydrant. The water department shall likewise be notified at both the beginning and end of the job so that the condition of the fire hydrants can be checked on both occasions. Any damage done to the hydrant during the excavation shall be the responsibility of the permittee. Water shall be paid for by the permittee on the terms agreed upon with the water department. 
(Code 1980, § 14-56; Ord. No. 54, § 24, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-82. - Same-Water-settling method. 
    When backfilling is done by water-settling, excavated materials above utility installations shall be deposited uniformly in layers of not more than five feet in thickness and shall be thoroughly flooded. During the flooding the water shall be allowed to flow slowly to the trench from high points and shall be worked down to the full depth of the layer of backfill with bars. All bars used shall be long enough to extend entirely through the layer being filled and shall be forced down through the loose backfill material. As the bars are withdrawn the water shall be allowed to flow downward around the bar. The channel or hole formed by the bar shall be kept open and the water kept running into it until the fill has settled. All work shall be done in such manner as to obtain a relative compaction through the entire depth of the backfill of not less than that existing adjacent to the excavation. 
(Code 1980, § 14-57; Ord. No. 54, § 25, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-83. - Same-Dry method; tamping. 
    When backfilling is done dry, backfilling up to the first 18 inches above the top of the utility pipes or similar installations shall be done with thin layers. Each layer is to be tamped by manual or mechanical means. Layers that are hand tamped shall not exceed four inches in thickness. Layers that are power tamped shall not exceed six inches in thickness. The same requirements shall apply to the remainder of the backfilling if tamping is the method used for backfilling. Backfilling of all pipes of over 24 inches in diameter shall be carried up to the spring line of the pipe in three-inch layers, with each layer moistened and thoroughly tamped with suitable mechanical equipment. The backfill around all pipes 24 inches or less in diameter shall be flooded or tamped as specified in this section to a depth of 18 inches above the top of the pipe before any additional backfilling is placed thereon. 
(Code 1980, § 14-58; Ord. No. 54, § 26, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-84. - Same-Material to be used. 
    Whenever any excavation for the laying of pipe is made through rock, the pipe shall be laid six inches above the rock bottom of the trench and the space under, around and six inches above the pipe shall be backfilled with clean river sand, noncorrosive soil or one-fourth-inch minus gravel. Broken pavement, large stones and debris shall not be used in the backfill. 
(Code 1980, § 14-59; Ord. No. 54, § 27, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-85. - Same-Required height; grading. 
    Backfilling shall be completed by placing the backfill material well up over the top of the trench. For dry backfilling, the material shall be compacted with a roller of an approved type until the surface is unyielding. The surface shall then be graded as required. 
(Code 1980, § 14-60; Ord. No. 54, § 28, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-86. - Restoration of surface by permittee. 
(a)  The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets, broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work, to its original condition in accordance with the specifications of the building official. The permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes. Except when the pavement is to be replaced before the opening of the cut to traffic, the fill above the bottom of the paving slab shall be made with suitable material well tamped into place and this fill shall be topped with a minimum of at least one inch of bituminous mixture which is suitable to maintain the opening in good condition until permanent restoration can be made. The crown of the temporary restoration shall not exceed one inch above the adjoining pavement. The permittee shall exercise special care in making such temporary restorations and must maintain such restorations in a safe traveling condition until such time as permanent restorations are made. The asphalt which is used shall be in accordance with the specifications of the building official. If in the judgment of the building official it is not expedient to replace the pavement over any cut or excavation made in the street upon completion of the work allowed under such permit by reason of the looseness of the earth or weather conditions, he may direct the permittee to lay a temporary pavement of wood or other suitable material designated by him over such cut or excavation to remain until such time as the repair of the original pavement may be properly made. 
(b)  Permanent restoration of the street shall be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the building official to restore the street to its original and proper condition, or as near as may be. 
(c)  Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the building official shall not prevent the town from asserting a claim against the permittee and his surety under the surety bond required in section 24-62 for incomplete or defective work if discovered within 24 months from the completion of the excavation work. The building official's presence during the performance of any excavation work shall not relieve the permittee of his responsibilities under this article. 
(Code 1980, § 14-61; Ord. No. 54, § 29, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-87. - City's right to complete work or restore surface. 
    If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by such permit or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the building official, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the street and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25 percent of such cost in addition for general overhead and administrative expenses. The town shall have a cause of action for all fees, expenses and amounts paid out and due it for such work and the town may enforce its rights under the permittee's surety bond provided pursuant to section 24-62. It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition. 
(Code 1980, § 14-62; Ord. No. 54, § 30, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-88. - Depth of trenches; bracing of trenches in pipe laying. 
    Except by special permission from the building official, no trench shall be excavated more than 250 feet in advance of pipe laying nor left unfilled more than 500 feet where pipe has been laid. The length of the trench that may be opened at any one time shall not be greater than the length of pipe and the necessary accessories which are available at the site ready to be put in place. Trenches shall be braced and sheathed according to generally accepted safety standards for construction work as prescribed by the building official. No timber bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench. 
(Code 1980, § 14-63; Ord. No. 54, § 31, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-89. - Prompt completion of work required. 
    The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon as practicable and in any event not later than the date specified in the excavation permit therefor. 
(Code 1980, § 14-64; Ord. No. 54, § 32, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-90. - Emergency work-Generally. 
    In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts or is otherwise in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit under this article, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the building official's office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit. 
(Code 1980, § 14-66; Ord. No. 54, § 34, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-91. - Same-Authority to order. 
    If in his judgment traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public or the public interest require that the excavation work be performed as emergency work, the building official shall have full power to order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day to the end that such excavation work may be completed as soon as possible. 
(Code 1980, § 14-65; Ord. No. 54, § 33, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-92. - Duty to avoid inconvenience or annoyance. 
    Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris, and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the express written permission of the building official, or in case of an emergency as herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. 
(Code 1980, § 14-67; Ord. No. 54, § 35, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-93. - Excavations in new street improvements; written notice. 
(a)  Whenever the town council enacts any ordinance or resolution providing for the paving or repaving of any street, the building official shall promptly mail a written notice thereof to each person owning any sewer, main, conduit or other utility in or under said street or any real property, whether improved or unimproved, abutting said street. Such notice shall notify such persons that no excavation permit shall be issued for openings, cuts or excavations in said street for a period of five years after the expiration of 45 days from the date of enactment of such ordinance or resolution. Such notice shall also notify such persons that applications for excavation permits for work to be done prior to such paving or repaving shall be submitted promptly in order that the work covered by the excavation permit may be completed not later than 45 days from the date of enactment of such ordinance or resolution. The building official shall also promptly mail copies of such notice to the occupants of all houses, buildings and other structures abutting said street for their information and to state agencies and city departments or other persons that may desire to perform excavation work in said street. 
(b)  Within said 45 days every public utility company receiving notice as prescribed herein shall perform such excavation work, subject to the provisions of this article, as may be necessary to install or repair sewers, mains, conduits or other utility installations. In the event any owner of real property abutting said street shall fail within said 45 days to perform such excavation work as may be required to install or repair utility service lines or service connections to the property lines, any and all rights of such owner or his successors in interest to make openings, cuts or excavations in said street shall be forfeited for a period of five years. During said five-year period no excavation permit shall be issued to open, cut or excavate in said street unless in the judgment of the building official an emergency exists, as described in sections 24-90 and 24-91, which makes it absolutely essential that the excavation permit be used. 
(c)  Every town department or official charged with responsibility for any work that may necessitate any opening, cut or excavation in said street is directed to take appropriate measures to perform such excavation work within said 45-day period so as to avoid the necessity for making any openings, cuts or excavations in the new pavement in said city street during said five-year period. 
(Code 1980, § 14-68; Ord. No. 54, § 36, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-94. - Preservation of surface monuments, hubs. 
    The permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments or hubs found on the line of excavation work until ordered to do so by the building official. 
(Code 1980, § 14-69; Ord. No. 54, § 37, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-95. - Maps, drawings of subsurface structures. 
    Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans and profiles showing the location and character of all underground structures, including abandoned installations. Corrected maps shall be filed with the city clerk within 60 days after new installations, changes or replacements are made. 
(Code 1980, § 14-70; Ord. No. 54, § 39, 9-12-1960) 
Sec. 24-96. - Inspections, additional regulations authorized. 
    The building official shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this article. The building official shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 14-71; Ord. No. 54, § 38, 9-12-1960) 
Chapter 28 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance and taxation, FS. § 166.201 et seq.; taxation and finance generally, F.S. ch. 192 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local business taxes generally, F.S. ch. 205. 

Sec. 28-19. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in or manage any business, occupation or profession within the town without first obtaining from the town a business tax receipt therefor and paying the required local business tax as set forth in section 28-27. Such tax may be levied on: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the town, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within its jurisdiction; 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the town, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within its jurisdiction; 
(3)  Any person who does not qualify under the provisions of subsection (1) or (2) of this section and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce, if such license tax is not prohibited by Section 8 of Article I of the United States Constitution. 
(Code 1980, § 5-2; Ord. No. 121, § 3, 9-11-1972; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 8-10-1994) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy a local business tax, F.S. § 205.042. 
Sec. 28-20. - Prima facie evidence of doing business. 
    In any prosecution under this chapter, the fact that such person is open for business shall be prima facie evidence of engaging in such trade, business, profession or occupation, and the burden shall be upon the defendant to rebut the same. 
(Code 1980, § 5-3; Ord. No. 121, § 3, 9-11-1972; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 8-10-1994) 
Sec. 28-21. - Exemptions. 
    There shall be no exemptions from taxes required in this article except for those exemptions required by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 5-4; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 8-10-1994) 
State Law reference- Exemptions from taxes, F.S. § 205.054 et seq. 
Sec. 28-22. - Fractional-year tax receipts. 
    Any business tax receipt purchased after April 1 of any license year shall have a tax of one-half of the amount specified in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 5-5; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 8-10-1994) 
State Law reference- Authority for fractional-year tax receipts, F.S. § 205.053(1). 
Sec. 28-23. - Tax receipts limited to one year; expiration. 
    A business tax receipt is not valid for more than one year and all receipts shall expire on September 30 of each year except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 5-6; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 8-10-1994) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.043(1)(c). 
Sec. 28-24. - Transfer. 
(a)  All business tax receipts may be transferred to a new owner when there is a bona fide sale of the business upon payment of a transfer fee of the lesser of $25.00 or ten percent of the annual tax and presentation of the original receipt and evidence of the sale. 
(b)  Upon written request and presentation of the original business tax receipt, any receipt may be transferred from one location to another location in the town upon payment of a transfer fee of the lesser of $25.00 or ten percent of the annual tax. 
(Code 1980, § 5-7; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 8-10-1994) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.043(2), (3). 
Sec. 28-25. - Penalty for delinquency or failure to obtain receipt. 
    Penalties for delinquencies and for persons who fail to obtain a business tax receipt shall be as provided in F.S. § 205.053, or any successor to said statute. 
(Code 1980, § 5-8; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 8-10-1994) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053. 
Sec. 28-26. - Tax requirements. 
    No business tax receipt shall be issued until the applicant provides to the town a valid and current federal employer identification number or social security number for the business to be taxed. 
(Code 1980, § 5-9; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 8-10-1994) 
Sec. 28-27. - Tax schedule. 
    The amounts which shall be paid by the several firms engaging in or managing businesses, professions or occupations for which a license is required are hereby fixed as follows: 
(1)  Amusement and recreation. Any person operating for a profit any game, contest, exhibition, parade, amusement, or recreation dance, contrivance or facility. 
Athletic, health club or fitness club ..... $242.55 
Billiard or pool hall, 1-5 tables ..... 121.28 
Each additional table ..... 24.26 
Boats, ferries ..... 60.64 
Bowling alleys, ten-pin or skeet ball ..... 120.75 
Each additional lane ..... 24.26 
Circus or carnival ..... 486.20 
Dance studio ..... 242.55 
Golf: 
Course ..... 273.42 
Driving range ..... 121.28 
Miniature course ..... 121.28 
Golf club ..... 364.93 
Includes restaurant, retail golf shop and other 
facilities associated with operating a golf club. 
Nightclub ..... 364.93 
Rinks: skating, bicycle or motorbike ..... 242.55 
Theater ..... 273.42 
Plus $0.42 for each seat 
Concession stand ..... 29.77 
Miscellaneous or general amusement for profit ..... 181.91 
Any person operating for profit, any game, contest, 
exhibition, parade, amusement, or recreation dance, 
contrivance or facility not especially provided for herein. 
(2)  Coin-operated or other machines. 
Amusement machine and merchandise vending operator ..... $273.42 
Amusement, merchandise vending, and service vending machines: 
Machines requiring $0.25 and under 
(per machine) ..... 11.03 
Machines requiring over $0.25 (per machine) ..... 29.77 
Service vending machine operator ..... 81.91 
(3)  Contractors. Includes, but is not limited to: general, building, plumbing, residential, electrical, mechanical, HARV and specialty ..... $121.28 
Each contractor will require a separate license. 
If possesses countywide license ..... 2.00 
(4)  Hotels, motels, apartment houses, etc. Every person engaged in the business of renting accommodations. 
Office ..... $43.00 
Each room ..... 3.31 
(5)  Adult congregate living facility (ACLF). A place, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide for a period exceeding 24 hours, one or more personal services for adults not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage who require such services. (Includes all services to run the facility, i.e., hospital, administrator, restaurant, etc.) 
Office ..... $43.00 
Per unit ..... 3.31 
(6)  Mobile home parks. 
Each space ..... $11.03 
(7)  Retail, wholesale and rental merchants; office space; warehouse storage. 
Not exceeding 5,000 square feet ..... $43.00 
Each additional 1,000 square feet ..... 18.74 
(8)  Professionals. Each person engaged in the business as, but not limited to: doctor, lawyer, engineer, etc. Department of professional regulation certificate required or other state license required ..... $121.28 
Accountant, certified public 
Acupuncturist 
Appraiser 
Architect 
Attorney 
Broker 
Carpenter 
Chiropractor 
Consultant 
Dentist 
Detective 
Dietitian/nutritionist 
Electrolysist 
Embalmer 
Engineer, professional 
Funeral director 
Geologist, professional 
Hearing aid specialist 
Hypnotist 
Insurance company 
Interior designer 
Land surveyor 
Landscape architect 
Marriage and family therapist 
Masseur/masseuse 
Mental health counselor 
Naturopath 
Nursing home administrator (nursing homes cannot operate without) 
Occupational therapist 
Optician 
Optometrist 
Physician 
Podiatrist 
Property appraiser 
Psychiatrist 
Psychologist 
Real estate broker (agents exempt) 
Respiratory therapist 
Speech-language pathologist/audiologist 
Talent agent 
Taxidermist 
Veterinarian 
(9)  Public service. Every person engaged in any business as owner, agent, or otherwise performs some service for the public in return for a consideration. 
Personal service ..... $43.00 
Animal grooming 
Barbershop/salon 
Cosmetologist 
Nail technician 
Other personal services not listed elsewhere. 
Business service. 
Abstract company ..... 121.28 
Advertising agency ..... 121.28 
Appliance repair, small ..... 60.64 
Auctions (per day) ..... 121.28 
Auction establishment, yearly ..... 121.28 
Automobile wrecking service ..... 121.28 
Automobile for hire-taxi, handicap ..... 121.28 
Banks and each branch office ..... 546.84 
Blueprinting ..... 121.28 
Boatyard, (repair, overhauling or building) ..... 169.79 
In addition where boats are stored, each space ..... 2.00 
Bond brokers or dealers in state, county and 
municipal bonds and debentures or private 
corporations. Also covers consultant fiscal 
advisory service ..... 546.84 
Brokers in options or futures (stocks, 
commodities) stipulated privilege or buying 
or selling a stated property or security ..... 546.84 
Clairvoyant, fortuneteller or palmist (must 
exhibit state and county license ..... 1,378.13 
Day care centers: 
6 to 25 children ..... 55.13 
26 to 50 children ..... 110.25 
51 to 75 children ..... 165.38 
Over 76 children ..... 220.50 
Dry cleaning or pressing ..... 48.51 
Exterminating companies ..... 364.93 
Firearms (where connected or not connected with 
other business) ..... 242.55 
Gas station with accessory uses ..... 91.51 
Hospitals, nursing homes, private or institutions 
operated for profit, life care ..... 242.55 
Import/export business ..... 43.00 
Janitorial or cleaning service ..... 43.00 
Loan companies for short term at interest, licensed 
by state as small loan business ..... 546.84 
Loans or mortgages, advertising for or loaning 
money at interest ..... 546.84 
Property management ..... 60.64 
Radio station ..... 121.28 
Title company ..... 121.28 
Travel agency ..... 121.28 
Service from vehicle. 
Each vehicle ..... 43.00 
Includes any vendor using vehicle to perform 
services to construction sites and not otherwise 
specifically classified in the license schedule. (When 
there is not a permanent business located in town.) 
Schools ..... 169.79 
Schools, such as, but not limited to: 
Auto driving 
Business college for profit 
Conservatory of music 
Obedience 
Dramatic 
Modeling or booking agency 
(10)  Auto repair shops and machine shops. 
Includes persons in the business of repair or machine shop ..... $486.20 
(11)  Restaurants. Restaurants, or any business serving food for consumption. This includes, but is not limited to: cafes, cafeterias, dining room, sidewalk cafes, etc. 
Each seat ..... $3.31 
Food take-out as main business ..... 43.00 
(12)  Vendors; peddlers. 
Open air establishments ..... $43.00 
(13)  Solicitors and itinerants. Each and every solicitor and/or itinerant shall be required to be fingerprinted by the police department, and obtain an identification card which shall be carried on the person at all times. 
Fee for ID card and fingerprinting ..... $5.51 
Each solicitor, per year ..... 220.50 
Examples: 
Catalogue and/or sample solicitor 
Lecturer and/or instructor with merchandise for sale 
Mail order salesperson 
Machine salesperson 
(Code 1980, § 5-10; Ord. No. 121, § 4, 9-11-1972; Ord. No. 220, § 1, 10-29-1980; Ord. No. 249, § 1, 11-11-1981; Ord. No. 395, § 1, 6-20-1990; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 8-10-1994; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 5-22-1996; Ord. No. 500, § 1, 7-29-1998; Ord. No. 543, § 1, 6-13-2001; Ord. No. 563, § 1, 6-25-2003) 
Secs. 28-28-28-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Public service tax, F.S. § 166.231 et seq. 

Sec. 28-58. - Levied. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and shall be collected on each and every purchase of electricity or metered or bottled gas within the corporate limits of the town a tax in the amount of ten percent of the payment received by the seller of such utility service from the purchaser for the purchase of such utility service. 
(b)  There is hereby levied and shall be collected on each and every purchase of water service within the corporate limits of the town a tax in the amount of ten percent of the payment received by the seller of such utility service from the purchaser of such utility service. 
(Code 1980, § 16-1; Ord. No. 266, § 1, 9-28-1983; Ord. No. 304, § 1, 7-9-1986; Ord. No. 630, § 2, 9-23-2009; Ord. No. 631, § 2, 10-14-2009; Ord. No. 643, § 2, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 28-59. - Fuel oil declared competitive. 
    The town council hereby declares a legislative finding of fact that the sale of fuel oil in the town is a competitive utility service. Therefore, the eight percent tax levied in section 28-58 relative to electricity or metered or bottled gas shall also be levied and collected on each and every purchase of fuel oil within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Code 1980, § 16-2; Ord. No. 266, § 1, 9-28-1983; Ord. No. 304, § 1, 7-9-1986) 
Sec. 28-60. - Collection. 
(a)  The tax imposed and levied in sections 28-58 and 28-59 shall be collected from the purchaser of such utilities services and paid by such purchaser for the use of the town to the sellers of such electricity, fuel oil, metered gas, bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured gas), and water service at the time of the purchaser paying the charge therefor to the seller. 
(b)  The sellers of electricity, fuel oil, metered gas, bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured gas), and water service within the corporate limits of the town shall act as the tax collection media or agencies for the town, and they shall collect from the purchasers of such utilities services for the use of the town the tax imposed and levied by this article and shall report and pay over to the town all such taxes imposed, levied and collected, in accordance with the accounting methods and other provisions of this article. 
(c)  The sellers of such electricity, fuel oil, metered gas, bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured gas), and water service shall account for and report on all monies received by them, on or before the last day of each and every month. Each month shall be a separate accounting period. Thereafter, such sellers shall submit said monies, reports and accounting to the town finance director on or before the last day of the month following said accounting period. The accounting and reports which shall accompany such payment shall be upon forms mutually agreed upon by the town finance director and the sellers of such electricity, fuel oil, metered gas, bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured gas), and water service, and if no such agreement can be reached, they shall be upon such forms as are determined by the town manager. 
(Code 1980, § 16-3; Ord. No. 304, § 1, 7-9-1986; Ord. No. 630, § 2, 9-23-2009) 
Sec. 28-61. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Purchases by the United States government, the state, and all counties, school districts, and municipalities of the state, and by public bodies exempted by law or court order, and any recognized church in the state, if used exclusively for church purposes, shall be exempted from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this article. 
(b)  The tax imposed by this article shall not be applied against any fuel adjustment charge, and such charge shall be separately stated on each bill. The term "fuel adjustment charge" means all increases in the cost of utility services to the ultimate consumer resulting from an increase in the cost of fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973. 
(c)  The purchase of natural gas or fuel oil by a public or private utility, either for resale or for use as fuel in the generation of electricity, or the purchase of fuel oil or kerosene for use as an aircraft engine fuel or propellant or for use in internal-combustion engines shall be exempt from taxation under this article. 
(Code 1980, § 16-4; Ord. No. 304, § 1, 7-9-1986; Ord. No. 425, § 3, 7-29-1992) 
Secs. 28-62-28-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOCAL COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Communications services tax simplification law, F.S. ch. 202. 

Sec. 28-81. - Intent; adoption of rate. 
    It is the intent of the town to increase and adopt its local communications services tax rate as provided in Laws of Fla. ch. 2001-140, §§ 9, 12, amending F.S. §§ 202.19 and 202.20, respectively. 
(Code 1980, § 16-6; Ord. No. 548, § 1, 8-22-2001) 
Sec. 28-82. - Increased local communications services tax rate. 
    The local communications services tax conversion rate for the town, established under Laws of Fla. ch. 2001-140, § 12, amending F.S. § 202.20(1)(b), is 4.70 percent, which is less than the maximum rate of 5.10 percent as established in Laws of Fla. ch. 2001-140, § 9, amending F.S. § 202.19(2)(a). The local communications services tax rate for the town shall be increased to 5.10 percent. This increased rate is to be effective October 1, 2002. 
(Code 1980, § 16-7; Ord. No. 548, § 2, 8-22-2001) 
Sec. 28-83. - Adoption of local communications services tax rate. 
    The town further adopts the conversion rate of 5.10 percent as provided by Laws of Fla. ch. 2001-140, § 9, amending F.S. § 202.19(2)(a), which became effective October 1, 2002. 
(Code 1980, § 16-8; Ord. No. 548, § 3, 8-22-2001) 
Sec. 28-84. - Collection of permit frees from providers of communications services. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the town to make an election under F.S. § 337.401(3)(c)1, as amended by Laws of Fla. ch. 2001-140, § 34, regarding the town's decision on whether to require and collect permit fees from any providers of communications services that use or occupy municipal roads or rights-of-way for the provision of communications services. 
(b)  Election. The town elects not to require and collect permits fees from any provider of communications services that uses or occupies municipal roads or rights-of-way for the provision of communications services. As provided in F.S. § 337.401(3)(c)1, this election shall take effect October 1, 2001. 
(Code 1980, §§ 16-9, 16-10; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 8-22-2001) 
Sec. 28-85. - Rate increase; notice to department of revenue. 
(a)  Election to increase rate. Pursuant to F.S. § 337.401(3)(c)1.b, as amended by Laws of Fla. ch. 2001-140, § 34, the town elects to increase its total rate for the local communications services tax, as adopted in Resolution No. 2001-9, by an amount of 0.12 percent. This election shall take effect October 1, 2001. 
(b)  Notice to department of revenue. The town notified the department of revenue about the increased tax rate provided in subsection (a) of this section by Resolution No. 2001-10 as provided in Laws of Fla. ch. 2001-140, § 13. 
(Code 1980, §§ 16-10.1, 16-10.2; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 8-22-2001) 
Chapter 30 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State traffic law, F.S. ch. 316; municipal traffic powers generally, F.S. § 316.008. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Regulations, markings, devices. 
(a)  Authorized. The chief of police, by and with the consent of the town council, shall have the power and is hereby authorized to regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the town by the erection or placing of signs, signals, markers, markings and other authorized traffic control devices as provided in F.S. § 316.008(1). 
(b)  Prima facie evidence. The existence of such signs, signals, markers or markings at any place within the town shall be prima facie evidence that such signs or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the chief of police, and in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 17-1; Ord. No. 92, § 1, 3-13-1966; Ord. No. 430, § 17, 10-28-1992) 
Sec. 30-2. - Driving motor vehicles or riding horses on sidewalks, bicycle paths. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle upon any sidewalk or bicycle path within the town, or to ride a horse upon any sidewalk or bicycle path within the town except upon a permanent or duly authorized pathway for such purpose; provided that this section shall not apply to vehicles driven upon a sidewalk at a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. 
(Code 1980, § 17-2; Ord. No. 145, § 1, 3-12-1975) 
State Law reference- Driving on sidewalks or bicycle paths, F.S. § 316.1995. 
Secs. 30-3-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 662, § 2, adopted Dec. 12, 2012, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 30-23-30-27, 30-58-30-60, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1980, §§ 17-13-17-17, 17-34-17-36; Ord. No. 92, § 1, adopted March 13, 1966; Ord. No. 145, §§ 1-3, adopted March 12, 1975; Ord. No. 229, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 1981; Ord. No. 430, § 10, adopted Oct. 28, 1992; Ord. No. 472, §§ 2-4, adopted April 10, 1996. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, F.S. § 316.008(1)(a); stopping, standing or parking in specified places, F.S. § 316.1945 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-21. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein: 
    Bicycle path or bicycle lane means a portion of the roadway that has been designated by pavement markings and, if used, signs for the preferential or exclusive use of bicycles. 
    Crosswalk means (a) that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the roadway or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway or (b) any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Fire lane means marked portions of public or private property devoted to public use where the parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions may interfere with the ingress and egress of fire department vehicles for the protection of persons or property. 
    Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines; or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two roadways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles; or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
    Law enforcement officer means any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle not operated upon rails, but not including any bicycle or moped. 
    Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers as may be permitted by law. 
    Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street, road or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral line, of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
    Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers, as may be permitted by law. 
    Stop or stopping means when prohibited, any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to void conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a law enforcement officer or traffic control device. 
    Traffic control device means all signs, signals, markings, and devices, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 2, 12-12-2012) 
Sec. 30-22. - Stopping, parking and standing prohibited in specified areas. 
(a)  No person shall stop, park or leave standing a motor vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a law enforcement officer or traffic control device: 
(1)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street so as to impede travel on the roadway ("double parking"); 
(2)  On a sidewalk, or in such a manner that any part of such vehicle is protruding over a sidewalk; 
(3)  Within an intersection or crosswalk; 
(4)  Upon any bridge; 
(5)  On a bicycle path or exclusive bicycle lane; 
(6)  Within a marked fire lane; 
(7)  Within any area where a traffic control device prohibits standing, stopping or parking; 
(8)  On a roadway when it is reasonably practical to stop, park or leave the vehicle off the roadway; and 
(9)  In any portion of a parking space specifically designated and marked for the disabled, in accordance with division 2 below. 
(b)  No person shall park or leave standing a motor vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a law enforcement officer or traffic control device: 
(1)  Within 20 feet of an intersection or crosswalk; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(3)  Within 30 feet of the approach to any stop sign or traffic control device located at the side of the roadway; and 
(4)  In the opposite direction of traffic located on the adjacent roadway. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 2, 12-12-2012) 
Sec. 30-23. - Meanings of yellow markings. 
    Yellow paint or markings on any street or curbing shall mean parking is prohibited in that area so marked; provided, however, areas marked with yellow paint and designated as loading zones shall be permitted to be used for that purpose or for whatever purpose so designated. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 2, 12-12-2012) 
Sec. 30-24. - Removal of violating vehicles. 
    Whenever any police officer of the town shall find a motor vehicle standing upon a street, highway, sidewalk or bicycle path in violation of this article, such police officer is authorized to remove such vehicle to a position off the paved or main traveled part of such highway, street, sidewalk or bicycle path. If such vehicle is unattended and constitutes an obstruction to traffic or a hazard to public safety, such police officer is authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle, with the cost of such removal and the storage charges to be a lien against such motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 2, 12-12-2012) 
Sec. 30-25. - Form citation and fine schedule. 
    The town council shall adopt by resolution a form citation for use within the town, including a fine schedule and delinquent fee, for violations of section 30-22 above. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 2, 12-12-2012) 
Sec. 30-26. - Parking citation procedure. 
(a)  Any violators of the restrictions set forth in this article which relate to the stopping, standing, or parking of a motor vehicle may be notified of said violation by the attachment of a citation to said vehicle. 
(b)  Payment of the parking fine may be made at town center, within the time frame specified on the citation. 
(c)  If the violator does not pay the citation within the specified time frame, the town shall assess a delinquent fee 
(d)  Persons wishing to challenge the issuance of a parking citation may request a hearing before the town's code enforcement special magistrate. A request for a hearing constitutes a waiver of the right to pay the amount of the civil penalty indicated on the citation and subjects the person to whom a citation is issued to a fine of up to up $100.00 plus administrative costs incurred by the town (except for fines for disabled parking violations which shall not exceed $250.00 plus administrative costs incurred by the town). 
(e)  If the specified fine, delinquent fee, and/or administrative costs are not paid by the time set forth for payment, the entire amount may be referred for collection to a collection agency designated by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 2, 12-12-2012) 
Secs. 30-27-30-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING SPACES FOR PHYSICALLY DISABLED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Enforcement of parking requirements for persons with disabilities, F.S. § 316.1955 et seq. 

Sec. 30-58. - Incorporation of state law. 
    The provisions of F.S. §§ 316.1955-316.1959, 316.1964 and 316.1967 are specifically incorporated herein by reference, and the town is empowered to enforce such provisions. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 2, 12-12-2012) 
Sec. 30-59. - Penalties for violation. 
    Notwithstanding the penalty provisions set forth in section 30-27 governing parking violations, a violation of F.S. § 316.1955 shall be deemed an infraction, the fine which shall be $250.00. The penalties set forth herein are nonexclusive and may be imposed in addition to or in lieu of any other penalties set forth in F.S. chs. 316, 318, and 320. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 2, 12-12-2012) 
Sec. 30-60. - Withholding of license plates and revalidation stickers. 
(a)  The clerk of the court shall supply the department of highway safety and motor vehicles (DHSMV) with a computer tape reel or cartridge which is machine readable by the computer system installed at the DHSMV listing persons who have any outstanding violations of F.S. § 316.1955 or this division regulating parking and spaces designated for use by disabled persons. 
(b)  If a person's name appears on the list referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the tax collector shall not issue a license plate or revalidation sticker to such person until such person's name no longer appears on said list or until the person presents a receipt showing that such parking fines and all applicable late charges or other related charges have been paid. Pursuant to F.S. § 320.03(8), the tax collector and the clerk of court shall be entitled to receive monthly, as costs for implementing and administering this section, ten percent of the civil penalties and fines received from such persons whose names appear on the list provided for in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any person owing money for parking tickets issued by the town shall remit payment for the same directly to the town. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 2, 12-12-2012) 
State Law reference- Authority for this section, F.S. § 316.1967(6). 
Secs. 30-61-30-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLES ON BEACHES 

Sec. 30-79. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized emergency vehicles means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles, and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal, county or state departments, or private ambulance companies, or such others as may be authorized by municipal authority. 
    Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle propelled by power, other than muscular power, trailers, semitrailers, coaches or other similar devices or vehicles. 
    Owner means any person in whose name the title to a motor vehicle is registered. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Person means a natural person. 
    Police officer means every officer of the town police department, or any person authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests. 
    Possession means the person in charge of, the caretaker of, or sitting in a motor vehicle. 
    Restricted area means that area which is on the oceanfront, and which is subject to high or low tides, and also that area lying adjacent thereto and westerly thereof, commonly referred to as sand dunes, and soft sand and not privately owned. It shall also include all such area as described in this definition which lies within the north and south boundary lines of the town limits and extends eastward to the low water mark of the Atlantic Ocean, and extends westward to the east boundary line of privately owned property. 
(Code 1980, § 17-41; Ord. No. 69, § 1, 7-8-1963) 
Sec. 30-80. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor-driven cycle or motor vehicle on the restricted area at any time, except that authorized emergency vehicles are permitted thereon while attending to their duties. 
(Code 1980, § 17-42; Ord. No. 69, §§ 1, 2, 7-8-1963) 
Sec. 30-81. - Possession constitutes violation. 
    Any person in possession of a motor vehicle within the restricted area shall be deemed to have driven such vehicle into or onto such restricted area and shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 17-43; Ord. No. 69, § 3, 7-8-1963) 
Sec. 30-82. - Knowingly permitting violation. 
    Neither the owner or any person employing or otherwise directing the driver of any motor vehicle shall require or knowingly permit the operation of such vehicle upon or in the restricted area. 
(Code 1980, § 17-44; Ord. No. 69, § 6, 7-8-1963) 
Sec. 30-83. - Parties to violations. 
    Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or aids or abets in the commission of any act declared herein to be a violation of this article, whether individually, or in connection with one or more other persons, or as principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense, and every person who fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision of this article is likewise guilty of such offense. 
(Code 1980, § 17-45; Ord. No. 69, § 7, 7-8-1963) 
Sec. 30-84. - Authority to remove violations. 
    Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove any vehicle from the restricted area to a place of safety and keep it there until the case is satisfactorily disposed of and all costs and fines connected therewith are paid. 
(Code 1980, § 17-46; Ord. No. 69, § 8, 7-8-1963) 
Sec. 30-85. - Impoundment, redemption of violating vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be in or on such restricted area at any time and it shall be subject to seizure, if found thereon, and shall be impounded by the town. The owner thereof may redeem same by paying the fine, if any, imposed upon the person in possession of said vehicle, when so seized, plus the costs incurred in such impounding, which will include transportation, storage and care thereof, and the recording of such seizure. The fine is not included in such costs. 
(Code 1980, § 17-47; Ord. No. 69, § 4, 7-8-1963) 
Sec. 30-86. - Notice of impoundment. 
    Whenever a vehicle is impounded as authorized by this article, notice of such action shall be sent to the owner that the vehicle has been so impounded, and the reasons why it was impounded. 
(Code 1980, § 17-48; Ord. No. 69, § 9, 7-8-1963) 
Secs. 30-87-30-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 30-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Deviating truck means a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling inside the town. 
    Truck route means a way over certain streets, as designated and depicted on the official truck route map, over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the town shall operate. 
    Trucks means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property, including trailers and truck tractors but not including pickup trucks, sedan panel trucks, station wagons or similar light vehicles designed for carrying small loads of property, or small loads of property and passengers interchangeably. Such light vehicles shall not be subject to the regulations of this article unless they have been so altered or modified as to materially increase their cargo capacity, in which case such vehicles shall be classified as trucks for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 17-49; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 1-11-1984) 
Sec. 30-117. - Applicability of article. 
(a)  Generally. All trucks within the town shall be operated only over and along the truck routes established in section 30-118 and on the other designated streets over which truck travel is permitted. 
(b)  Exceptions. This article shall not prohibit: 
(1)  Operation on street of destination. The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point; provided that streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point. 
(2)  Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the town. 
(3)  Public utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the town, public utilities, any contractors or material men, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the town. 
(4)  Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could be lawfully operated upon the street for which such detour is established. 
(Code 1980, § 17-50; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 1-11-1984) 
Sec. 30-118. - Truck route established. 
    The truck route of the town shall be Donald Ross Road from the west town limits, east to U.S. 1 and U.S. 1 from the south town limits to the north town limits. 
(Code 1980, § 17-51; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 1-11-1984) 
Sec. 30-119. - Truck traffic prohibited on certain streets. 
    All truck traffic over and upon Ocean Drive is prohibited except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 17-52; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 1-11-1984) 
Sec. 30-120. - Regulations for operation of trucks in town. 
(a)  Outside origin. 
(1)  One inside-destination point. All trucks entering the town for a destination point in the town shall proceed only over an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street nearest to the destination point, upon which such traffic is permitted. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(2)  Multiple inside-destination points. All trucks entering the town to multiple-destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point, a deviating truck shall proceed to the other destination points by the shortest direction and only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(b)  Inside origin. 
(1)  Outside-destination point. All trucks on a trip originating in the town and traveling in the town for a destination point outside the town shall proceed by the shortest direction over streets on which such traffic is permitted to a truck route as established in section 30-118. 
(2)  Inside-destination points. All trucks on a trip originating in the town and traveling in the town for destination points in the town shall proceed only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. 
(Code 1980, § 17-53; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 1-11-1984) 
Sec. 30-121. - Posting of truck routes. 
    The town shall cause all truck routes to be signposted to give notice that this article is in effect. 
(Code 1980, § 17-54; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 1-11-1984) 
Sec. 30-122. - Restrictions on weight of vehicles. 
    When signs are erected giving notice of designated truck routes, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified in regulations promulgated by the town official designated by the town council at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in such regulations. The chief of police shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle to proceed to any public or private scale for the purpose of weighing and determining whether or not this article has been complied with. 
(Code 1980, § 17-55; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 1-11-1984) 
Sec. 30-123. - Commercial vehicles to display name on side. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate, park, stand or use upon any public street any commercial vehicle unless such vehicle is designated by lettering of three inches minimum size on either side indicating the name of the firm or name of the corporation or person operating the same for a commercial use. 
(Code 1980, § 17-56; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 1-11-1984) 
Sec. 30-124. - Load projections or extensions; identification; limits. 
    In the event a load projects more than three feet beyond the front or rear end of a vehicle, such load shall be protected during daylight hours by a red flag not less than 18 inches square and at night by red lights, lanterns or flares which are clearly visible from the rear at a distance of at least 200 feet. In no event shall a load project for a distance of more than ten feet from the rear or five feet in front of the vehicle except as otherwise permitted by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 17-57; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 1-11-1984) 
Sec. 30-125. - Granting of exceptions to size restrictions. 
    The chief of police is authorized to permit the movement of vehicles having a greater width or height or having a load of greater length than specified in this article upon application to his office for such special permission. 
(Code 1980, § 17-58; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 1-11-1984) 
Secs. 30-126-30-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 30-149. - Probable cause; towing procedure. 
(a)  A motor vehicle shall be subject to seizure and impoundment whenever a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle: 
(1)  Contains any controlled substance or cannabis as defined in F.S. ch. 893; or 
(2)  Was used in the purchase, attempt to purchase, sale, or attempt to sell such controlled substance or cannabis; or 
(3)  Was used to facilitate the commission of an act of prostitution, assignation, or lewdness as defined in and pursuant to F.S. § 796.07; or 
(4)  Was being operated by a person driving under the influence in accordance with F.S. § 316.193; or 
(5)  Was being operated by a person whose driver's license has been revoked as a habitual offender, as defined in F.S. § 322.264; and 
(6)  Was being operated by a person whose driver's license or driving privileges were permanently revoked as defined in F.S. § 322.341. 
(b)  Upon seizing the motor vehicle, the law enforcement officer shall: 
(1)  Provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the agency providing law enforcement services to the town or its towing agent; and 
(2)  Notify in writing the person determined to be the owner of the vehicle and any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the impoundment of the facts of the impoundment as well as of the right to reclaim the vehicle pursuant to section 30-150 and to request a preliminary hearing pursuant to section 30-151. 
(c)  The notices to be given pursuant to this section shall be provided by hand delivery at the time of the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle, except if the vehicle owner is not available to receive such notice, or if neither the vehicle owner nor the person in control of the vehicle at the time of its seizure is available to receive such notice, then notice shall be mailed to the vehicle owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, within 48 hours of the time of impoundment, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. 
(d)  This section shall not apply and the vehicle shall not be seized or impounded if: 
(1)  The possession, use or sale of the controlled substance and/or cannabis is authorized by F.S. ch. 499 or 893; 
(2)  The vehicle was stolen at the time it was subject to seizure and impoundment; 
(3)  The vehicle was operating as a common carrier at the time it was subject to seizure and impoundment; or 
(4)  A law enforcement agency has expressed its intent in writing to institute forfeiture proceedings on the vehicle. 
(Code 1980, § 17-61; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 6-25-2003) 
Sec. 30-150. - Return of vehicle prior to administrative hearing. 
    If the owner of the motor vehicle or his agent or authorized representative pays to the town an administrative civil penalty of $250.00 plus the towing and storage costs, or posts with the town a cash bond, a money order or a bank check in the amount of $250.00 plus the towing and storage costs, the vehicle shall be released to the owner or his agent or authorized representative prior to the administrative hearings held pursuant to section 30-151. The payment shall be held by the town pending the administrative hearing. If, at the preliminary hearing, there is a finding of probable cause, the town shall retain the collected funds. If no probable cause is found, the money shall be returned to the person who remitted same. 
(Code 1980, § 17-62; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 6-25-2003) 
Sec. 30-151. - Hearings; administrative penalty. 
(a)  Preliminary hearing. If the owner of the motor vehicle or his agent or authorized representative has made a written request for a preliminary hearing, then the town shall hold such hearing within ten days of receipt of the written request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, before a special magistrate designated by the town. 
(1)  At the hearing, the town shall have the burden to show that there is probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle is subject to impoundment and continued seizure pursuant to section 30-149. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence is admissible. 
(2)  If, after the preliminary hearing, the special magistrate determines that there is probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle is subject to impoundment and continued seizure, he shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle unless the owner of the motor vehicle or his agent or authorized representative pays to the town an administrative civil penalty of $250.00 plus accumulated costs of towing and storing the vehicle. If, after the hearing, there is a finding of no probable cause, the vehicle shall be released forthwith to the owner or his agent or authorized representative without the imposition of penalties or fees. 
(b)  Final hearing. Within 20 days of the date the motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to section 30-149, and whether or not a preliminary hearing is requested, the town shall mail notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the vehicle owner of record the date, time, and location of a final hearing to be conducted pursuant to this subsection. 
(1)  The final hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless waived by the vehicle owner or continued by order of the special magistrate, no later than 45 days after the date the vehicle was seized and impounded. 
(2)  The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay is admissible. The town shall have the burden to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the vehicle was used as set forth in section 30-149(a)(1)-(6). 
a.  If, after the hearing, a finding is made that the vehicle is subject to impoundment and seizure pursuant to section 30-149, and that none of the exceptions set forth in section 30-149(d) apply, then the special magistrate shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the vehicle civilly liable to the town and imposing an administrative penalty of $250.00, plus towing and storage costs and the costs of the hearing. 
b.  If, after the hearing, a finding is made that the town did not meet its burden of proof as set forth in this subsection (b)(2) or that one of the exceptions of section 30-149(d) apply, the vehicle shall be returned to the owner along with any bond posted. In such instance, no hearing costs shall be imposed. 
c.  If the vehicle has been returned pursuant to section 30-150, and the owner has possession of the vehicle, the determination of the final hearing shall be whether the money or bonds remitted to the town shall be retained by the town or returned to the person remitting same. If the determination is made that the money or bonds shall be retained by the town, hearing costs shall also be assessed. 
(Code 1980, § 17-63; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 6-25-2003) 
Sec. 30-152. - Administrative penalty; costs. 
    If an administrative penalty, towing and storage costs and/or hearing costs are imposed pursuant to section 30-151, such penalty and costs shall constitute a debt due and owing to the town. The vehicle record owner's obligation to pay such debt to the town shall be independent of the town's return or release of the vehicle. If cash or a cash bond has been posted pursuant to section 30-150, the bond shall be applied toward payment of the penalty and costs. 
(Code 1980, § 17-64; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 6-25-2003) 
Sec. 30-153. - Return of the vehicle. 
    Except as otherwise provided in section 30-151, an impounded vehicle shall be returned to the record owner, or the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle, upon his payment of the administrative penalty and costs to the town, plus any towing and storage fees, unless the vehicle has been sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 17-65; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 6-25-2003) 
Sec. 30-154. - Appeal. 
    The owner of the motor vehicle that has been the subject of seizure and impoundment or the town may appeal the rulings and decisions of the special magistrate to the circuit court of the 15th judicial circuit of the county within 30 days of the date of the order being appealed. The town may charge a reasonable fee for the preparation of the record for purposes of making the appeal; provided, however, that the town shall have no obligation to provide a verbatim transcript or record on the proceedings. A person seeking to appeal the decision of the special magistrate may need to ensure that a verbatim record of the proceedings is made, which record includes the testimony and evidence upon which the appeal is to be based. 
(Code 1980, § 17-66; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 6-25-2003) 
Sec. 30-155. - Unclaimed vehicles. 
    Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within 60 days from the date of the final order of the special magistrate regarding that vehicle becomes unclaimed evidence as defined in F.S. § 705.101(6). Such unclaimed evidence shall then be disposed of by the town pursuant to F.S. § 705.105. 
(Code 1980, § 17-67; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 6-25-2003) 
Secs. 30-156-30-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INTERSECTION SAFETY PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 664, § 2, adopted June 26, 2013, effective July 1, 2013, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 30-161-30-174, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to image capture technologies and derived from Ord. No. 621, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2008; Ord. No. 626, § 2, adopted Sept. 10, 2009; Ord. No. 634, § 2, adopted Feb. 10, 2010. 

Sec. 30-161. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to specifically authorize the use of traffic infraction detectors within the town's jurisdictional limits as of July 1, 2013, as authorized by state general law. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 2, 6-26-2013, eff. 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 30-162. - Use of traffic infraction detectors. 
    The town exercises its option under F.S. § 316.0083 to use traffic infraction detectors within its jurisdiction to enforce F.S. §§ 316.074(1) or 316.075(1)(C) when a driver fails to stop at a traffic signal on streets and highways in the town's jurisdiction. The town may utilize traffic infraction detectors as a supplemental means of monitoring and assisting law enforcement personnel in the enforcement of compliance with laws related to traffic control signals as permitted and provided for by state law, which are designed to protect and improve the public health, safety, and welfare of the community and thereby reduce accidents, injuries and disruption of traffic associated with such violations. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 2, 6-26-2013, eff. 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 30-163. - Implementation of general law and appointment of local hearing officer. 
    In accordance with the provisions of the Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Act, the town authorizes the implementation of the provisions and requirements of Chapters 2010-80 and 2013-160, Laws of Florida. Effective July 1, 2013, the town shall utilize a local hearing officer, as defined by Chapter 2013-160, Laws of Florida, in accordance with the provisions of the Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Act. The town manager may appoint the code enforcement special magistrate or any other qualified individual to act as the town's local hearing officer pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 2, 6-26-2013, eff. 7-1-2013) 
Secs. 30-164-30-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 664, § 2, adopted June 26, 2013, effective July 1, 2013, repealed Art. VII, §§ 30-181-30-184, which pertained to automated red light traffic enforcement pursuant to state law and derived from Ord. No. 639, § 2, adopted June 23, 2010. 

Secs. 30-181-30-184. - Reserved. 
Chapter 32 - WATER AND SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public utilities, F.S. ch. 366; water and wastewater systems, F.S. ch. 367; water resources, F.S. ch. 373; Florida Safe Drinking Water Act, F.S. § 403.850 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FEES AND CHARGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 32-19-32-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER CONNECTION FEES AND WATER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGES 

Sec. 32-40. - Area subject to fees and charges. 
    The sewer connection fees described in this division shall apply to those properties being provided sewer service by ENCON. The water capital improvement charges described in this article shall apply to those properties being provided water service by the Town of Jupiter. 
(Code 1980, § 18-1; Ord. No. 423, §§ 2, 3, 8-12-1992) 
Sec. 32-41. - Basis for fees and charges. 
    Sewer connection fees and water capital improvement charges shall be imposed based upon the number of equivalent connections applicable to the use in question. For purposes of determining the sewer connection fee, the use shall be assigned the number of equivalent connections then assigned to the use by ENCON by administrative regulation, policy or procedure. For purposes of determining the water capital improvement charges, the use shall be assigned the number of equivalent connections then assigned to the use by the Town of Jupiter by ordinance, resolution, policy or procedure. 
(Code 1980, § 18-2; Ord. No. 423, §§ 2, 3, 8-12-1992) 
Sec. 32-42. - Amount of fees and charges; time of payment. 
(a)  The sewer connection fee shall be $100.00 per equivalent connection. 
(b)  The water capital improvement charge shall be $500.00 per equivalent connection. 
(c)  The sewer connection fee and capital improvement charge shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit. If a building permit is not required, payment shall be made prior to connection to ENCON's sewer system and the Town of Jupiter's water system. 
(Code 1980, § 18-3; Ord. No. 423, §§ 2, 3, 8-12-1992) 
Sec. 32-43. - Use of funds. 
    All funds received by the town from the sewer connection fee and the water capital improvement charge shall be used only to reimburse the town for the cost of capital improvements made by the town or to be made by the town in connection with the sewer system and the water system. Nothing shall prohibit the town from depositing such funds in its general fund and investing and using such funds in the same manner as other town funds. 
(Code 1980, § 18-4; Ord. No. 423, §§ 2, 3, 8-12-1992) 
Secs. 32-44-32-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SHORTAGE PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Declaration of water shortage, F.S. § 373.175. 

Sec. 32-75. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this article to protect the water resources of the town from the harmful effects of overutilization during periods of water shortage and to allocate available water supplies by assisting the South Florida Water Management District in the implementation of its water shortage plan. 
(Code 1980, § 18-85; Ord. No. 285, § 1, 6-12-1985) 
Sec. 32-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    District means the South Florida Water Management District. 
    Water resource means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground, including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
    Water shortage condition means that sufficient water is not available to meet present or anticipated needs of persons using the water resource, or conditions are such as to require temporary reduction in total water usage within a particular area to protect the water resource from serious harm. A water shortage usually occurs due to drought. 
    Water shortage emergency means that situation when the powers which can be exercised under F.A.C. ch. 40E-21 part II are not sufficient to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, or the health of animals, fish or aquatic life, or a public water supply, or commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other reasonable uses. 
(Code 1980, § 18-86; Ord. No. 285, § 2, 6-12-1985) 
Sec. 32-77. - Application. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons using the water resource within the geographical areas subject to the water shortage or water shortage emergency, as determined by the district, whether from public or privately owned water utility systems, private wells, or private connections with surface water bodies. This article shall not apply to persons using treated effluent or saltwater. 
(Code 1980, § 18-87; Ord. No. 285, § 3, 6-12-1985) 
Sec. 32-78. - Amendments to water shortage plan. 
    F.A.C. ch. 40E-21 is incorporated herein by reference as part of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 18-88; Ord. No. 285, 4, 6-12-1985) 
Sec. 32-79. - Declaration of water shortage; water shortage emergency. 
    The declaration of a water shortage or water shortage emergency within all or any part of the town by the governing board or the executive director of the district shall invoke the provisions of this article. Upon such declaration all water use restrictions or other measures adopted by the district applicable to the town, or any portion thereof, shall be subject to enforcement action pursuant to this article. Any violation of the provisions of F.A.C. ch. 40E-21, or any order issued pursuant thereto, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 18-89; Ord. No. 285, § 5, 6-12-1985) 
Sec. 32-80. - Enforcement. 
    Every police officer having jurisdiction in the town shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article. In addition, the town manager may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this article to agencies and/or departments of the town, in accordance with state and local law. 
(Code 1980, § 18-90; Ord. No. 285, § 6, 6-12-1985) 
Sec. 32-81. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided by section 1-10. 
(b)  The town, in addition to the sanctions contained herein, may take any other appropriate legal action, including but not limited to emergency injunctive action, to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 18-91; Ord. No. 285, § 7, 6-12-1985; Ord. No. 430, § 18, 10-28-1992) 
Sec. 32-82. - Water users to accept provisions of article. 
    No water service shall be furnished to any person by a public or private utility unless such person agrees to accept all the provisions of this article. The acceptance of water service shall be in itself the acceptance of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 18-92; Ord. No. 285, § 8, 6-12-1985) 
Sec. 32-83. - System-based water shortages. 
    The mayor or town manager may declare a water shortage and impose water restrictions in accordance with the district's water shortage plan, when necessary, to curtail water use within the town water system due to a mechanical failure or other operational problem with said system. 
(Code 1980, § 18-93; Ord. No. 288, § 1, 7-10-1985) 
Secs. 32-84-32-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IRRIGATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Reuse of reclaimed water, F.S. § 403.064. 

Sec. 32-110. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Hours. Irrigation of any residential and nonresidential landscape areas shall be restricted to the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
(b)  Waste of water. It shall be unlawful to operate or cause the operation of any irrigation system or device in a manner causing water to be wasted, including but not limited to unnecessary watering of impervious areas. 
(c)  Water-sensing devices. Upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, new installations of automatic irrigation systems shall be equipped with a water-sensing device which will automatically discontinue irrigation during periods of rainfall. 
(d)  Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from the irrigation restrictions stated in subsections (a)-(c) of this section: 
(1)  Landscape irrigation by hand watering using a self-canceling nozzle or low-volume irrigation system. 
(2)  Landscape irrigation by systems from which the sole source is treated wastewater effluent. 
(3)  The operation of irrigation systems for system repair and maintenance. 
(4)  Flushing of water mains required for normal water main clearance and maintenance and for maintenance of water quality; however, where practical, contractors and utilities shall direct flushed water into pervious areas, flush at the minimum rate necessary for cleaning and disperse the water in such a manner as to benefit local vegetation. 
(5)  Landscape irrigation for purposes of watering in fungicides, insecticides and herbicides as required by the manufacturer or by federal or state laws; however, this exemption applies only to licensed pest control operators and shall be limited to manufacturer's recommendations. 
(Code 1980, § 18-127; Ord. No. 430, § 11, 10-28-1992) 
Secs. 32-111-32-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PRIVATE WELLS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Wells, F.S. § 373.203 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-134. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install any water well in the town without having first obtained a permit therefor as provided in this article. The form of such permit, and the application therefor, shall be as prescribed by the town. 
(Code 1980, § 18-97; Ord. No. 337, § 1, 5-18-1988) 
Sec. 32-135. - Application for permit. 
    Applications for permits required by this article shall be made to the building official who shall refer such applications to the planning and zoning director for recommendations as to issuance, denial or issuance with conditions. Upon appropriate recommendation, all such permits shall then be signed and issued by the building official. 
(Code 1980, § 18-98; Ord. No. 337, § 2, 5-18-1988) 
Sec. 32-136. - Inspection, approval. 
    All wells for which permits are required by this article shall be subject to inspection and approval by the building official and planning and zoning director, who shall see that all ordinances, rules and regulations protecting the public health and safety are complied with. This inspection is in addition to all inspections required by the county health department or other regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the construction of such wells. 
(Code 1980, § 18-99; Ord. No. 53, § 1, 7-11-1960; Ord. No. 337, § 3, 5-18-1988) 
Sec. 32-137. - Excavation of wells; precautions. 
    Before a well shall be driven, proper barriers shall be placed around the site of the well to prevent injury to persons. All excavations in connection therewith shall be properly guarded to prevent injury to persons, and same shall be promptly backfilled as quickly as possible after inspection and approval of the work by the building official. 
(Code 1980, § 18-100; Ord. No. 53, § 2, 7-11-1960) 
Secs. 32-138-32-157. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDIVIDUAL HOME SUPPLY WELLS 

Sec. 32-158. - Permitted in certain areas. 
    With the exception of a salt water well, only wells lying outside a 500-foot distance from the mean high water line of the Atlantic Ocean, the Intercoastal Waterway or other body of saline surface water shall be permitted. 
(Code 1980, § 18-111; Ord. No. 158, § 1, 12-3-1975; Ord. No. 185, § 1, 5-17-1978; Ord. No. 337, § 4, 5-18-1988) 
Sec. 32-159. - Installation permit; conditions. 
    Any permit issued for the installation of wells pursuant to this article will be conditioned on the following: 
(1)  The permit applicant shall have an ownership interest in the real property in which the drilling is proposed. 
(2)  The permit applicant must have prior written approval, if necessary, of the proposed installation issued by the department of environmental protection, water management district, or other regulatory agency having jurisdiction over construction and installation of such wells. 
(3)  The permit applicant shall enter into a written agreement with the town whereby, if the well being applied for is of domestic potable use and town water is not readily available, the property owner shall disconnect from his private well and will connect and receive service from the town's water system at such time as such water service becomes available. 
(4)  All wells shall be installed so that groundwater will be only drawn from the zone above 30 feet below mean sea level. The ground level elevation and depth of the well must be noted on the application submitted to the town. 
(5)  The column pipe of such wells which are not permitted by the South Florida Water Management District shall be not greater than two inches in diameter and shall be provided with pumps having a capacity not to exceed 30 gallons per minute driven by motors rated at not more than two horsepower. 
(6)  Permit applications shall be accompanied by two copies of a legible drawing showing the location of the well, the area to be irrigated, the elevation of the wellhead in feet above mean sea level, the depth at which the well is screened, performance data of the pump and the location of any well, septic tanks and drainfields or other potential sources of contamination within a 100-foot radius. 
(7)  Not more than one well shall be permitted per single-family residence. 
(8)  Such well shall be located a minimum of 75 feet from any other well, septic tank or drainfield. 
(9)  The use of all such wells shall be limited to not more than an average of four hours per day or not more than an average of eight hours per day during the dry season. 
(10)  All wells shall be constructed by a water well contractor licensed by the South Florida Water Management District. 
(11)  The use of all wells shall be restricted to general or specific limitations which may be imposed by the town or the South Florida Water Management District from time to time. 
(12)  Wells serving multiple-family or commercial entities shall be constructed and operated only under specific permit of and conditions imposed by the South Florida Water Management District. 
(13)  Upon receiving water service from the town's water system, the permit applicant shall disconnect the well from the potable water service lines by providing the required air gap and use such well only for irrigation purposes. 
(14)  All wells will be constructed, abandoned or repaired in accordance with the standards of F.A.C. ch. 40E-3. 
(Code 1980, § 18-112; Ord. No. 158, § 3, 12-3-1975; Ord. No. 185, § 2, 5-17-1978; Ord. No. 337, § 5, 5-18-1988) 
Sec. 32-160. - Permit not transferable. 
    Any permit issued hereunder does not run with the real property involved, but that any permit granted hereunder is granted only to the individual permit applicant and upon transferring, conveyance or other disposition by the permit applicant of any real property on which a permit hereunder has been granted, this permit becomes void and any new or subsequent owner must make application to the town for a reissuance of the permit. 
(Code 1980, § 18-113; Ord. No. 337, § 6, 5-18-1988) 
Secs. 32-161-32-188. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Drainage and water control, F.S. ch. 298; management and storage of surface waters, F.S. § 373.403 et seq. 

Sec. 32-189. - Purpose; definitions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town. This article is intended to comply with federal and state laws and regulations regarding water quality. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized official means the director and any employee or agent of the town authorized in writing by the director to administer or enforce the provisions of this article. 
    Director means the director of public works. 
    Discharge means any direct or indirect entry of any solid, liquid or gaseous matter. 
    Site of industrial activity means any area or facility used for manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage, as defined under 40 CFR 122.26(a)(14) of regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, as amended. 
    Stormwater means any stormwater runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater system means the system of conveyances owned by the town and used for collection, storing, and transporting stormwater but not including any facilities intended to be used in accordance with applicable law for collection and transporting of sanitary or other wastewater. 
(Code 1980, § 18-141; Ord. No. 440, § 1, 4-14-1993) 
Sec. 32-190. - Industrial activity. 
(a)  General prohibitions. Any discharge into the stormwater system in violation of any federal, state, county, municipal or other law, rule, regulation or permit is prohibited. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. By adoption of industrial activity stormwater regulations or by issuance of industrial activity stormwater permits, or both, the director may impose reasonable limitations as to the quality of stormwater (including, without limitation, the designation of maximum levels of pollutants) discharged into the stormwater system from sites of industrial activity. Any promulgation of such regulations and issuance of permits by the director shall be in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  Administrative orders. The director may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge determined by the director to be in violation of any provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(d)  NPDES permits. Any person who holds a national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit shall provide a copy of such permit to the director no later than 60 calendar days after the issuance of such permit. 
(Code 1980, § 18-142; Ord. No. 440, § 2, 4-14-1993) 
Sec. 32-191. - Illicit discharges. 
(a)  General prohibitions. Except as set forth under subsection (c) of this section or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is prohibited. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. Any discharge to the stormwater system containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste materials, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, order or permits, is prohibited. 
(c)  Authorized exceptions. Unless the director determines that it is not properly managed or otherwise is not acceptable, the following discharges are exempt from the general prohibition set forth under subsection (a) of this section: Flows from firefighting, water line flushing and other contributions from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, direct infiltration to the stormwater system, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and dechlorinated swimming pool contributions. 
(d)  Illicit connections. No person may maintain, use or establish any direct or indirect connection to the stormwater system that results in any discharge in violation of this article. This prohibition is retroactive and applies to connections made prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, regardless of whether made under a permit, or other authorization, or whether permissible under laws or practices applicable or prevailing at the time the connection was made. 
(e)  Notification of spills. As soon as any person has knowledge of any discharge to the stormwater system in violation of this article, such person shall immediately notify the director by telephone and if such person is directly or indirectly responsible for such discharge, then such person shall also take immediate action to ensure the containment and clean up of such discharge and shall confirm such telephone notification in writing to the director within three calendar days. Such telephone and written notice shall be to the town's general telephone number and address then in use. 
(f)  Administrative order. The director may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge or any connection to the stormwater system determined by the director to be in violation of any provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Code 1980, §§ 18-143, 18-144; Ord. No. 440, §§ 3, 4, 4-14-1993) 
Sec. 32-192. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. The town may seek injunctive relief to prevent any violation of any provision of this article, or of any regulation or order issued hereunder, if necessary to protect the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(b)  Continuing violation. A person shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation for each and every day during any continuing violation of any provision of this article, or of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(c)  Enforcement actions. The director may take all actions necessary, including the issuance of notices of violation, the filing of court actions and/or referral of the matter to the local code enforcement board to require and enforce compliance with the provisions of this article and with any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Code 1980, § 18-145; Ord. No. 440, § 5, 4-14-1993) 
Sec. 32-193. - Inspections and monitoring. 
(a)  Authority for inspections. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or regulation or permit issued hereunder, or whenever an authorized official has reasonable cause to believe there exists any condition constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or regulation or permit issued hereunder, any authorized official may enter any property, building or facility at any reasonable time to inspect the same or to perform any duty related to enforcement of the provisions of this article or any regulations or permits issued hereunder; provided that: 
(1)  If such property, building or facility is occupied, such authorized official shall first present proper credentials and request permission to enter; and 
(2)  If such property, building or facility is unoccupied, such authorized official shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the property, building or facility, and shall request permission to enter. 
Any request for permission to enter made hereunder shall state that the owner or person in control has the right to refuse entry, and that in such event that entry is refused, the authorized official may enter to make inspection only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. If the owner or person in control refuses permission to enter after such request has been made, the authorized official is hereby authorized to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining entry. Routine or areawide inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, including but not limited to random sampling and sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, nonstormwater discharges, or similar factors. 
(b)  Authority for monitoring and sampling. Any authorized official may establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering of discharges to the stormwater system. During any inspection made to enforce the provisions of this article, or regulations or permits issued hereunder, any authorized official may take any samples deemed necessary. 
(c)  Requirements for monitoring. The director may require any person engaging in any activity or owning any property, building or facility, including but not limited to a site of industrial activity, to undertake such reasonable monitoring of any discharge to the stormwater system and to furnish periodic reports. 
(Code 1980, § 18-146; Ord. No. 440, § 6, 4-14-1993) 
Chapter 34 - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the Town of Juno Beach Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 1.10, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish comprehensive controls for the development of land in the town based on the comprehensive plan for the town and enacted in order to protect, promote and improve the public health, safety and the general welfare of the people. The objectives of this chapter are to provide for: efficiency and economy in the development process; the appropriate and best use of land; preservation, protection, development and conservation of the natural resources of land, water, and air; convenience, traffic and circulation of people and goods; the use and occupancy of buildings; healthful and convenient distribution of population; adequate public utilities and facilities; promotion of the civic amenities of beauty and visual interest; promotion of planned unit developments as a means of achieving better land use and design; and development in accordance with the comprehensive plan. To accomplish these purposes, the town council shall divide the entire town into districts of such number and shape as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purpose of this chapter, and within these districts may regulate, determine and establish: 
(1)  Height, number of stories, size, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings and other structures, for trade, profession, residence and other purposes; 
(2)  Use of land and water for trade, profession, residence and other purposes; 
(3)  Size of yards, and other open spaces; 
(4)  Percentage of lot that may be occupied; 
(5)  Density of population; 
(6)  Conditions under which various classes of nonconformities may continue, including authority to set fair and reasonable amortization schedules for the elimination of nonconforming uses; 
(7)  Use and types and sizes of structures in those areas subject to seasonal or periodic flooding and/or storm damage so that danger to life and property in such areas will be minimized; 
(8)  Performance standards for use of property and location of structures thereon; 
(9)  Architectural design of structures. 
All such regulations shall be uniform throughout each district, but the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts. For each district designated for the location of trades, callings, commercial enterprises, residences or buildings designated for specific use, regulations may specify those uses that shall be excluded or subjected to reasonable requirements of a special nature. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 1.20, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 689 , § 2, 1-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-3. - Intent. 
(a)  The intent of this chapter is that it be inclusionary; permitted uses, accessory uses, and special exception uses specifically stated for each zoning district shall be the only uses permitted. Any use proposed within any given zoning district which is not a stated use within said district is expressly prohibited, subject to the provisions of section 34-242. 
(b)  In addition, unless specifically stated to the contrary in this chapter, all other town ordinances, resolutions and other regulations shall be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 1.30, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 689 , § 2, 1-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-4. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural; and the plural the singular; the term "used for" shall include the meaning "designed for"; the term "structure" shall include the term "building"; the term "lot" shall include the terms "plot" and "tract"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. 
    Accessory apartment means a second dwelling unit, either in, detached from, or added to a single-family detached dwelling, for use as a complete, independent living facility. Such a dwelling unit is an accessory use to the main dwelling unit, and shall not be counted when calculating density for property in the district if the accessory apartment is 750 square feet or less in living area. An accessory apartment shall have a maximum living area (air conditioned space) of 500 square feet when the lot area is less than 10,000 square feet, and shall be permitted a maximum 1,250 square feet of living area when the lot area is 10,000 square feet or more. However, the Saturn Lane Historic District shall be permitted a maximum living area of 750 square feet and shall have no minimum lot size requirement. 
    Accessory use or building means a subordinate use or building customarily incidental to and located upon the same lot occupied by the main use or buildings; including public or private utilities serving the main use or building. Accessory use is also known as secondary use. 
    Acre means, for the purpose of calculating dwelling units, an area or parcel of land containing 43,560 square feet. 
    Airline route means the distance measured on a map from one location to another. 
    Aisle means a roadway within a parking lot. 
    Alley means a right-of-way or easement which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alteration means any change in size, shape, occupancy, character, or use of a building or structure. 
    Architectural feature means a structural or decorative feature which enhances design quality and is consistent with the overall architectural design of the structure on which it is placed and all other structures on the site. Such architectural features include, without limitation, roof structures, wall caps, windows, varying forms, planters, and similar quality design features. 
    Area regulations means the regulations of building size, setbacks or yards, parking and loading requirements and similar regulations not determining use of property. 
    Assisted living facility means residences which may include a mixture of housing types and may have extended medical care, central kitchen, common dining room, nursing and medical facilities, as well as a chapel, library, and other accessory and incidental uses, as well as limited commercial uses serving exclusively the residents of the facility. Such facilities shall include but not be limited to adult extended care residences and nursing homes and shall not include substance abuse treatment providers licensed pursuant to F.S. ch. 397. 
    Attendant uses for resort hotel means those uses which are complementary to a resort hotel. Those uses are conference facilities, restaurants (enclosed), sidewalk cafes, open-air restaurants, travel agencies, health clubs, spas, beach equipment sales and rentals, snorkeling and scuba diving equipment sales and rentals, beach cabanas, vacation apparel, seaside arts and crafts, branch banks, retail liquor stores, drugstores, photo shops, bookstores, luggage shops, gift shops, real estate offices, and auto rental offices (with rental autos stored and serviced elsewhere off the site). 
    Average front yard setback means the calculation determined by measuring the distance between the front property line, and the corners of the front wall of the principal structure closest to the front property line. The walls of the principal structure may be angled with respect to the front property line, so long as the closest and farthest points of the wall (with respect to the front property line), when averaged, equal the average front yard setback. No structure wall shall encroach on the required minimum front yard setback. 
    Awning means a shelter projecting from the exterior wall of a building, typically constructed of flexible materials except for the supporting framework. 
    Awning, sidewalk , means a projecting structure, either temporary or permanent, which is composed of construction limited to an open framework and is typically covered by flexible material and is suspended from a supporting building over a public sidewalk or walkway. 
    Basement means a story situated under a building having exterior perimeter walls, a floor level two or more feet below the level of the contiguous exterior ground outside of the building, and having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of all the exterior ground of the lot comprising the subject building development site. A basement story shall not be considered a story with regards to height regulations contained in this chapter if said story does not exceed eight feet above the average mean elevation for the subject lot, and if designed or adapted to and used solely for the purpose of automobile parking and/or machinery and essential building utility services not involving habitable space. The exterior walls of said basement story shall be set back from all property lines as required for said building situated over the basement story, and minimum door openings in said basement walls shall be limited to those essential to permit one automobile entry access driveway and one automobile exit driveway for each separated under-building parking area, plus pedestrian lobby entries and required fire escape exit ways. 
    Basement, sub-, means a story which is located underground and does not exceed in height the lowest point of the public sidewalk abutting the property, or the public street if there is no public sidewalk; and is designed, adapted to or used for the purpose of auto storage and/or furnace and other utility purposes, provided that said furnace and other utilities are located within the projected confines of the outer walls of the main building properly located above ground level. 
    Beach means the zone of unconsolidated material that extends landward from the mean low water line to the place where there is marked change in material or physiographic form, or to the line of permanent vegetation (usually the effective limit of storm waves). Unless otherwise specified, the seaward limit of a beach is the mean low water line. The term "beach" is alternatively termed the "shore." 
    Boat means a craft or device for water transport, including but not limited to a boat, jet ski, or windsurfer board. 
    Boat trailer means a trailer used to haul and carry a boat. 
    Buildable area means the portion of the lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
    Building. See Structure . 
    Building dimension means the horizontal length of any building wall in one elevation (the front, sides, or rear building wall of any structure). Attached building structures (for example, a row of townhouses) shall be considered as one building and one building dimension, regardless of whether the attached building structures are parallel to the property line, staggered, or some other configuration. The dimension shall be measured from the farthest extremes of said building wall, exclusive of balconies, porches, canopies, porte-cocheres, and other similar features. 
    Building facade means all windows, doors, and wall areas of a building in one plane or elevation. 
    Building footprint means the total ground floor area of a structure covered by a roof measured to the outside building walls, columns, and/or posts. 
    Building frontage means the building dimension of that portion of a building which faces upon and is generally parallel to a public or private street, aisle, or walkway, as applicable. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from finished grade to the highest exterior point of the building roof, exclusive of chimneys, aerials, and other similar appurtenances. See Finished grade . 
    Building line means the line established by law on any legally platted lot beyond which no building shall extend, except as specifically provided by law. 
    Business services means establishments providing support services to other business concerns, Business services would include, but not necessarily be limited to, print shops, secretarial services, travel agencies, drafting, services, advertising agencies, etc. 
    Cabana (pool house) means an accessory structure typically used in connection with outdoor bathing, providing enclosed space for showering or changing clothes, with recreational cooking and/or bar facilities, but no sleeping rooms. 
    Canopy means a permanent, projecting roofed structure attached to and supported by a building wall, which may project over a traffic aisle or walkway. 
    Church or place of worship means a structure utilized by a religious organization for worship and religious training or education. In addition, a church or place of worship may be used for activities and programs for the enrichment of its organization members and the community, including but not limited to special events, social gatherings and recreational programs. Any accessory uses involving outdoor activities must be approved as special exception uses unless otherwise permitted elsewhere in this chapter (i.e., special events). A church or place of worship, for the purposes of this chapter, may include, in addition to the principal structure, accessory structures and/or dwelling units for church personnel located within an accessory structure. 
    Club, private, means buildings and/or facilities not open to the general public and operated for social or recreational purposes for members and their bona fide services which are customarily carried on as a business. A private club may provide living quarters for its bona fide employees only. 
    Coastal area means that area which lies east of A1A (Ocean Drive) as well as that area which lies west of Ellison Wilson Road. 
    Coastal construction control line or CCCL means that line which marks the most seaward extent of construction established in 1979 by the state bureau of beaches and shores and which is marked along the dune line by permanent survey markers. 
    Coastal high hazard area means those areas within the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) designated V zones which lie seaward of the coastal construction control line. 
    Coastal vegetation means native dune vegetation which preserves and protects beach and dunes from erosion. Examples of native dune vegetation include but are not limited to sea oats, sea grapes, railroad vine, and saw palmettos. 
    Code compliance official means any authorized agent or employee of the town whose duty is to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, designated employees of the police and code enforcement departments. 
    Commercial areas includes all areas in the town that have commercial uses and/or are commercially zoned properties as designated by this chapter. 
    Commercial center means a group of two or more commercial buildings. 
    Common area lots (RV park). See section 34-566(c) for definitions. 
    Common open space means that area of a development site which is unencumbered by buildings, other structures, driveways for vehicular access, or automobile parking areas and storage. This area shall include all yard areas as well as those other open land areas located within the planned unit development site. 
    Community association means an entity created by a recorded instrument providing for the operation and maintenance of commonly owned facilities or common open space and may consist of a property owners' association, a homeowners' association or a condominium association. 
    Community parks means active recreational areas typically over 15 acres in size that serve multineighborhood recreational needs. 
    Community residential home means a dwelling unit licensed to serve residents who are clients of the department of elderly affairs, the agency for persons with disabilities, the department of juvenile justice, or the department of children and family services, or a dwelling unit licensed by the agency for health care administration, which provides a living environment for seven to 14 unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care by supportive staff as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social need of the residents, as defined in F.S. ch. 419. The community residential home is provided for pursuant to the requirements of F.S. ch. 419 and shall not include substance abuse treatment providers licensed pursuant to F.S. ch. 397. 
    Compatible or consistent means harmonious in the appearance of two or more external design features in the same vicinity. The term "compatible" or "consistent" also means being in a state of order, agreement, or completeness in the relations of parts of a whole to each other. 
    Comprehensive plan means the official public document adopted by the town council as a policy guide to present and future land use decisions. 
    Convenience store means a retail establishment which is usually open for extended daily hours of business (12 to 24 hours), usually located as a single entity or in a strip building facility not dependent upon comparison shopping and by its manner of display and merchandising usually sells a limited selection of items and brands of prepackaged or prepared foods, ready-to-eat foods, snacks, gum, candy, beverages, dairy products or sundries, all of which are frequently purchased for immediate use. Such establishment described in this definition, developed with facilities for the dispensing of vehicular fuels, shall be defined as a fuel service station and regulated as a fuel service station. 
    Day Spa. See Health spa/gym. 
    Development review committee (DRC) means a committee providing technical review of development applications consisting of representatives of the planning and zoning, building and police departments, in addition to providers of fire rescue and utility services. 
    Dining room means any building or part thereof, or any room or part thereof, in which food is dispensed or served for profit or gratis to a restricted and limited clientele consisting of tenants and residents of the same premises and their bona fide guests. 
    Director means the director of the town planning and zoning department, or his designee. 
    Display means the exhibition of an item, such as but not limited to goods, materials, merchandise, decorations, etc. 
    Dock means a structure built on pilings over water which is designed or used to provide anchorage for and access to one or more boats at anchorage. Necessary boat services such as water, phone, electricity and other utilities are considered a part of a dock; however, no cooking, sleeping or commercial activity shall be permitted or conducted on a dock. 
    Drive-in business means an establishment, other than a drive-in financial facility, where a patron is provided products or services without departing from his automotive vehicle. 
    Drive-in financial facility means a drive-in teller service, where the patron makes withdrawals or deposits or receives other financial services without departing from his automotive vehicle. 
    Drug store is an establishment that combines a pharmacy with the sale of products typically associated with a convenience store, and provides services such as photo processing or basic health assessments (such as vaccinations or minor examinations). This use is subject to the additional regulations set forth in article IV, division 15 of this chapter. 
    Dune means a mound or ridge of loose, typically sand-sized sediment, upland of the beach, and deposited by any natural or artificial means; the term "dune" may also include a beach ridge, dune ridge, chenier, etc. 
    Dune, crest of, means that line connecting points of highest elevation of the collective cross sections of a dune between its easternmost and westernmost minimum elevations. 
    Dune restoration means the placement of sand on an eroded dune, together with revegetation. 
    Dune revegetation means the planting of dune vegetation on nonvegetated dune areas. 
    Dune walkover means a low wooden narrow platform which is pile-supported and elevated above the dune to provide access to the beach. A dune walkover shall not be subject to any setback requirements from the property lines. 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including transient facilities. 
    Dwelling unit (DU) means a group of rooms designed, used exclusively or occupied as separate living quarters by a single family, but not including transient facilities. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family, but not including transient facilities. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other, but not including transient facilities. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family or multifamily, commonly known as an apartment house, means a building, or portion thereof, used or designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other, having individual living units with each unit having cooking facilities, but not including transient facilities. 
    Dwelling, townhouse, means a dwelling unit designed for or occupied exclusively by one family and attached to three or more other dwelling units of similar design and separated by one or more party walls. The attached townhouses as defined constitute a building cluster. This definition does not include transient facilities. 
    Excavation means any removal of earth in excess of six inches below the existing grade of surrounding land, for any reason whatsoever, except when excavation is to be made and earth restored to its original condition. 
    Family means one person or a group of two or more persons living together and interrelated by bonds of consanguinity, marriage or legal adoption, or a group of persons not more than three in number who are not so interrelated, occupying a dwelling as a single housekeeping unit. The persons thus constituting a family may also include gratuitous guests and domestic servants. Any person under the age of 18 years whose legal custody has been awarded to the state department of children and family services (DCF) or to a child-placing agency licensed by DCF, or who is otherwise considered to be a foster child under the laws of the state, and who is placed in foster care with a family, shall be deemed to be related to and a member of the family for the purposes of this chapter. Nothing herein shall be construed to include any roomer or boarder as a member of a family, nor shall this definition preclude the utilization of single-family residences as vacation rentals. 
    Family care home means a dwelling unit licensed to serve residents who are clients of the department of elderly affairs, the agency for persons with disabilities, the department of juvenile justice, or the department of children and family services; or a dwelling unit licensed by the agency for health care administration in which a living environment is provided for a payment, fee or grant for any of the residents receiving care, whether or not operated for profit, for one to six unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care by supporting staff as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional and social needs of the residents and meeting all other criteria of F.S. ch. 419. 
    Family day care home means an occupied residence in which child care is regularly provided for children from at least two unrelated families and which receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operated for profit. A family day care home shall be allowed to provide care for one of the following groups of children, which shall include those children under 13 years of age who are related to the caregiver: 
(1)  A maximum of four children from birth to 12 months of age. 
(2)  A maximum of three children from birth to 12 months of age, and other children, for a maximum total of six children. 
(3)  A maximum of six preschool children if all are older than 12 months of age. 
(4)  A maximum of ten children if no more than five are preschool age and, of those five, no more than two are under 12 months of age. 
    Finished grade means the average elevation of the existing grade prior to land alteration of the lot on which a proposed or existing structure is located, or the grade established by the town equal to the crown of the adjacent neighborhood or platted subdivision street at its highest elevation abutting the property, whichever is greater. If such elevation is less than seven and one-half feet above mean sea level, USC and GS datum, then building height shall be measured from seven and one-half feet above mean sea level, USC and GS datum, to the highest exterior point of the building roof, exclusive of chimneys, aerials, and other similar appurtenances. 
    Floor area, total, means the sum of the gross horizontal area of all of the floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls and/or supporting columns. Such area shall exclude a basement or subbasement as defined; open plaza, balcony or deck areas; and off-street parking within or under the building. 
    Foster care home means a residence licensed by the state department of children and family services which houses foster residents and provides a family living environment for the residents, including such supervision and care as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional and social needs of residents and serving either children or adult foster residents. 
    Frontage means all or a portion of a lot line which directly abuts a public or private right-of-way, excluding alleys and private driveways. 
    Fuel service station means a retail establishment which primarily sells, dispenses and installs gasoline and automotive lubricants and products. Such establishments may include the sale of typical convenience store items. 
    Garage, private, means a building or space used as an accessory to or part of a main building permitted in any residential district, and providing for the storage of motor vehicles and in which no business, occupation or service for profit is in any way conducted. 
    Garage, storage, means any building or premises, other than a private garage, used exclusively for the parking or storage of motor vehicles. 
    Ground cover means material such as, but not limited to, grass, rocks, pebbles, mulch and tree bark. 
    Group home means one of the following: a foster care home, a family care home, or family day care home. These group homes are provided for pursuant to the requirements of F.S. chs. 402 and 419 and shall not include substance abuse treatment providers licensed pursuant to F.S. ch. 397. 
    Gym. See Health spa/gym. 
    Habitable space means all that interior living space in a dwelling unit which is provided with heating and/or air conditioning facilities such as to render the space habitable in all seasons and weather. 
    Health spa/gym means an enclosed facility or spa providing equipment, classes, instruction, and similar assistance for conducting a variety of activities designed to improve health and physical fitness, including but not limited to, aerobic exercise and dancing, massage, weight lifting, running, swimming, racquetball, basketball, weight reduction and similar activities. Accessory uses, limited to patrons of the facility, include babysitting and food and beverage services. 
    Helistop means a designated public or private landing area used for the operation of motorcraft where no basing facilities are provided. 
    Holiday decorations means a display, including lighting and ornamentation, which is a nonpermanent installation celebrating national, state, and local holidays or holiday seasons. 
    Hot tub/whirlpool means a small swimming pool with a maximum of 36 square feet in surface area. 
    Hotel/motel means a building or a group of buildings, or part thereof in which sleeping accommodations are offered to the public on a daily basis, regardless of the number of rooms, and which may include as well additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities; as distinguished from transient residential facilities. 
    Impervious means land surfaces which do not allow the penetration of water including paved roads, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and highly compacted areas including shell and clay. 
    Individual freestanding retail use means a retail use located in a freestanding building which contains only one retail business and which is not part of any retail center. 
    Interior lots (RV park) See section 34-566(c) for definition. 
    Landscape barrier means a design feature constructed within a landscape buffer which is intended to impede pedestrian or vehicular cross-movement and to provide an abrupt transition between otherwise incompatible land uses. A landscape barrier may consist of living plants (such as a hedge), structures (such as a wall or fence), changes in grade (such as a berm) or any combination thereof as determined by the town. 
    Landscape buffer means a continuous area of land which is adjacent to and abutting one or more property boundaries in which landscaping is used to provide a transition between, and to reduce any negative environmental, aesthetic or other impacts of, adjacent land uses. 
    Landscaped open space means open space which is covered and maintained with vegetation as required in the definition of "landscaping." 
    Landscaping means any of the following or combination thereof: materials such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms, and other materials such as rocks, pebbles, sand, wall or fences. 
    Limited home occupations means a home occupation which by its nature has no impact on the surrounding residential neighborhood, and requires no facilities other than those normally provided for a residential dwelling unit. Limited home occupations are typically those businesses that require only telephone, and/or internet service to conduct their transactions. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a building together with its accessory buildings, including the open space required under this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "lot" shall be taken to mean any number of contiguous lots or portions thereof not separated by a street or public way, upon which one or more main structures for a single use are erected or are to be erected. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot coverage means that percentage of the total area of a lot covered or occupied by the buildings or any part of the buildings, excluding therefrom any projections which are permitted by this chapter to extend into yard areas. 
    Lot depth means the distance measured in the mean direction of the side lines of the lot from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the opposite mean rear lot line. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as established by ownership. 
    Lot of record means a parcel of land as originally subdivided or subsequently resubdivided and properly recorded as a lot within a subdivision or plat. 
    Lot, through, means an interior lot having frontage on two streets. 
    Lot width means the distance measured along the front building line between the side lot lines of a lot. 
    Low-volume irrigation system or microirrigation means equipment or irrigation devices designed to provide small quantities of water on or below the soil surface as drops or tiny streams of spray through emitters or applicators placed along a water delivery line. Microirrigation includes methods or concepts such as bubbler, drip, trickler, mist, or microspray, and subsurface irrigation. 
    Manufactured home , as currently defined by Florida Statutes and as subsequently amended, means a mobile home fabricated on or after June 15, 1976, in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, with each section bearing a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standard Act. This definition does not include modular housing placed on a standard foundation or travel trailers. 
    Manufactured home accessory building or structure , as currently defined in the National Fire Protection Association's (NFPA) 501A Standards, and as subsequently amended, means a building or structure that is an addition to or supplements the facilities provided in a manufactured home. It is not a self-contained, separate, habitable building or structure. Examples are awnings, cabanas, garages, ramadas, storage structures, carports, fences, windbreaks, or porches. 
    Mechanical equipment means and includes but is not limited to heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and pool equipment machinery; water filtration systems; fuel oil and propane tanks; accessory communications equipment such as signal sending and receiving dishes, etc.; public utility service fixtures, including telephone, telegraph, electricity, natural or propane gas, potable water, and sewer facilities; and elevator facilities. 
    Medical marijuana treatment center means an entity that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to qualifying patients and their caregivers and is registered by the state department of health. 
    Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facility means a facility that is owned or operated by, or affiliated with, a medical marijuana treatment center holding all necessary licenses and permits from which medical marijuana is delivered, purchased, possessed or dispensed for medical purposes. 
    Minor structure means and includes pile-supported, elevated dune and beach walkover structures, beach access ramps, walkways and stairways; viewing platforms; gazebos, boardwalks, slab patios, and other paved areas not exceeding 144 square feet in area; sand fences, privacy fences; and lifeguard support stands. 
    Municipally owned or operated refers to the municipality of the Town of Juno Beach. 
    Neighborhood parks means areas typically less than five acres which serve neighborhood-type recreational needs. 
    Nonconforming lot means a lot which was of lawful area and dimension when platted but, due to the creation of or revisions to this chapter, no longer conforms to the current regulations of the district or zone in which it is situated. 
    Nonconforming structure means a structure which was lawfully existing when constructed but which, due to the creation of or revisions to this chapter, no longer conforms to the area regulations of the district or zone in which it is situated. 
    Nonconforming use means a use which was permitted when instituted but which, due to the creation of or revisions to this chapter, no longer conforms to the current regulations of the use district on which it is situated. 
    Occupant means a business or entity occupying a building or building space. Such business or entity shall be considered as one occupant, regardless of the number of business tax receipts held by any one business or entity. 
    Offices, medical and dental means outpatient establishments offering patients medical services, examinations and treatments by professionals trained in healing or health-related practices, including, but not limited to, medical doctors, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths, podiatrists, optometrists, or any similar profession licensed by the state, as well as those technicians and assistants who are acting under the supervision and control of an on-site licensed health care practitioner. These uses shall not include establishments where patients are provided services or otherwise lodged overnight and are subject to the additional regulations set forth in article IV, division 15 of this chapter. 
    Offices, professional, means establishments providing executive, management or professional services to the public, including but not limited to the following: advertising services; business offices of private companies; business offices of utility companies; public or nonprofit agencies; trade associations; employment offices (excluding day labor and labor pool services), professional or consulting offices for accounting, architecture, computer technology, design, engineering, landscape architecture, law, urban planning and similar professions; property and financial management; real estate; telecommunication services; and travel agencies. 
    Open space means that area of a lot which is unencumbered by buildings, accessory structures, driveways, or automobile parking areas, except for garden walls and fences and recreational equipment as provided herein. Such space is to be generally maintained in a natural or cultivated living landscape. 
    Ornamental feature for fence/wall means a feature added to a fence or wall which enhances its design quality, consistent with the overall architectural design of the structure on which it is placed and the principal structures on the site. Such ornamental features shall include decorative columns or posts, varying forms, planters, and similar quality design features (excluding wall caps). 
    Outbuilding means a building located separately from other buildings in a development, but within the same legally described parcel, and in which there is only one occupant. 
    Outparcel means a separate legally described parcel within a commercial development and on which there is only one occupant. 
    Outpatient substance abuse treatment provider includes the following licensed facilities as specifically listed in F.S. § 397.311(18): (a) day or night treatment on an outpatient basis only; (b) detoxification services on an outpatient basis only; (c) medication-assisted treatment for opiate addition [addiction] on an outpatient basis only; and (d) outpatient treatment and intensive outpatient treatment. 
    Parapet means that portion of a wall which extends above the roofline. 
    Parking lot, public or private, means an open area or plot of land used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles to provide off-street parking, either for profit or gratis, for commercial or residential uses, other than single-family. 
    Parking required means those parking facilities determined as the minimum facilities necessary to comply with this chapter as set forth in the Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements in section 34-981(b)(5). 
    Perimeter lots (RV park) See section 34-566(c) for definition. 
    Perimeter wall/fence means a wall or fence delineating the outer boundary or fringe of a development site. 
    Person means and includes all natural persons, individuals, public or private corporations, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, municipalities, governmental agencies, political subdivisions, public officers or any other entity whatsoever, or any combination of such, jointly or severally. 
    Pharmacy is an establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of a variety of prescription and non-prescription drugs and medicines, prosthetic supplies, surgical instruments and supplies, and sale and/or rental of aids for invalids. This use is subject to the additional regulations set forth in article IV, division 15 of this chapter. 
    Pier means a structure extending into navigable water for use as a landing place, promenade or fishing. 
    Pioneer zone means the seaward side of the dune where grasses such as sea oats, vines such as railroad vine, and other low-lying plants are dominant. 
    Pool equipment machinery . See Mechanical equipment . 
    Principal entrance means the main access to a building through which the majority of patrons enter. 
    Proportional (tower) . See Tower, proportional . 
    Rear building facade means the elevation of a building providing for restricted entry to employees and servicing only and/or which facade is different from the other facades and clearly represents the rear of the building. 
    Residence, adult extended care, means a dwelling unit for elderly adults who may require extended medical care, and/or personal attention. Such unit shall exist only in a comprehensive adult care facility which shall include on-site health care facilities. Such residence is not considered a dwelling unit. 
    Residential areas includes all areas in the town so zoned by this chapter. Furthermore, for the purpose of this chapter, a residential condominium shall be deemed a residential area regardless of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Residential substance abuse treatment provider includes the following licensed providers or facilities as specifically listed in F.S. § 397.311(18), providing overnight services: (a) day or night treatment with community housing; (b) detoxification services; (c) medication-assisted treatment for opiate addition [addiction]; (d) outpatient treatment and intensive outpatient treatment; (e) additions [addictions] receiving facility; (f) intensive inpatient treatment facility; and (g) residential treatment facility. Residential substance abuse treatment providers may also provide outpatient substance abuse treatment services. 
    Resort hotel means a transient lodging facility which primarily services the persons who elect to stay at the facility for the purpose of using on-site and directly adjacent facilities, and who use the Atlantic Ocean and its beach as sources of relaxation. 
    Restaurant means every building or part thereof and all accessory buildings used in connection therewith or any place or location kept, used, or maintained as, advertised as, or held out to the public as a place where meals or foodstuffs are prepared and/or served, either gratuitously or for profit, to the general public. 
    Retail center means any shopping center, shopping plaza, or commercial freestanding building which contains two or more individual retail businesses. 
    Right-of-way means an area or strip of land either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of passage has been recorded, (whether by deed, dedication or easement). 
    Sand preservation zone means an area of jurisdiction from the mean high water line of the Atlantic Ocean to a line 600 feet landward, for the purpose of maintaining the volume of beach sand within the beach/dune system. 
    Satellite dish antenna means a device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include but not be limited to what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations or TVROs (television reception only satellite dish antennas). A satellite dish antenna is considered to be a structure as defined by the building code. 
    School, academic, means a use comprised of a structure, or portion thereof, designed or used for instructing one or more persons, either children or adults, in either general or specialized education and including accessory uses such as administrative offices, physical education facilities and group housing facilities for student or staff; provided, however, that instruction received by children or adults in their place of residence shall not constitute a school. 
    School, professional or studio-type, means a use comprised of a structure, or portion thereof, designed and used for the business of instructing one or more persons, either children or adults, in a specialized subject or subjects such as voice, language, dancing or modeling. 
    Secondary use means a subordinate and dependent use to the principal building use, i.e., automated bank teller machines (ATMs), book depositories, etc. The term "secondary use" is also known as "accessory use." 
    Shrubs means woody perennial plants of low stature characterized by persistent stems and branches springing from the base. 
    Sidewalk cafe means any group of tables and chairs, and its authorized decorative and accessory devices, situated and maintained upon the sidewalk for use and consumption of food and beverages sold to the public from or in an adjoining indoor restaurant. 
    Sign means any lettering, number, pictures, illustrations, trademarks, logograms, posters, characters, illumination, decoration, or other device visible from a public or private roadway and/or sidewalk which is used to announce, direct attention to, identify, advertise or otherwise make anything known shall be classified as a sign regardless of whether it is freestanding or attached or painted to or on or in a building, structure, display board, screen surface or wall, or is projected thereon by artificial lighting. 
    Sign area means the entire area within a single continuous perimeter which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising message, announcement, display, logo, picture or any figure of a similar nature, together with any frame, background area of a sign, structural trim, or other material, color, or condition which forms an integral part of the display, excluding the necessary supports, bases or uprights on which such sign is placed; provided that such supporting structures shall not exceed the maximum allowable sign area and shall carry only street numbers. When a sign has two faces which are back to back with one another, only one face shall be counted toward the sign area. 
    Sign, artisan, means temporary signs advertising the work of tradesmen, mechanics, painters, and other artisans during the period such persons are performing work on the premises. 
    Sign, awning, means a shelter projecting from the exterior wall of a building and constructed of flexible materials except for the supporting framework. 
    Sign, banner, means a temporary sign possessing characters, letters, illustrations, ornamentations, or designed so as to attract attention by a scenic effect, excluding pennants, balloons, and flags with or without lettering or characters, streamers, wind-driven whirligigs, propellers or other devices, either with or without a frame. A banner sign shall be made of durable material, such as but not limited to plastic or vinyl, and have professional lettering/characters/design. The paint on said banner shall be weatherproof. 
    Sign base means the supporting structure of a sign. See Sign structure . 
    Sign, building identification wall, means a sign located on a principal building and such principal building wall, identifying the name of the building or main anchor or tenant therein. 
    Sign, cabinet, means a box-type sign where illumination is internally within the box/cabinet structure. 
    Sign, changeable copy, means lettering which is removable and not permanently affixed to a sign area. 
    Sign, construction, means a temporary sign on a building site advertising the builder, contractor, developer, architect, and engineer involved in the construction of the premises. 
    Sign copy means any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic representation incorporated into a sign. 
    Sign, development, means a temporary sign advertising an approved project, for a future occupant and/or the sale, leasing, or rental of the premises upon which it is placed or erected. 
    Sign, directional, means an on-premises sign designed to guide or direct pedestrians or vehicular traffic. Such sign may contain the name or logo of a building or development and/or directional words such as entrance, exit, etc. A directional sign is also known as an aid-to-traffic sign. 
    Sign display means the displaying of something, such as but not limited to goods and merchandise, decorations, etc. 
    Sign, emitting, means a sign which emits sound, odor, or visible matter, such as smoke or steam. 
    Sign, externally lit, means a sign that is externally lit with an artificial source of light. 
    Sign face means that portion of a sign which is the viewable sign area. 
    Sign, freestanding, means a sign which is permanently affixed in or upon the ground and is not attached nor a part of a building. 
    Sign, freestanding identification, means a sign which is freestanding within a setback along a street frontage and which identifies a building or development. 
    Sign, freestanding monument . See Sign, monument . 
    Sign, front entrance wall, means a sign placed on a front entrance wall feature such as a wall aligning both sides of an entrance way (as regulated by sections 34-905 and 34-906), an archway structure extending over an entranceway, columns aligning an entrance way, or other similar entrance feature consistent with the architectural design of the principal structure. 
    Sign, generic business names, means words that describe the type of service or product provided, i.e., dentist, doctor, lawyer, shops, eateries, etc. 
    Sign grade means the ground level directly below a sign or immediately adjacent to its base or support. Where the ground level has been artificially raised for landscaping or other purposes, grade shall be measured from the level of the nearest curb of a public street, or the crown of such street if no curb exists. 
    Sign height means the vertical distance from the crown of the road to the top of the sign area for signs along the street frontage, and the vertical distance from grade to the top of the sign area, including any structural element for internal signs on the site. Architectural features may extend proportionally (see article IV, division 6 of this chapter) above this height limitation. 
    Sign, holiday decorations, means a display, including lighting and ornamentation, which is a nonpermanent installation celebrating national, state, and local holidays or holiday seasons. 
    Sign, illuminated, means a sign having an artificial source of light to make the sign's message readable, including internally and externally lit signs. (See article IV, division 6 of this chapter for permitted and prohibited forms of illumination.) 
    Sign, internally lit, means a sign that is internally lit with an artificial source of light whereby no glare or off-site saturation of light occurs. Internally lit individual letter signs include those signs which separately illuminate each letter of the sign, as opposed to illuminating more than one letter or word/logo from the same cabinet, continuous backlight or spotlight. 
    Sign, landscape/topiary, means a sign created/constructed from live plant materials (see section 34-1053(14)c). 
    Sign length (horizontal length) means the horizontal dimension of a sign. 
    Sign, logo, means a trademark or business name or symbol identifying a business or service which may be all or part of a sign. 
    Sign, monument, means a low-profile freestanding sign with a solid base on the ground, where the base does not exceed the height dimension of the sign area, or a low-profile freestanding sign with side support structures and no more than two feet air space from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign. Such base or support structures shall incorporate design and building materials that complement the architectural theme of the building on the premises. 
    Sign, neon, means a sign with tubing that is internally illuminated by neon or other electrically charged gas. 
    Sign, off-premises, means a sign used to advertise a business conducted, services available or rendered, or goods produced, which are not located on the site where the sign has been erected and/or displayed. 
    Sign, official, means a sign placed or erected by a governmental agency as a regulatory, aid-to-traffic or informational sign, in connection with control of vehicular or pedestrian traffic over a bridge, roadway, pathway or sidewalk or for other public purposes. 
    Sign, on-premises, means a sign used to advertise the business conducted, services available or rendered, or the goods produced, on the site where the sign has been lawfully erected. 
    Sign, ornamental, means a colorful fabric or vinyl banner-like ornament attached to a light pole, lamppost, column, building, etc., with brackets at the top and bottom of the ornament to maintain a fixed position. Such brackets must allow the ornament to flex with gusts of wind while maintaining a tightly stretched appearance. 
    Sign, painted, means a sign which is painted directly onto a building or structure. 
    Sign, permanent special event, means a freestanding monument sign which advertises no more than four special events at one time, for a retail building or center which is greater than 15,000 square feet in total floor area. 
    Sign, portable, means a sign which is capable of being carried or readily moved from one location to another and which is not permanent in nature. Such signs include, but are not limited to, A-frame signs, sandwich board signs, signs on wheels, or signs which lean onto a stationary object, building or structure. 
    Sign, roof, means a sign erected above the eave line or parapet wall, whichever is higher. 
    Sign, sale or rental, means temporary signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which they are displayed or erected by the owner or broker or any other person interested in the sale or rental of said premises. 
    Sign setback means the minimum distance required for any edge of any sign to be located from the property line. 
    Sign structure means any edifice or framework which supports or is capable of supporting a sign. 
    Sign, temporary, means a sign which is intended to advertise community or civic projects, construction projects, real estate for sale or lease, or special events, or being displayed for a limited period of time. 
    Sign, walkway directional, means a flat sign hung from or attached to a walkway ceiling or structure at the beginning and end of each walkway corridor which identifies the occupants or types of occupants within that corridor. 
    Sign, walkway occupant identification, means a flat sign hung from or attached to a walkway ceiling or structure in front of the principal entrance to an occupant's space. 
    Sign, wall, means a single-faced sign attached to and parallel to the building facade. Such sign may include a wall sign, cabinet sign, awning sign, or canopy sign. 
    Sign, window, means any sign which is attached or painted, either permanently or temporarily, on the interior or exterior of a window or which is placed within 12 inches of the face of such window and is intended to be viewed from the outside. 
    Signs, identical, means two or more signs which are exactly alike, meaning same size and dimensions in sign area; same message configuration, design, and color; and same position and location on different elevations. 
    Signs, incidental, means signs for secondary uses which are located outside of the building, i.e., automated bank teller machines (ATMs), book depositories, etc. 
    Spa. See Hot tub/whirlpool. 
    Special events means promotional events for commercial businesses, institutional and governmental uses, and charitable groups which may include grand openings, special holiday sales, sidewalk sales, charity drives, and other similar events. Special sales on merchandise or services, other than those identified herein, do not represent a special event. 
    Special exception means a use which may be allowed within a zoning district subject to the provisions of section 34-93. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. In computing the height of a building, the height of a basement shall not be included if used for the purpose as provided in the definition of basement. 
    Street means a facility, either public or private, which affords the primary access to abutting property and is intended for general traffic circulation. A street includes the entire area between street lines (right-of-way line). 
    Street frontage means the width of a lot or parcel of land fronting upon a street. 
    Street line means the line between the street and abutting property. A street line is also referred to as a right-of-way line. (See section 34-896.) 
    Structural alterations means any change, except the repair or replacement, in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders or the rearrangement of any interior partitions affecting more than five percent of the floor area of a building. 
    Structure means anything constructed, assembled or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
    Structure, principal, means a building or structure in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
    Subdivision/simple lot split . A subdivision shall be defined as stated in the town's subdivision regulations, which serve as an extension of this chapter; in supplementation to said regulations, a simple lot split (de minimus development) shall be considered the division/reconfiguration of a parcel of land, whether improved or unimproved, into three or less contiguous lots or parcels of land, designated by reference to the number or symbol of the lot or parcel contained in the plat of such subdivision, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership. In addition, if not defined in article IV of this chapter, any subdivision or simple lot split shall conform and be required to follow specified procedures and processes as outlined in the town's subdivision regulations. 
    Swimming pools means any pool which is constructed, used or maintained to provide recreational facilities for swimming, bathing or wading and which is capable of containing water to a depth greater than 24 inches, and all accessory buildings, equipment, and appurtenances thereto. 
    Temporary labor office means an office which provides on a fee basis the services of generally unskilled or semiskilled laborers on a daily or short-term basis. Temporary labor offices are prohibited in all zoning districts within the town as such uses are not deemed to be acceptable business or professional offices, which are permitted within certain zoning districts in the town. 
    Tenant . See Occupant . 
    Tip-outs means the sliding portion of the recreational vehicle (RV) which extends beyond the typical eight- to 8.5-foot RV width. 
    Total floor area . See Floor area, total . 
    Tower means an open air or enclosed structural feature which is an integral part of the principal structure, and whose floor area, from outside wall to outside wall, is limited in size. Such structural feature is intended to provide additional scenic view opportunities. 
    Tower, proportional, means the height of the eave of the tower structure, or roof deck, if applicable, shall be no higher than 1.5 times the height of the eave of the principal structure. The roof of the tower may extend above this limit. As an example, if the height of an eave for a two-story principal building is at 18 feet, then the height of the tower eave or roof deck shall be no higher than 27 feet (18 × 1.5 = 27) above the average existing grade or crown of the road, whichever is applicable. The roof of the tower may extend above this limit. 
    Transient residential facility means any building, or part thereof, in which the right of use or occupancy of any unit circulates among various occupants for specific periods of time less than a full year during any given year, but not necessarily for consecutive years, in accordance with a fixed time schedule on a periodically recurring basis extending for more than one year. Such accommodations may not include any meals except for breakfast, and the total number of sleeping rooms in any one transient residential facility, not including the owner or operators, shall not exceed 15. The determination that a building, or part thereof, is a transient residential facility shall be made without regard to the form of ownership of the property or units therein, and it shall be immaterial whether the right of use or occupancy is derived from a leasehold or fee interest. Transient residential facilities are permitted only in the commercial general (CG), medical commercial (MC) and residential transient and multiple-family moderate density (RMT) zoning districts. 
    Tree means a woody plant having a height of not less than 12 feet and a canopy spread of not less than six feet measured at three radius points from the trunk, and a clear trunk of not less than four feet at the time of planting. 
    Use means the purpose for which land or water or a structure thereon is designed, arranged, or intended to be occupied or utilized or for which it is occupied or maintained. The use of land or water in the various zoning districts is governed by this chapter. 
    Utility trailer means a trailer used to haul and carry anything other than a boat. 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship on the land. As used in this chapter, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of structure or size of yards, parking requirements and other area requirements and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use or density otherwise prohibited or not permitted shall not be allowed by variance. 
    Vehicle means as defined by F.S. ch. 316. 
    Vehicle repair facility means a retail establishment where vehicle minor and/or vehicle major repairs are rendered. 
    Vehicle minor repair means installation of auto parts such as tires, batteries and similar items (e.g., brakes, mufflers, etc.) and provision of routine services such as tune-ups and lubrication, etc. 
    Vehicle major repair means body repair, painting, engine or transmission removal, valve and cylinder work, etc. Vehicle major repair facilities are prohibited in all zoning districts within the town as such uses are not deemed to be acceptable retail establishments, which are permitted within certain zoning districts in the town. 
    Viewing platform means a raised wooden deck area which may include railings, benches, and a roofed structure (e.g., tiki hut). 
    Vines means plants which normally require support to reach mature form. 
    Walkway means a surface adjacent to a building which is intended to be used by pedestrians. 
    Yard means a required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure except roof overhang, from 30 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot upward, except as otherwise provided herein; provided, however, that fences, walls, vegetation, poles, posts and other customary yard accessories, ornaments and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. The term "court" means an uncovered open space enclosed on two or more sides by external walls of a building. 
    Yard, front, means a yard adjacent to a street and extending across the entire front of the lot to the face of the building wall closest to the front property line or the required front yard setback, whichever is greater. Through lots extending through blocks in such a way as to have frontage on two public or private streets shall provide front yards adjacent to each street. The depth of required front yards shall be measured perpendicular to a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The foremost points of side lot lines, in the case of rounded property corners, as at street intersections, or irregular corners, shall be assumed to be the points at which lines would have met without rounding or irregularity. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending between required side yards at the rear of the lot. In the case of lots having more than one front yard, remaining yards shall be considered side yards. Depth of a required rear yard shall be measured so that the yard established is a strip of the minimum depth required with its inner edge parallel to the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side, means a yard extending from the rear line of a required front yard to the opposite property line, or in cases where more than one front yard is required, as on a through lot, to the rear line of the second front yard. In the case of corner lots, all yards adjacent to streets shall be considered front yards. Width of a required side yard shall be measured so that the yard established is a strip of the minimum depth required with its inner edge parallel to the side lot line. 
(Ord. No. 207, §§ 2.00-2.185, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 355, 3-15-1989; Ord. No. 374, 11-15-1989; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 389, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 393, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 487, 9-18-1996; Ord. No. 527, 11-15-2000; Ord. No. 538, 4-25-2001; Ord. No. 581, § 2(exh. A), 8-24-2005; Ord. No. 646, § 2, 4-13-2011; Ord. No. 668, § 2, 5-28-2014; Ord. No. 677, § 2, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 689 , § 2, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 701 , § 2, 10-25-2017; Ord. No. 705 , § 2, 9-12-2018) 
Secs. 34-5-34-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-27. - Duties of director. 
    The director shall review the applicability of all sections of this chapter to any application for permits. He shall administer all zoning actions such as variances, interpretations, special exceptions, site plan and appearance reviews and any other procedures described in this chapter. It shall be the director's responsibility to present all applications and plans to the appropriate boards or commissions for action. It is further the director's duty to provide the council and each board with a staff report indicating his findings and recommendations. He shall further carry out the duties as outlined in other parts of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 8.10, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 689 , § 3, 1-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-28. - Planning and zoning board duties. 
    The planning and zoning board shall issue recommendations to the town council and zoning board of adjustment and appeals, as applicable, on all matters involving community planning, including, but not limited to, the comprehensive plan, site plan and appearance reviews, preliminary plat reviews, variances, administrative appeals, and special exception uses. It shall exercise its power as defined in this chapter and as further established by F.S. ch. 163, part II. The planning and zoning board shall be the local planning agency required to be designated as such by F.S. § 163.3174. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 8.20, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 686 , § 2, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 34-29. - Town council responsibilities. 
    The town council is the legislative body which enacts this chapter. It is the final approving body for all amendments and plan approvals where indicated in this chapter and as further determined by F.S. ch. 163, part II. It is further the intent of this chapter that the duties of the town council in connection with this chapter shall include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation that may arise, as regards appeals and other appropriate instances. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 8.30, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-30. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The code compliance official of the town shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. He shall diligently enforce the chapter, making necessary inspections to this end and investigating promptly all complaints, reporting his findings and actions to complainants and using his best endeavors to prevent violations and to detect and secure the correction of violations. 
(b)  If he shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall in writing notify the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land or structures, removal of illegal structural changes, discontinuance of any illegal work being done, and shall take or cause to be taken any other action authorized by this chapter or other laws of the town or the state to ensure compliance with, and prevent violations of, the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  He shall maintain records of all official actions of his office with relation to administration, and of all complaints and actions taken with regard thereto, and of all violations discovered by whatever means, with remedial action taken and disposition of cases. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 9.10, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-31. - Building permits required. 
    No structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a valid and legally issued permit therefor, issued by the zoning administrative official or designee, except such permit shall be construed to only allow uses and structures that are in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 9.20, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 689 , § 3, 1-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-32. - Certificate of occupancy required; temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter, as well as to the requirements of the building code of the town. 
(b)  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. All work must be completed before a final certificate of occupancy will be issued. 
(c)  The building department shall maintain a record of these certificates to be supplied to anyone upon request. 
(d)  Failure to obtain such a certificate shall be a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided in section 34-34. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 9.30, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-33. - Construction and use as provided in applications, plans, permits and certificates of occupancy. 
    Building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the town authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter, and punishable as provided in section 34-34. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 9.40, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-34. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any permit, site plan and appearance approval, variance or special exception granted hereunder, shall be punishable in the same manner as a misdemeanor by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and, in addition, any violator shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  It shall also be a violation of this chapter for any person to destroy, move, remove or deface or obscure any sign or notice erected or posted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 9.50, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-35. - Other remedies in addition to violations and penalties. 
(a)  Legal remedies. In addition to the penalties and enforcement procedures provided in section 34-34, the town council may institute any lawful civil action or proceeding to prevent, restrain or abate: 
(1)  The construction, erection, reconstruction, alteration, rehabilitation, expansion, continuation or use of any building or structure in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  The occupancy of such building or structure on land or water. 
(3)  The illegal act, conduct, business, or use of, in or about such premises. 
(b)  Other administrative remedies. 
(1)  Cease and desist orders. The town council shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the form of written official notices given to the owner of the subject building, property, or premises, or to his agent, lessee, tenant, contractor, or to any person using the land, building, or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist. 
(2)  Revocation or suspension of building permits and certificates of occupancy; appeal. 
a.  Revocation. The town may revoke a building permit or certificate of occupancy in those cases where determination has been duly made that false statements or misrepresentations existed as to material facts in the application or plans upon which the permit or certificate was based. 
b.  Suspension. The town may suspend a building permit or certificate of occupancy in those cases where determination has been duly made that an error or omission on either the part of the permit applicant or government agency existed in the issuance of the permit or certificate approval. A valid permit or certificate shall be issued in place of the incorrect permit or certificate after correction of the error or omission. 
c.  Notice of appeal. All town decisions concerning the issuance, revocation, or suspension of a building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be stated in official written notice to the permit applicant. Any decision may be appealed to the board of adjustment. 
(3)  Code enforcement special magistrate. Violations of the provisions of this chapter, or of any permit, site plan and appearance approval, variance or special exception granted hereunder, are deemed to be violations of this Code, and as such are subject to the jurisdiction of the town's code enforcement special magistrate. 
(c)  Other lawful action. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking any other lawful action necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 9.60, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-36. - Review and expiration of approvals. 
(a)  In the event the granting of a rezoning, special exception, variance, site plan and appearance, or other approval hereunder is made subject to conditions which must be satisfied within a designated time period, the failure of the developer or property owner to satisfy any such condition within the designated time period (or any extension previously granted) shall result in review of the approval by the town council. Upon such review, the town council may take the following actions: 
(1)  Institute appropriate proceedings to return the status of the subject property to its status prior to the approval. Such proceedings may include rezoning, revocation of special exceptions or variances and cancellation or revocation of permits. 
(2)  Suspend further development of the subject property until the condition is satisfied. 
(3)  Modify the conditions. 
(4)  Extend the time required for compliance. 
(b)  The developer or property owner may file an application with the director requesting an extension of any such condition at any time prior to the expiration of the designated time period. Upon receipt of such application, the director shall, in his discretion, either: 
(1)  Grant an extension not to exceed six months; or 
(2)  Deny the request, in which event the matter shall, upon the request of the developer or property owner, be reviewed by the town council as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
Provided, however, that the director shall not grant any extension if the approval could not be permitted under the laws in effect at the time the extension is requested. 
(c)  If a condition does not designate a time period for its completion/compliance, two years shall be deemed to be the designated time period, unless it is clear from the grant of approval that a different designated time period was intended by both the town and the developer or property owner. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 9.70, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-37. - Schedule of fees, charges, and expenses. 
(a)  The town council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses, and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of occupancy, appeals, applications, and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be on file in the office of the town clerk and may be altered or amended only by the town council. Fees collected are nonrefundable. 
(b)  In the event the applicant fails to pay all fees, charges, costs, and expenses relative to the property subject to an application or appeal pursuant to this section or pursuant to any other Code section, including, without limitation, application fees, appeal fees, local business taxes, utility fees, payments, and connection charges, code enforcement board fines, and/or plan review fees, the town shall suspend all action on the application or appeal until all applicable fees, charges, costs and expenses have been paid by the applicant. 
(c)  No development order application of any type shall be scheduled for consideration at any development review committee meeting or any workshop, regular meeting, special meeting, or public hearing of the planning and zoning board or town council unless all fines and liens owed to the town by the owner of the subject property and all fines and liens owed to the town by any agent, person or party representing the owner of the subject property with respect to the development order application under review have been paid and satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 9.80, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 406, 3-20-1991; Ord. No. 624, § 2, 8-26-2009) 
Secs. 34-38-34-62. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS 

Sec. 34-63. - Established; members. 
(a)  There is hereby established a zoning board of adjustment and appeals (the "board of adjustment") for the town. The members of said board of adjustment shall be the duly elected mayor and councilmembers of the town. The mayor shall serve as the chairman of the board of adjustment. 
(b)  The chairman and vice chairman of the planning and zoning board shall be ex officio members of the board of adjustment and shall serve as first and second alternate, respectively, in the event the mayor or any councilmember is unable to participate in any board of adjustment hearing. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 12.00, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 347, 10-19-1988; Ord. No. 685 , § 2, 5-25-2016) 
Sec. 34-64. - Powers, duties, and functions. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in enforcement of any zoning ordinance or regulation. In exercising its power, the board of adjustment may, in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, decision or determination made by the administrative official in the enforcement of any zoning resolution or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter and make such order, recommendation, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall further have the power to authorize upon appeal such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to specific conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in an unnecessary and undue hardship. All variance requests shall first be considered by the planning and zoning board at a duly advertised public hearing. After consideration of the recommendation of the planning and zoning board, the board of adjustment shall not grant a variance from the terms of this chapter unless the board of adjustment finds that: 
(1)  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; 
(2)  The special conditions or circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
(3)  A granting of the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, buildings or structures in the same district; 
(4)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter and would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant; 
(5)  A prior application for the granting of the variance had not been submitted within the preceding 12 months. 
In granting any variance, the board of adjustment shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. The board of adjustment may also prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall commence, be completed, or both. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 12.01, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 347, 10-19-1988; Ord. No. 686 , § 3, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 34-65. - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be of public record and be immediately filed with the town clerk, who shall maintain the records. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 12.02, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 347, 10-19-1988) 
Sec. 34-66. - Procedures. 
    The board of adjustment shall be governed by the following procedures: 
(1)  Appeals to the board of adjustment concerning interpretation or administration of this chapter may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the town council affected by any decision of the administrative official. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the decision by the administrative official concerning the issue by filing with the administrative official and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. All notices of appeal shall be made by filing an application on forms provided by the town clerk. The clerk shall forthwith transmit to the planning and zoning board and board of adjustment all papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was rendered. 
(2)  No application shall be considered or construed to be completely filed until the application fee, as determined from time to time by the town council, shall have been paid. 
(3)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal not to exceed 75 days from the date of filing of a complete application. Prior to the hearing before the board of adjustment, the planning and zoning board shall consider the appeal at a duly advertised public hearing and providing a recommendation to the board of adjustment. 
(4)  The town shall give public notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, at least seven days prior to the planning and zoning board hearing and at least 15 days prior to the board of adjustment hearing, at the expense of the petitioner. 
(5)  At the hearing the petitioner may appear in person, by attorney authorized to practice in the state, or by any agent who has received from the petitioner and submitted to the board a written authorization for their appearance. 
(6)  A notice containing the same information in the published notice aforesaid shall be mailed by the town clerk on behalf of the board of adjustment, at the expense of the petitioner, to the property owners of record, their tenants or their agents, within a radius of 300 feet of the property described in the application. 
(7)  When an appeal is taken to the board of adjustment, all work and proceedings shall stop on the project or premises in question unless the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken shall certify in writing that a stay would cause immediate peril to life or property. In such case, work and proceedings shall not stop unless the board of adjustment or a court of competent jurisdiction issues a temporary restraining order after application to the board or court and notice to the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 12.03, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 347, 10-19-1988; Ord. No. 686 , § 3, 8-10-2016) 
Sec. 34-67. - Orders and decisions. 
(a)  The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any officer or official upon zoning matters, or to grant a variance to the provisions of any existing zoning regulation. 
(b)  Orders and decisions of the board shall be in writing, a copy of which shall be kept by the board, one copy shall be forwarded to the town clerk and shall become a public record, and one copy shall be given to the petitioner. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 12.04, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 347, 10-19-1988) 
Secs. 34-68-34-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 34-93. - Procedures. 
    The town council may hear and decide only such special exceptions as the town council is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this chapter; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this chapter, or to deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter. Special exception procedures for planned unit developments are indicated in article V of this chapter. A special exception shall not be granted by the town council unless and until: 
(1)  A written application for a special exception is submitted indicating the section of this chapter under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested. The planning and zoning board shall consider the application and conduct a public hearing following the requirements of subsections (3) and (4) of this section on the request. The planning and zoning board shall recommend to the town council either approval, approval with modification, or disapproval of the special exception. 
(2)  After receiving the planning and zoning board's recommendation, the town council shall hold a public hearing following the requirements of subsections (3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  Unless otherwise required by state statutes, notice of each public hearing required hereunder shall be published at least 15 days in advance of the public hearing. The owner of the property for which special exception is sought or his agent shall be notified of the public hearing by mail at least 15 days in advance of the public hearing. Notice of each such hearing shall also be posted on the property for which a special exception is sought, and at the town center, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. 
(4)  At the public hearing, the applicant may appear in person, or by appropriately designated agent or attorney. Before taking action on any special exception request the town council shall make written findings of fact addressing the issues of whether the requirements of the section of the chapter described in the application have been met, and whether satisfactory provision and arrangement has been made that the special exception use will, where applicable: 
a.  Provide for ingress and egress to the property and structures with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and access in case of fire or catastrophe; 
b.  Provide for parking and loading areas, refuse and service areas, with particular attention to subsection (4)a of this section and to their effects on surrounding property; 
c.  Provide for screening and buffering with respect to type, dimensions and location; 
d.  Provide for signs, if any, and proposed lighting; 
e.  Provide for required yards and other open space; 
f.  Not adversely affect the public interest; 
g.  Comply with specific requirements governing the special exception requested; 
h.  With conditions and safeguards attached, be generally compatible with adjacent properties and or property within the district; 
i.  Not generate excessive noise or traffic; 
j.  Not tend to create fire, disease or other equally or greater dangerous hazard; 
k.  Be in harmony and compatible with the present and/or future developments of the area concerned; 
l.  Conserve the value of buildings and encourage the most appropriate use of the land and water; 
m.  Provide adequate light and air; 
n.  Promote such distribution of population and such classification of land uses, development and utilization as will tend to facilitate and provide adequate provisions for public requirements, including but not limited to transportation, water flowage, water supply, drainage, sanitation, educational opportunities, and recreation; 
o.  Conform to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses; 
p.  Be consistent with the needs of the town for land areas for specific purposes to serve the population and economic activities; 
q.  Protect the tax base; and not create a financial burden on the town; and 
r.  Not be disruptive to the character of neighborhoods nor adverse to playgrounds, parks, schools and recreation areas; nor adverse to the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, order, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. 
(5)  Among other conditions and safeguards, the town council may prescribe reasonable time limits within which actions shall commence, be completed, or both. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 10.00, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 401, 9-17-1990) 
Secs. 34-94-34-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SITE PLAN AND APPEARANCE REVIEW 

Sec. 34-115. - Intent and purpose. 
    The intent of site plan and appearance review is: 
(1)  To ensure the best use and the most appropriate development and improvement of each lot in the town; 
(2)  To protect the owners of lots to ensure that the use of surrounding lots will maintain or improve property values; 
(3)  To ensure the erection thereon of well-designed and proportioned structures built of appropriate materials; 
(4)  To preserve, as far as practicable the natural features and beauty of said property; 
(5)  To obtain harmonious architectural themes; to encourage and secure the erection of attractive structures thereon, with appropriate locations thereof on lots; 
(6)  To secure and maintain proper setbacks from streets and adequate open spaces between structures; and 
(7)  In general, to provide adequately for a high type and quality of improvement in said property, and thereby enhance the property values and the quality of life in the town. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 11.10, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-116. - Required; criteria. 
    No construction or clearing of land may begin in any district prior to review and approval of the site plan and appearance. The review shall consist of: 
(1)  Consideration of the application by the development review committee (DRC), which may recommend approval, denial, or approval with modifications and/or conditions; 
(2)  Consideration of the application by the town planning and zoning board, which may recommend approval, denial, or approval with modifications and/or conditions; and 
(3)  Final review and approval or denial, or approval with modifications by the town council. Single-family detached dwellings shall be subject to review and approval only by the town planning and zoning department. The criteria to be used in this review shall be to ascertain that the proposed site plan for new development meets the following criteria: 
a.  Site plan criteria. 
1.  Is in conformity with the comprehensive plan and is not detrimental to the neighboring land use; 
2.  Has an efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic system, including pedestrian, bicycle, and automotive linkages and proper means of ingress and egress to the streets; 
3.  Has adequate provision for public services, including but not limited to access for police, fire and solid waste collection; 
4.  Complies with the provisions of chapter 20, article III, regarding potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, recreation and open space, and road facilities; 
5.  Is planned in accordance with natural characteristics of the land, including but not limited to slope, elevation, drainage patterns (low areas shall be used for lakes or drainage easements), natural vegetation and habitats, and unique physical features; 
6.  Preserves environmental features and native vegetation to the maximum extent possible, and complies with the Environmentally Sensitive Lands Ordinance; 
7.  Protects estuarine areas when concerning marina siting, drainage plans, alteration of the shoreline, provisions for public access and other concerns related to water quality and habitat protection; 
8.  Complies with all sections of this chapter. 
b.  Appearance review criteria. 
1.  Is of an architectural style representative of or reflecting the vernacular of Old Florida style which is indigenous to the town and which is commonly known and identified by its late Victorian (Key West Cracker), Spanish revival (Mediterranean), Modern (early to mid-20th century), or combination thereof style of architecture. Summarized briefly, common features of the vernacular of Old Florida style that identify the Victorian (Key West Cracker), and Spanish revival (Mediterranean) architectural style include wood or concrete block with stucco siding; simple pitched roofs; tile, metal, or asphalt roofs; ornate details such as but not limited to exposed soffits, individualized vent and louver shapes, reliefs, and detailed window and door treatments; lush landscaping with private yards; and use of porches, balconies and patios. Common features of the vernacular of Old Florida Style that identify the Modern (early to mid-20th century) architectural style include clean geometric lines, often at right angles; an emphasis on function; materials such as glass, steel, iron, and concrete; and the use of natural light though large and expansive windows; 
2.  Is of a design and proportion which enhances and is in harmony with the area; 
3.  Elevator and stairwell shafts and other modern operations and features of a building shall be either completely concealed or shall incorporate the elements of the architectural style of the structure; rooftop equipment and elevator and mechanical penthouse protrusions shall be concealed; and parking garages and other accessory structures shall be designed with architectural features and treatments so that they are well proportioned and balanced and in keeping with the architectural style of the principal structure; 
4.  Shall have all on-site structures and accessory features (such as but not limited to light fixtures, benches, litter containers, including recycling bins, traffic and other signs, letter boxes, and bike racks) compatible in design, materials, and color; 
5.  Shall have a design in which buildings over 40 feet in height shall appear more horizontal or nondirectional in proportion rather than vertical, accomplished by the use of architectural treatments as described in these criteria; 
6.  Shall locate and design mechanical equipment with architectural treatments so that any noise or other negative impact is minimized; 
7.  Complies with the town's community appearance standards (see article IV, division 14 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 11.20, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999; Ord. No. 678, § 2, 12-10-2014; Ord. No. 689 , § 4, 1-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-117. - Submission requirements. 
    Each site plan and appearance approval request shall include the items stated in the town's site plan and appearance approval checklist which is part of the town's development application form, as it may be amended by the director from time to time. The development application form is available at the office of the planning and zoning department. When applicable, all plans submitted pursuant to this division shall require a state registered/licensed architect, engineer, and/or landscape architect seal with signature. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 11.30, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 689 , § 4, 1-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-118. - Minor amendment to a previously approved site plan and appearance approval. 
    A minor amendment to a previously approved site plan and appearance approval may be approved by the director. The director shall make a written determination as to the approval, denial, or approval with modifications and/or conditions within 30 calendar days after the director has determined that the application and required supporting materials have been filed and are complete. A minor amendment shall be approved only if it meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Any increase in the total floor area of any principal structure does not exceed ten percent, and there is no increase in the number of principal structures or in the number of residential dwelling units as specified by the previously approved site plan. However, a decrease in the total floor area of any building, or reduction of the number of principal structures, stories, or units as specified by the approved site plan may be approved as a minor amendment. 
(2)  There is no change in the boundary of the approved plan. 
(3)  Rearrangement of uses or locations on a property may be permitted unless they conflict with a specific provision herein or condition of the approved site plan. 
(4)  There is a relocation of no more than ten percent of the total building footprint on a site. For example, if there are two buildings on a site and each has 5,000 square feet of building footprint, then the total building footprint for the site is 10,000 square feet. 
If one building relocates 500 square feet and the other building relocates 1,000 square feet, then the total relocation is 1,500 square feet out of 10,000 square feet. This is a relocation of 15 percent of the total building footprint and would qualify as a major amendment under this provision. 
(5)  Any increase in traffic generation shall be by no more than ten percent above that established by the site plan previously approved by town council. However, the county's traffic performance standards as specified in section 7.9 of the county Unified Land Development Code must be adhered to. 
(6)  There is no increase in negative impacts on adjacent properties. 
(7)  There is no major alteration in the architectural design. Major alteration in design shall mean any change in the character of the structure. However, an amendment to a previously approved site plan that was not reviewed under the current appearance criteria in section 34-116(2)b may be amended in architectural design to conform with the current appearance standards and not be considered a major alteration. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 11.40, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992) 
Sec. 34-119. - Expiration of approval. 
(a)  A site plan and appearance approval shall be valid for two years from the date of such approval. If commencement of development has not begun prior to the date of two years following the approval date, said site plan and appearance approval shall become null and void. Commencement of development shall consist of receipt of a validly issued building permit and the first building inspection approval for a minimum of one principal structure or completion of 25 percent of the total cost of the infrastructure (water, sewer, roads, and drainage) on the site. Infrastructure costs for the project shall be reviewed and approved by the town engineer prior to final engineering plan approval. 
(b)  Prior to the expiration of the two-year period, a one-year extension to commence development may be applied for with the town council. An extension may be granted upon a determination by the town council that the applicant has made a good faith effort to commence construction but has been prevented from doing so for reasons beyond the control of the applicant. The town council may, at the request of the applicant and in the exercise of its discretion, grant additional extension(s) pursuant to this paragraph when warranted by the totality of the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 11.50, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 623, § 2, 8-26-2009) 
Secs. 34-120-34-136. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 34-137. - Town council authority to amend the regulations and districts in this chapter. 
    The town council may amend the regulations and districts established in this chapter, subject to the requirements and procedures set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 13.00, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-138. - Initiation of procedure. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, the zoning regulations set forth in this chapter may be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed in the same manner as other ordinances of the town, subject to applicable law. In addition, the planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing on such matters. The public hearing shall be noticed in a newspaper of general circulation in the town a minimum of five days prior to the hearing. 
(b)  A petition to designate a zoning classification or rezone any land within the town may be filed by the town or by the owner or authorized agent of the owner of property within the town. After the director has determined that a petition has been properly filed and is complete with all required supporting materials, the planning and zoning board shall set a date for a public hearing on the petition. The public hearing shall take place within 60 days of the determination by the director that a petition has been properly filed and is complete. All requirements of F.S. ch. 166 shall be followed in providing notice for a public hearing on such petition. 
(c)  In addition to any statutory notice requirements applicable to a petition to designate a zoning classification or to rezone any property within the town, the town shall, as a courtesy, notify all property owners within 300 feet of the property subject to such a petition. The courtesy notices required by this section shall be sent by mail or provided by hand delivery. In addition to the courtesy notices described herein, the town shall require the property owner to post the notice on the property subject to a petition for rezoning. The notice shall be approved by the director and shall state: 
(1)  The proposed zoning district; 
(2)  The hearing dates when the petition is scheduled to be heard by the town planning and zoning board and by the town council, which date shall be at least 15 days after the date the notice is mailed and posted on the property; and 
(3)  That a copy of the rezoning petition is on file for inspection in the town planning and zoning department. 
Except as otherwise required by F.S. ch. 166, failure of the town to provide either courtesy notices or to post a rezoning notice on the subject property shall not invalidate any action taken by the town on a petition. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 13.10, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 341, 8-17-1988; Ord. No. 365, 5-17-1989; Ord. No. 408, 4-17-1991) 
Sec. 34-139. - Public hearing-Before planning and zoning board; action following hearing. 
(a)  At the public hearing described in section 34-138, the petitioner may appear in person, or by appropriately designated agent or attorney. If the petitioner requests a postponement and a new notice is required, the petitioner shall pay the costs of such new notice. 
(b)  Following the public hearing, the planning and zoning board shall, by motion, adopt its recommendations, which may include changes from the original proposal as a result of the hearing, and transmit such recommendations to the town council. The planning and zoning board's failure to adopt recommendations by motion shall be treated as no recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 13.30, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-140. - Same-Before the town council; public notice. 
    The town council shall set a date for its public hearing, which shall not be more than 90 days from the date the planning and zoning board considered the request. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 13.40, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-141. - Same-Petitioner representation; postponement; action following hearing. 
(a)  At the public hearing described in section 34-140, the petitioner may appear in person, or by appropriately designated agent or attorney. If the petitioner requests a postponement and a new notice is required, the petitioner shall pay the costs of such new notice. 
(b)  Following the public hearing, the town council may grant the petition, deny the petition, or grant the petition with conditions or modifications; provided, however, that: 
(1)  No land shall be rezoned that was not described in the public notice; and 
(2)  No land may be rezoned to a less restrictive use or different classification than that described in the public notice. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 13.50, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-142. - Limitations. 
(a)  The planning and zoning board shall not recommend, nor the town council pass, any amendment except on substantial proof that it is in accordance with the comprehensive plan and sound zoning practice, and will serve to promote the purposes of zoning as provided by state law. Criteria which follow principles of sound zoning practice include but are not limited to: 
(1)  If the proposed change is consistent with the established land use pattern; 
(2)  If the proposed change would create a related district to adjacent and nearby districts; 
(3)  If the proposed change would naturally alter the population density pattern and thereby reasonably maintain, or concurrently increase the availability of public facilities such as utilities, streets, etc.; 
(4)  If the proposed change would be consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
(5)  If changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed amendment necessary; 
(6)  If the proposed change will maintain or positively influence living conditions in the neighborhood; 
(7)  If the proposed change will maintain or improve traffic conditions, or otherwise address traffic-related public safety issues; 
(8)  If the proposed change will maintain or improve drainage conditions; 
(9)  If the proposed change will relatively maintain, or allow for appropriate light and air conditions to adjacent areas; 
(10)  If the proposed change will maintain or improve property values in the adjacent area; 
(11)  If the proposed change will promote the improvement of development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations; 
(12)  If the proposed change benefits the public welfare as opposed to resulting in a grant of special privilege to an individual owner; 
(13)  If there are substantial reasons why the property requires a change from existing zoning; 
(14)  Whether the change suggested is to scale, or appropriately balanced with the needs of the neighborhood or the town; 
(15)  After using reasonable diligence, the petitioner can demonstrate there is a reasonable lack of alternative sites available in the town for the proposed use. 
(b)  No amendment to rezone property shall contain conditions, limitations, or requirements not applicable to all other property in the district to which the particular property is rezoned. 
(c)  Except where the proposal for the rezoning of property involves an extension of an existing use boundary, no change in the zoning classification of land shall be considered which involves less than 40,000 square feet of area and 200 feet of street frontage unless otherwise provided for herein. 
(d)  If the recommendation of the planning and zoning board is adverse to any proposed change, such change shall not become effective except by the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire membership of the town council. 
(e)  Whenever the town council has changed the zoning classification of property, the town council shall not then accept or consider a petition for rezoning of all or any part of the same property for a period of one year from the effective date of the amendment changing the zoning classification. 
(f)  Whenever the town council has denied a petition for rezoning of property, the town council shall not thereafter: 
(1)  Accept or consider any further petition for substantially the same rezoning of all or part of the same property for a period of 18 months from the date of such denial; or 
(2)  Accept or consider any petition for any other kind of rezoning on all or any part of the same property for a period of one year from the date of such action. 
(g)  Nothing contained in subsection (c), (e) or (f) of this section shall prevent the initiation of amendments by the town, provided that such amendments meet the remaining requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 13.60, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 694 , § 2, 5-24-2017) 
Secs. 34-143-34-167. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 34-168. - Imposed. 
    It is hereby found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health and safety require the establishment of police and general administrative services impact fees for new construction within the town. The construction of publicly owned governmental buildings or facilities shall be exempt from such impact fees. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 14.00, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 398, 9-17-1990; Ord. No. 452, 11-8-1995) 
Sec. 34-169. - Police services. 
(a)  Residential property. All owners of residential property within the town shall, prior to the issuance of a building permit, pay to the town the sum of $32.32 per dwelling unit for new construction as a police services impact fee. 
(b)  Nonresidential property. All owners of nonresidential property within the town, including, but not limited to, hotels, motels, and commercial buildings, shall, prior to the issuance of a building permit, pay to the town the sum of $0.0824 per square foot for new construction as a police services impact fee. 
(c)  Expenditure of funds. All funds collected hereunder shall be deposited into an interest-bearing account to be known as the police services fund, with all interest to accrue to the benefit of the town. Funds deposited therein shall be expended only for the purposes of the improvement and expansion of police services and the acquisition of related equipment within the town. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 14.19, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 345, 10-19-1988) 
Sec. 34-170. - General administrative services. 
(a)  Residential property. All owners of residential property within the town shall, prior to the issuance of building permit, pay to the town the sum of $298.35 per dwelling unit for new construction as a general administrative services impact fee. 
(b)  Nonresidential property. All owners of nonresidential property within the town, including, but not limited to, hotels, motels, and commercial buildings, shall, prior to the issuance of a building permit, pay to the town the sum of $0.5134 per square foot for new construction as a general administrative services impact fee. 
(c)  Expenditure of funds. All funds collected hereunder shall be deposited into an interest-bearing account to be known as the general administrative services fund with all interest to accrue to the benefit of the town. Funds deposited therein shall be expended only for the purposes of the improvement and expansion of government services, park and recreation services, maintenance services, code enforcement services and general administrative services and the acquisition of related equipment within the town. 
(d)  Credits or waivers. The town council may provide the owner of residential or nonresidential property with a credit or a waiver as to said administrative services impact fee for on-site or recreational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 14.20, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 345, 10-19-1988) 
Sec. 34-171. - Automatic adjustment. 
    The impact fees assessed hereunder shall adjust on January 1 of each year beginning January 1, 1997, by a percentage equal to the percentage change in the Engineering News-Record Construction Cost Index over the 12-month period ending November 30 of the previous year. The adjustment shall occur automatically, without any action required by the town council. In the event the Engineering News-Record Construction Cost Index is no longer published, the town council may, by resolution, substitute an index they determine to be comparable to the Engineering News-Record Construction Cost Index, and such index shall thereupon be the basis for all future adjustments to the impact fees assessed herein. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 14.21, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-172. - Imposition of increases. 
(a)  There are hereby assessed the impact fees stated herein on all development issued a building permit for which a complete application was made on or after January 1, 1996. For those land uses which do not require a building permit, the impact fees stated herein are hereby assessed on the final development order approved for which a complete application was made on or after January 1, 1996. 
(b)  For applications which are pending on January 1, 1996, or January 1 of any subsequent year, the building permit must be issued within 30 days of the date the application is approved for issuance of the building permit; and the construction must proceed in good faith or the impact fees stated herein, or as may be automatically adjusted, will be assessed. It is the responsibility of the applicant for the building permit to ensure the permit is issued once the application is approved for issuance. For the purpose of this section, construction shall be presumed to be proceeding in good faith if an inspection is scheduled on completed work prior to 180 days following the issuance of the building permit or the previous approved inspection, as the case may be. For the purpose of this section, the application shall be considered to have been approved for issuance of the building permit when the building official has completed review of the application and the plans and specifications, determined that the Florida Building Code, as amended, is met, and is prepared to issue the building permit upon payment of all fees. 
(c)  There are hereby assessed impact fees stated herein, or as may be automatically adjusted, on all development for which the building permit application was made prior to June 1, 1995, or June 1 of any subsequent year, and for which the building permit expired, lapsed, or was abandoned or canceled, and then renewed on or after January 1, 1996, or January 1 of any subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 14.22, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-173. - Encumbrance; expenditure; refund. 
(a)  Funds collected hereunder shall be encumbered within six years of the date of payment and spent within nine years of the date of payment or refund shall be made provided the requirements of subsection (b) of this section are met. 
(b)  The then-present owner must petition the town for the refund within one year following the end of the sixth or ninth year, as the case may be, from the date on which the impact fee was paid. The petition must contain the following: 
(1)  A notarized statement that the petitioner is the current fee simple owner of the property and is entitled to the refund, and the basis for the refund; 
(2)  A copy of the dated receipt issued for payment of the impact fees; or other proof of the date and amount of payment of the fees for the development; 
(3)  A certified copy of the latest recorded deed; and 
(4)  A copy of the most recent ad valorem tax bill. 
(c)  Within three months from the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the town shall advise the petitioner of the status of the fee requested for refund. For the purpose of this section, fees collected shall be deemed to be encumbered and spent on the basis of the first fee in shall be the first fee out. In other words, the first money placed in the impact fee fund account shall be deemed to be the first money taken out of that account when withdrawals have been made. 
(d)  When the money requested is still in the trust fund after the petition has been made and has not been encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following six years from the date the fees were paid or has not been spent by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following nine years from the date the fees were paid, the money shall be returned with interest accrued at the rate of six percent per annum. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 14.23, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-174. - Appeal from provisions. 
    Any appeal from the application of the town's impact fee provisions shall be made in writing to the town manager within 30 days of the decision or action complained of. An adverse decision by the town manager may be appealed to the town council by filing a written appeal with the town manager stating the basis for such relief within ten days of the town manager's decision. The town council shall not modify or reject the town manager's decision if it is supported by competent substantial evidence. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 14.24, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-175. - Periodic review. 
    As often as the town council may deem necessary, but in any event at least every five years, the terms and provisions of this division shall be reviewed. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 14.25, 8-8-1979) 
Secs. 34-176-34-203. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - APPLICATION FEES 

Sec. 34-204. - Imposed. 
    Any party submitting an application pursuant to this chapter shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, plus any additional costs as specified in section 34-205. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 15.00, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 344, 10-19-1988) 
Sec. 34-205. - Set by resolution. 
    The town manager shall provide to the town council an application fee schedule to be adopted by resolution, which shall be amended from time to time to meet the impact of the cost of such application procedures for the town. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 15.01, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 344, 10-19-1988) 
Sec. 34-206. - Reduction or waiver. 
    The town manager shall have the discretion to reduce or waive said application fees when deemed to be in the best interest of the town. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 15.02, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 344, 10-19-1988) 
Secs. 34-207-34-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ZONING RELIEF PROCEDURE 

Sec. 34-210. - Zoning relief procedure. 
(a)  Purpose and applicability. In order to address possible or alleged violations of federal and state laws, subsequent to implementation of Chapter 34, "Zoning," of the Code of Ordinances or its related rules, policies, and procedures in advance of costly litigation, zoning relief may be granted pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Application. A person or entity shall request relief under this section prior to filing a lawsuit, by completing a zoning relief request form, which is available from the town's planning and zoning department. The form shall contain such questions and requests for information as are necessary for evaluating the relief requested. 
(c)  Notice. The town shall display a notice of the request for zoning relief on the town's public notice bulletin board and shall maintain copies available for review in the planning and zoning department and the town clerk's office. The notice shall advise the public that a request for zoning relief under federal or state law is pending. The location, date and time of the applicable public hearing shall be included in the notice. A notification containing this information shall also be mailed by the town clerk at least 15 days prior to the public hearing to the property owners of record, their tenants or their agents, within a radius of 300 feet of the property described in the request, if the request is site-specific. 
(d)  Application and hearing. A hearing officer appointed by the town in accordance with subsection (k) of this section shall have the authority to consider and act on requests for zoning relief submitted to the planning and zoning department. A public hearing shall be held by the hearing officer on the request for relief within 45 days of receipt of a completed application, unless the applicant agrees in writing to extension of the hearing date. A final written determination shall be issued by the hearing officer no later than 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing. The final written determination may: (i) grant the relief requested, (ii) grant a portion of the request and deny a portion of the request, or impose conditions upon the grant of the request, or (iii) deny the request. Any determination shall be final, in writing, and shall state the reasons for the decision. The final written determination shall be provided to the town and sent to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(e)  Additional information. If necessary, prior to the public hearing, the town may request additional information from the applicant, specifying in sufficient detail what information is required. In the event a request for additional information is made to the applicant by the town, the 45 day time period to hold a public hearing shall be extended to 90 days to include the time necessary to seek and review the additional information. The applicant shall have 15 days after the date the information is requested to provide the additional information. If the applicant fails to timely respond with the requested additional information, the town shall notify the applicant and proceed with scheduling a public hearing; however, the applicant and the town may extend the time period for conducting the hearing by mutual agreement. The hearing officer will issue a final written determination regarding the relief requested as required in subsection (d) of this section, based on the information in the town's possession at the time of the public hearing. 
(f)  Criteria. In determining whether the zoning relief request shall be granted or denied, the applicant shall be required to establish: 
(1)  The applicant is a potential claimant under federal or state law, including applicable legal precedent; and 
(2)  The applicant believes in good faith that the town, through implementation of its Code, has intentionally or unintentionally violated federal or state law, for the reasons stated in the zoning relief request; and 
(3)  The applicant satisfies the standard for relief set forth in the applicable federal or state statute(s) or legal precedent. 
(g)  Exhaustion required. Completion of the zoning relief procedures shall be a supplement to and not a substitute for any other pre-litigation dispute resolution processes available by law to the town or the applicant. Completion of the zoning relief procedures shall constitute the exhaustion of all administrative remedies available from the town. 
(h)  Effect while pending. While an application for zoning relief or appeal of a determination of same is pending before the town, the town will not enforce the Code, rules, policies, and procedures which are the subject of the request against the applicant, except that the town may seek relief through the code enforcement procedures of Article VI "Code Enforcement" of Chapter 2 "Administration" or through injunctive relief if an imminent threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public is present. 
(i)  Appeals. The applicant or the town manager may appeal the decision of the hearing officer on a request for zoning relief to the town council in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The denial or other disputed determination of a request for zoning relief pursuant to this section may be appealed to the town council by filing a notice of appeal, on a form provided by the town manager, within 30 days of the date of the issuance of the final written determination by the hearing officer in accordance with subsection (d). 
(2)  After receipt of the notice of appeal, the appeal will be placed on a town council agenda for a hearing within 60 days, with public notice provided as required by subsection (c). At the hearing, the applicant and the town may present evidence and testimony relating to the issues appealed, and the standard of review for such appeal shall be de novo. 
(3)  At the hearing, the town council shall grant the appeal, deny the appeal or grant the appeal subject to conditions. 
(j)  Additional provisions for zoning relief. The following provisions shall be applicable: 
(1)  The town shall display a notice in its public notice bulletin board and on its website advising the public of this zoning relief procedure and that applications for zoning relief may be obtained from the planning and zoning department. 
(2)  An applicant may apply for zoning relief on his or her own behalf, or may be represented at all stages by a representative designated by the applicant. 
(3)  The town shall provide such assistance and accommodation as is required pursuant to federal and state law, in connection with a disabled person's request for zoning relief, including, without limitation, assistance with reading application questions, responding to questions, completing the form, filing an appeal, and appearing at a hearing, etc., to ensure that the process is accessible. 
(k)  Hearing officer. The town manager shall appoint one or more hearing officers for a three-year term. A hearing officer shall be: (1) a retired judge who has served in either the circuit court or a higher Florida court or as a federal district judge or circuit federal judge, or (2) a retired hearing officer of the State of Florida; or (3) a practicing member of the Florida Bar with at least five years of experience in the field of land use. A hearing officer shall not reside or own property within or otherwise be employed by the town. If more than one hearing officer is appointed, each hearing officer shall be assigned to particular applications on a rotating basis. The town manager shall notify each hearing officer of each such rotating assignment. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 3, 5-28-2014) 
Secs. 34-211-34-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-236. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The town is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the official zoning map which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(b)  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the town clerk, and bearing the seal of the town under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in section 1 of Ordinance No. 207 of the town together with the date of the adoption of this ordinance." 
(c)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and F.S. ch. 163, part II, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the town council with an entry on the official zoning map as follows: "On (date), by official action of the town council, the following (change) (changes) were made in the official zoning map," which entry shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the town clerk. No amendment to this chapter which involves matters portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map. No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person shall be considered a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided under section 34-34. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map shall be located in a secure place under the jurisdiction of the town clerk and shall be the final authority. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 3.10, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-237. - Replacement of official zoning map. 
(a)  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the town council may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the town clerk, and bearing the seal of the town under the following words: "This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted August 8, 1979, as part of Ordinance No. 207 of the Town of Juno Beach, Florida." 
(b)  Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 3.11, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-238. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, shall be construed to follow such centerlines; 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines; 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following town limits shall be construed as following such town limits; 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, or ocean mean high-water line, or intracoastal right-of-way line and, in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; except where such moving would change the zoning status of a lot or parcel; and in such case the boundary shall be interpreted in such a manner as to avoid changing the zoning status of any lot or parcel; 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines and to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the town, unless otherwise indicated; 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1)-(5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the legal description of the property; 
(7)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1)-(6) of this section, the board of adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries; 
(8)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was a single ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the town council may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 3.20, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 689 , § 5, 1-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-239. - Application of regulations. 
    Except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  No building shall be erected, added on to, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used which does not comply with all the district regulations established by this chapter for the district in which the building or land is located. 
(2)  The minimum yards and other open spaces, including the intensity of use provisions contained in this chapter for each building erected, added on to, reconstructed or structurally altered subsequent to the enactment of this chapter shall not be encroached upon or considered as a compliance with yard or open space requirements or intensity of use requirements for any other building or adjoining building. 
(3)  Every building erected, added on to, reconstructed or structurally altered subsequent to the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be located on a lot fronting on a street. 
(Ord. No. 207, §§ 3.30-3.33, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-240. - Unity of title declaration. 
    Where it is found necessary in order to obtain a building site of sufficient size and dimension to meet the minimum yard requirements, setback distances or plot area applicable thereto, that separate lots, plots, parcels or portions thereof must be combined, added or joined to the whole or portion of any other recorded lot, parcel, or acreage, the applicant for such building permit shall first place on record as public document in the official records of the clerk of the circuit court of the county an instrument hereinafter referred to as a unity of title declaration. Such unity of title declaration shall be in a form and content sufficient to unequivocally state that the aforesaid combination of separate lots, plots, parcels, acreage, or portions thereof, shall be regarded as unified under one title as an indivisible building site. The unity of title declaration will further state that the said property shall henceforth be considered as one plot or parcel of land and that no portion thereof shall be sold, assigned, transferred, conveyed or devised separately, and that any sale shall be in its entirety as one plot or parcel of land. The declaration shall further state that the declarer agrees that the unity of title declaration shall constitute a covenant to run with the land and further state that it shall be binding upon the declarer, his heirs, successors and assigns and all parties claiming under the declarer, until such time as the unity of title declaration may be released in writing under the order of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 3.34.1, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-241. - Unity of control covenant. 
    In lieu of the unity of title declaration provided for in section 34-240, the applicant may execute and record a unity of control covenant, which shall be a covenant stipulating that lots, plots, parcels or portions thereof shall be developed according to a single site plan or master plan providing unified control. Such covenant shall be executed by all property owners and shall otherwise be subject to the same requirements and conditions as a unity of title declaration. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 3.34.2, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-242. - Interpretation of use restrictions. 
    When uncertainty exists concerning the allowance of a specific use in a specific zoning district, the following procedure shall be used to determine its appropriateness: 
(1)  If the use is specifically listed as permitted in any zoning district, then it is interpreted to be prohibited in any district in which it is not listed. 
(2)  If the specific use is not listed in any zoning district, the director shall make a determination whether similar uses are listed within certain districts and whether this use would likewise be appropriate to these districts. The director shall consider the intent and purpose of the district in making this determination. The director's decision may be appealed to the board of zoning adjustment. 
(3)  In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between different provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 3.35, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-243. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
    For the purpose of protecting, promoting and improving the public health, safety and the general welfare of the people, the town hereby establishes the following districts: 
District 
Abbreviation Zoning District Applicable Code Division RS Residential Single-Family Article III, division 2 RM-1 Residential Multiple-Family-Medium Density Article III, division 3 RM-2 Residential Multiple-Family-Moderate Density Article III, division 4 RMT Residential Transient and Multiple-Family-Moderate Density Article III, division 5 RH Residential Multiple-Family-High-Density Article III, division 6 RM-OO Residential Multiple-Family-Moderate Density-Open Space Option Article III, division 7 HIST-S Saturn Lane Historic Preservation District Article III, division 8 HIST-Z Zephyr Way Historic Preservation District Article III, division 9 HIST-B Beachbound Historic Preservation District Article III, division 10 R-DUP Residential Duplex (Two-Family) Article III, division 11 RV PARK Recreational Vehicle Park Article III, division 12 MH Manufactured Home Community Article III, division 13 CG Commercial General Article III, division 14 CO Commercial Office Article III, division 15 BCH Beach Article III, division 16 REC-PUB Public Recreation Article III, division 17 REC-PRIV Private Recreation Article III, division 18 UTL Utilities Article III, division 19 GOV Government Article III, division 20 INS Institutional Article III, division 21 MC Medical Commercial Zoning District Article III, division 22  
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.00, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014; Ord. No. 689 , § 5, 1-25-2017) 
Secs. 34-244-34-263. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY (RS-1, -2, -3, -4, -5) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-264. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the RS residential single-family districts is to provide for areas of the town which shall be exclusively used for single-family detached homes, and, further, that all the amenities and quality of life normally associated with single-family use are protected and enhanced in these districts. Further purposes of these districts include preserving the character of the existing neighborhoods and the enhancement of property values. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.11, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 466, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-265. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the RS residential single-family districts are: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Group homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(3)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.12, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 466, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-266. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the RS residential single-family districts are: 
(1)  Private nurseries and greenhouses. 
(2)  Private garages. 
(3)  Private swimming pools. 
(4)  Other accessory uses customarily incident to permitted or approved special exception uses, not involving the conduct of business. 
(5)  Limited home occupations (see article IV, division 10 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.13, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 393, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 466, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-267. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the RS residential single-family districts are: 
(1)  Public and private utility structures. 
(2)  Churches, synagogues, and other houses of worship. 
(3)  Planned unit development-residential only (single-family detached). (See article V of this chapter.) 
(4)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.14, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 466, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-268. - Site plan review requirements. 
    A site plan review is required of all uses other than individual single-family detached dwellings, which shall be subject to review only by the town planning and zoning department. 
RS-1 
Sea View Ridge 
(Apollo Dr.) 
(Diana Ln.) 
Ocean View Ridge 
(Sunset Way) 
(Starlight Ln.) 
(Sunrise Way) 
(Olympus Dr. & South And East) 
Tomkus Subdivision 
(N. & S. Lyra Cir.) RS-2 
First Addition 
(N. & S. Juno Ln.) 
(Jupiter Ln.) 
(Zenith Ln.) RS-3 
Malbo Subdivision 
(Mars Way) RS-4 
Juno Heights 
(Neptune Rd.) RS-5 
New Palm Beach Height 
(Cocoanut Ave.) Minimum lot area 10,000 sq. ft. 8,000 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft. 5,500 sq. ft. 6,500 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 75 ft. 75 ft. 75 ft. 75 ft. 65 ft. Minimum lot depth 100 ft. 90 ft. 80 ft. 90 ft. 100 ft. Maximum density 4 units/acre 4 units/acre 5 units/acre 5 units/acre 5 units/acre Minimum front setback 25 ft. (A), (B), (C) 15 ft. (A), (B), (C) 20 ft. (A), (B), (C) 20 ft. (A), (B), (C) 25 ft. (A), (C) Minimum side setback 10 ft. (A) 15 ft. total, 5 ft. per side (A) 15 ft. total, 5 ft. per side (A) 15 ft. total, 5 ft. per side (A) 7.5 ft. (A) Minimum rear setback 10 ft. (B) 10 ft. (B) 10 ft. (B) 10 ft. (B) 12 ft. Maximum height 2 stories, 30 ft. (D) 2 stories, 30 ft. (D) 2 stories, 30 ft. (D) 2 stories, 30 ft. (D) 2 stories, 30 ft. (D) Maximum tower height None, but must be in proportion with rest of building None, but must be in proportion with rest of building None, but must be in proportion with rest of building None, but must be in proportion with rest of building None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Maximum tower area 225 sq. ft. 225 sq. ft. 225 sq. ft. 225 sq. ft. 225 sq. ft. Maximum coverage 35% 35% 35% 35% 35% Minimum ocean setback 50 ft. west of CCCL 50 ft. west of CCCL 50 ft. west of CCCL 50 ft. west of CCCL 50 ft. west of CCCL Minimum living area (habitable space)  1-bedroom 1,000 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft.  2-bedroom 1,200 sq. ft. 1,200 sq. ft. 1,200 sq. ft. 1,200 sq. ft. 1,200 sq. ft.  3-bedroom 1,400 sq. ft. 1,400 sq. ft. 1,400 sq. ft. 1,400 sq. ft. 1,400 sq. ft. Maximum building dimension 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. Minimum landscaping requirement 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% Minimum parking requirements 2 spaces/unit (C) 2 spaces/unit (C) 2 spaces/unit (C) 2 spaces/unit (C) 2 spaces/unit (C) Loading N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High-rise setback N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Minimum accessory structure setback 5 ft. (E) 5 ft. (E) 5 ft. (E) 5 ft. (E) 5 ft. (E) Accessory structure maximum height 12 ft.* 12 ft.* 12 ft.* 12 ft.* 12 ft.** Accessory structure maximum building dimension 12 ft.** (F) 12 ft.** (F) 12 ft.** (F) 12 ft.** (F) 12 ft.** (F)  
NOTES: 
* Screened pool enclosures are included. 
** Screened pool enclosures are excluded. 
(A) Corner lots: section 34-899 is modified for the RS districts as follows: One street side: minimum 20-foot setback *** ; Other street side: min. required front yard setback (see table above). 
*** In the RS-2 district (first addition subdivision): A minimum 15-foot setback shall be required on both street sides when such corner lot abuts Zenith Lane. 
*** Yard facing U.S. Highway 1 and/or Ocean Drive shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet. 
*** In the RS-5 district: a minimum 15 foot setback. 
(B) Through lots: section 34-900 is modified for the RS districts as follows: Those through lots which have frontage on both U.S. Highway 1 and a local residential street shall have the principal building setback the required front yard setback on both frontages. However, accessory structures in yards facing U.S. Highway 1 may be set back according to the accessory structure setback requirements for a side and rear yard. Those lots in the RS-2 district (first addition subdivision) which front on both North Juno Lane and Diana Lane shall have the front yard setback requirement apply to the North Juno Lane frontage, while the frontage facing Diana Lane shall be treated and regulated as a rear yard. 
(C) A minimum 19-foot-long driveway or parking area is required in front of a garage or carport for stacking depth. 
(D) Building height is the vertical distance measured from finished grade to the highest exterior point of the building roof, exclusive of chimneys, aerials, and other similar appurtenances. See Finished Grade. 
(E) If accessory structure is in the front yard, the front yard setback shall apply. However, see note (B) for exception. 
(F) If accessory structure is set back a minimum of ten feet from the side or rear property line, then section 34-873 shall apply and there shall be no maximum building dimension requirement. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.15, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 371, 7-19-1989; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 466, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 689 , § 6, 1-25-2017) 
Secs. 34-269-34-284. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE-FAMILY-MEDIUM DENSITY (RM-1) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-285. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the RM-1 residential multiple-family-medium density district is to maintain a generally spacious residential environment, while permitting a desirable variety of housing types. Population density and building heights are low enough to be compatible with neighboring single-family development. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.21, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995) 
Sec. 34-286. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the RM-1 residential multiple-family-medium density district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Three-family dwellings. 
(4)  Four-family dwellings. 
(5)  Clustered single-family dwellings (townhouses). 
(6)  Group homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(7)  Community residential homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(8)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.22, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995) 
Sec. 34-287. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the RM-1 residential multiple-family-medium density district are as follows: 
(1)  Private nurseries and greenhouses. 
(2)  Private garages. 
(3)  Private swimming pools and/or cabanas. 
(4)  Other accessory uses customarily incident to permitted or approved special exception uses, not involving the conduct of business. 
(5)  Limited home occupations. (see article IV, division 10 of this chapter) 
(6)  Accessory apartments. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.23, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 393, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995) 
Sec. 34-288. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the RM-1 residential multiple-family-medium density district are as follows: 
(1)  Planned development district-residential (see article V of this chapter). 
(2)  Public and private utility structures. 
(3)  Public or private academic schools. 
(4)  Churches, synagogues and other houses of worship. 
(5)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.24, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995) 
Sec. 34-289. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required of all uses other than individual single-family detached dwellings, which shall be subject to review only by the town planning and zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.25, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 371, 7-19-1989; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995) 
Sec. 34-290. - Building site area regulations. 
    The following building site area regulations shall apply to the RM-1 residential multiple-family-medium density district: 
(1)  Minimum total area: 
Single-family detached 10,000 sq. ft. Two-family 10,000 sq. ft. Townhouse, cluster 20,000 sq. ft. Multiple-family 20,000 sq. ft.  
(2)  Minimum lot width: 
Single-family detached 75 ft. total Two-family 75 ft. total Townhouse, cluster 100 ft. total Multiple-family 100 ft. total  
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 
Single-family detached 100 ft. total Two-family 100 ft. total Townhouse, cluster 150 ft. total Multiple-family 150 ft. total  
(4)  Density:* 
Single-family detached 4 dwelling units/gross acre Two-family 8 dwelling units/gross acre Townhouse 8 dwelling units/gross acre Multiple-family 8 dwelling units/gross acre  
(5)  Front yard setback:** 
Single-family detached 30 ft. from the street line***** Two-family 30 ft. from the street line***** Townhouse, cluster 30 ft. from the street line Multiple-family 30 ft. from the street line  
(6)  Side yard setback:*** 
Single-family detached 10 ft. per side Two-family 10 ft. per side Townhouse, single unit 0 ft. per side Townhouse, cluster 35 ft. total with one side having a minimum of 15 ft. Multiple-family 35 ft. total with one side having a minimum of 15 ft.  
(7)  Rear yard setback:**** 
Single-family detached 10 ft. Two-family 10 ft. Townhouse, single unit 0 ft. Multiple-family 20 ft.  
(8)  Ocean setback: 50 feet west of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL). 
(9)  High-rise setback: not applicable. 
(10)  Minimum floor space per dwelling unit: 
1-bedroom unit 1,000 sq. ft. habitable space 2-bedroom unit 1,200 sq. ft. habitable space 3- (or more) bedroom unit 1,400 sq. ft. habitable space  
(11)  Maximum building height: 
Single-family detached 2 stories not to exceed 30 ft. Two-family 2 stories not to exceed 30 ft. Townhouse 3 stories not to exceed 40 ft. Multiple-family 3 stories not to exceed 40 ft.  
(12)  Maximum building dimension: 150 feet for all types of permitted principal structures. This maximum dimension shall not include parking and attached accessory structures less than 25 feet in height. 
(13)  Distance between principal structures on same property. The minimum distance between principal structures on the same lot shall be 30 feet. 
(14)  Maximum lot coverage: 
Single-family detached 35% Two-family 35% Townhouse, cluster 40% Multiple-family 40%  
(15)  Minimum landscaped open space: 
Single-family detached 25% of lot area Two-family 20% of lot area Townhouse, single unit not applicable Townhouse, cluster 20% of lot area Multiple-family 20% of lot area  
(16)  Maximum tower height: 
Single-family detached None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Two-family None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Townhouse, single unit None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Townhouse, cluster None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Multiple-family None, but must be in proportion with rest of building  
(17)  Maximum tower area: 
Single-family detached 225 sq. ft. Two-family 225 sq. ft. Townhouse, single unit 225 sq. ft. Townhouse, cluster 225 sq. ft. Multiple-family 225 sq. ft.  
(18)  Minimum parking: See article IV, division 4 of this chapter. For multifamily developments: two spaces per dwelling unit for the first 20 units; 1.75 spaces for the next 21-50 dwelling units; and 1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit in excess of 50. Also, one guest space for every seven dwelling units. 
(19)  Loading: not applicable. 
*Except for a planned unit development (PUD), in which case the average density per gross acre may be increased as set forth in section 34-1333(b)(4). 
*Two additional dwelling units per gross acre may be permitted for up to every five acres that a minimum ten-foot-wide beach access easement is irrevocably dedicated for public use. (For example, if an eight-acre site provides two ten-foot-wide public beach access easements with the required improvements, then the project may be permitted an additional two dwelling units per gross acre for the total eight acres). The easement shall be located, constructed, and improved at a minimum with a paved walkway and a wooden dune walkover structure over the dune, covered and uncovered seating benches on the walkover, landscaping, irrigation, and lighting as determined by the town, and shall be at the expense of the property owner. 
**See also section 34-873. 
***See also section 34-899. 
****See also section 34-900. 
*****A 20-foot setback from the street line (R-O-W line) shall be permitted when a minimum 45-foot right-of-way is provided in front of the property. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.26, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 689 , § 7, 1-25-2017 
Secs. 34-291-34-308. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE-FAMILY-MODERATE DENSITY (RM-2) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-309. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the RM-2 residential multiple-family-moderate density district is to provide for a variety of housing types at a moderate population density which are compatible with neighboring housing areas of lower density. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.31, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-310. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the RM-2 residential multiple-family-moderate density district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(4)  Clustered single-family dwellings (townhouses). 
(5)  Group homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(6)  Community residential homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(7)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.32, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-311. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the RM-2 residential multiple-family-moderate density district are as follows: 
(1)  Private nurseries and greenhouses. 
(2)  Private garages. 
(3)  Private swimming pools and/or cabanas. 
(4)  Other accessory uses customarily incident to permitted or approved special exception uses, not involving the conduct of business. 
(5)  Limited home occupations (see article IV, division 10 of this chapter). 
(6)  Accessory apartments. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.33, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-312. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the RM-2 residential multiple-family-moderate density district are as follows: 
(1)  Planned unit development-residential (see article V of this chapter). 
(2)  Public and private utility structures. 
(3)  Public or private academic schools. 
(4)  Churches, synagogues and other houses of worship. 
(5)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.34, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-313. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required of all uses other than individual single-family detached dwellings, which shall be subject to review only by the town planning and zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.35, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 371, 7-19-1989; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-314. - Building site area regulations. 
    The following building site area regulations shall apply to the RM-2 residential multiple-family-medium density district: 
(1)  Minimum total area: 
Single-family detached 10,000 sq. ft. Two-family 10,000 sq. ft. Townhouse, cluster 20,000 sq. ft. Multiple-family 20,000 sq. ft.  
(2)  Minimum lot width: 
Single-family detached 75 ft. total Two-family 75 ft. total Townhouse, cluster 100 ft. total Multiple-family 100 ft. total  
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 
Single-family detached 100 ft. total Two-family 100 ft. total Townhouse, cluster 150 ft. total Multiple-family 150 ft. total  
(4)  Density:* 
Single-family detached 4 dwelling units/gross acre Two-family 8 dwelling units/gross acre Townhouse 12 dwelling units/gross acre Multiple-family 12 dwelling units/gross acre  
(5)  Front yard setback:** 
Single-family detached 30 ft. from the street line***** Two-family 30 ft. from the street line***** Townhouse, cluster 30 ft. from the street line Multiple-family 30 ft. from the street line  
(6)  Side yard setback:*** 
Single-family detached 10 ft. per side Two-family 10 ft. per side Townhouse, single unit 0 ft. per side Townhouse, cluster 35 ft. total with one side having a minimum of 15 ft. Multiple-family 35 ft. total with one side having a minimum of 15 ft.  
(7)  Rear yard setback:**** 
Single-family detached 10 ft. Two-family 10 ft. Townhouse, single unit 0 ft. Townhouse, cluster 30 ft. Multiple-family 30 ft.  
(8)  Ocean setback: 50 feet west of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL). 
(9)  High-rise setback: not applicable. 
(10)  Minimum floor space per dwelling unit: 
1-bedroom unit 1,000 sq. ft. habitable space 2-bedroom unit 1,200 sq. ft. habitable space 3- (or more) bedroom unit 1,400 sq. ft. habitable space  
(11)  Maximum building height: 
Single-family detached 2 stories not to exceed 30 ft. Two-family 2 stories not to exceed 30 ft. Townhouse 3 stories not to exceed 40 ft. Multiple-family 3 stories not to exceed 40 ft.  
a.  Upon request, the town may increase the maximum building height by up to one story and a maximum of ten feet in height where parking is provided under 75 percent of the building's floor area. The town shall consider the following criteria when making a decision to approve or deny an increase in building height: 
1.  The proportion, scale and massing of the proposed structure as it relates to the proportion, scale and massing of other structures within the zoning district and within neighboring areas; 
2.  The general character of the surrounding developed properties and established patterns of development; and 
3.  The physical characteristics of the subject property, including, but not limited to, the slope and elevation, as they relate to the physical characteristics of other properties within the zoning district and within neighboring areas. 
b.  The town's evaluation of such criteria shall not include matters related solely to design, style, architectural theme or other purely aesthetic issues. 
(12)  Maximum building dimension: 150 feet for all types of permitted principal structures. This maximum dimension shall not include parking and attached accessory structures less than 25 feet in height. 
(13)  Distance between principal structures on same property: The minimum distance between principal structures on the same lot shall be 30 feet. 
(14)  Maximum lot coverage: 
Single-family detached 35% Two-family 35% Multiple-family 50%  
(15)  Minimum landscaped open space: 
Single-family detached 20% of lot area Two-family 20% of lot area Townhouse, single unit not applicable Townhouse, cluster 15% of lot area Multiple-family 15% of lot area  
(16)  Maximum tower height: 
Single-family detached None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Two-family None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Townhouse, single unit None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Townhouse, cluster None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Multiple-family None, but must be in proportion with rest of building  
(17)  Maximum tower area: 
Single-family detached 225 sq. ft. Two-family 225 sq. ft. Townhouse, single unit 225 sq. ft. Townhouse, cluster 225 sq. ft. Multiple-family 225 sq. ft.  
(18)  Minimum parking: See article IV, division 4 of this chapter. For multifamily developments: two spaces per dwelling unit for the first 20 units; 1.75 spaces for the next 21-50 dwelling units; and 1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit in excess of 50. Also, one guest space for every seven dwelling units. 
(19)  Loading: see Section 34-985. 
*Except for a PUD, in which case the average density per gross acre may be increased as set forth in section 34-1333(b)(4). 
*Two additional dwelling units per gross acre may be permitted for up to every five acres that a minimum ten-foot-wide beach access easement is irrevocably dedicated for public use. (For example, if an eight-acre site provides two ten-foot-wide public beach access easements with the required improvements, then the project may be permitted an additional two dwelling units per gross acre for the total eight acres). The easement shall be located, constructed, and improved at a minimum with a paved walkway and a wooden dune walkover structure over the dune, covered and uncovered seating benches on the walkover, landscaping, irrigation, and lighting as determined by the town, and shall be at the expense of the property owner. 
**See also section 34-873. 
***See also section 34-899. 
****See also section 34-900. 
*****A 20-foot setback from the street line (R-O-W line) shall be permitted when a minimum 45-foot right-of-way is provided in front of the property. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.36, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997; Ord. No. 592, § 2(Exh. A), 5-24-2006; Ord. No. 689 , § 8, 1-25-2017) 
Secs. 34-315-34-331. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESIDENTIAL, TRANSIENT AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY-MODERATE DENSITY (RMT) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-332. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the RMT residential, transient and multiple-family-moderate density district is to provide for a variety of housing types at a moderate population density which are compatible with neighboring housing areas of lower density and which may include transient facilities. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.41, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-333. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the RMT residential, transient and multiple-family-moderate density district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(4)  Clustered single-family dwellings (townhouses). 
(5)  Group homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(6)  Community residential homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(7)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.42, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-334. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the RMT residential, transient and multiple-family-moderate density district are as follows: 
(1)  Private nurseries and greenhouses. 
(2)  Private garages. 
(3)  Swimming pools for tenants and guests. 
(4)  Limited home occupations (see article IV, division 10 of this chapter). 
(5)  Accessory apartments. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.43, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 393, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-335. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the RMT residential, transient and multiple-family-moderate density district are as follows: 
(1)  Planned unit development-residential (see article V of this chapter). 
(2)  Public and private utility structures. 
(3)  Public or private academic schools. 
(4)  Churches, synagogues and other houses of worship. 
(5)  Transient residential facilities. 
(6)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.44, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-336. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required of all uses other than individual single-family detached dwellings, which shall be subject to review only by the town planning and zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.45, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 371, 7-19-1989; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-337. - Building site area regulations. 
    The following building site area regulations shall apply to the RMT residential, transient and multiple-family-moderate density district: 
(1)  Minimum total area: 
Single-family detached 10,000 sq. ft. Two-family 10,000 sq. ft. Townhouse, cluster 20,000 sq. ft. Multiple-family 20,000 sq. ft. Transient facility 20,000 sq. ft.  
(2)  Minimum lot width: 
Single-family detached 75 ft. total Two-family 75 ft. total Multiple-family 100 ft. total Transient facility 100 ft. total  
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 
Single-family detached 100 ft. total Two-family 100 ft. total Townhouse, cluster 150 ft. total Multiple-family 150 ft. total Transient facility 150 ft. total  
(4)  Density:* 
Single-family detached 4 dwelling units/gross acre Two-family 8 dwelling units/gross acre Townhouse 12 dwelling units/gross acre Multiple-family 12 dwelling units/gross acre Transient facility 15 dwelling units/gross acre  
(5)  Front yard setback:** 
Single-family detached 30 ft. from the street line***** Two-family 30 ft. from the street line***** Townhouse, cluster 30 ft. from the street line Multiple-family 30 ft. from the street line Transient facility 30 ft. from the street line  
(6)  Side yard setback:*** 
Single-family detached 10 ft. per side Two-family 10 ft. per side Townhouse, single unit 0 ft. per side Townhouse, cluster 35 ft., with one side having a minimum of 15 ft. Multiple-family 35 ft. total with one side having a minimum of 15 ft. Transient facility 35 ft. with one side having a minimum of 15 ft.  
(7)  Rear yard setback:**** 
Single-family detached 10 ft. Two-family 10 ft. Townhouse, single unit 0 ft. Townhouse, cluster 30 ft. Multiple-family 30 ft. Transient facility 30 ft.  
(8)  Ocean setback: 50 feet west of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL). 
(9)  High-rise setback: not applicable. 
(10)  Minimum floor space per dwelling unit: 
One-bedroom unit 1,000 sq. ft. habitable space Two-bedroom unit 1,200 sq. ft. habitable space Three- (or more) bedroom unit 1,400 sq. ft. habitable space Transient facility occupancy unit 300 sq. ft. habitable space  
(11)  Maximum building height: 
Single-family detached 2 stories not to exceed 30 ft. Two-family 2 stories not to exceed 30 ft. Townhouse 3 stories not to exceed 40 ft. Multiple-family 3 stories not to exceed 40 ft. Transient facility 3 stories not to exceed 40 ft.  
a.  Upon request, the town may increase the maximum building height by up to one story and a maximum of ten feet in height where parking is provided under 75 percent of the building's floor area. The town shall consider the following criteria when making a decision to approve or deny an increase in building height: 
1.  The proportion, scale and massing of the proposed structure as it relates to the proportion, scale and massing of other structures within the zoning district and within neighboring areas; 
2.  The general character of the surrounding developed properties and established patterns of development; and 
3.  The physical characteristics of the subject property, including, but not limited to, the slope and elevation, as they relate to the physical characteristics of other properties within the zoning district and within neighboring areas. 
b.  The town's evaluation of such criteria shall not include matters related solely to design, style, architectural theme or other purely aesthetic issues. 
(12)  Maximum building dimension: 150 feet for all types of permitted principal structures. This maximum dimension shall not include parking and attached accessory structures less than 25 feet in height. 
(13)  Distance between principal structures on same property: The minimum distance between principal structures on the same lot shall be 30 feet. 
(14)  Maximum lot coverage: 
Single-family detached 35% Two-family 35% Townhouse, cluster 50% Multiple-family 50% Transient facility 50%  
(15)  Minimum landscaped open space: 
Single-family detached 20% of lot area Two-family 20% of lot area Townhouse, single unit Not applicable Townhouse, cluster 15% of lot area Multiple-family 15% of lot area Transient facility 15% of lot area  
(16)  Maximum tower height: 
Single-family detached None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Two-family None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Townhouse, single unit None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Townhouse, cluster None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Multiple-family None, but must be in proportion with rest of building  
(17)  Maximum tower area: 
Single-family detached 225 sq. ft. Two-family 225 sq. ft. Townhouse, single unit 225 sq. ft. Townhouse, cluster 225 sq. ft. Multiple-family 225 sq. ft.  
(18)  Minimum parking: See article IV, division 4 of this chapter. For multifamily developments: two spaces per dwelling unit for the first 20 units; 1.75 spaces for the next 21-50 dwelling units; and 1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit in excess of 50. Also, one guest space for every seven dwelling units. 
(19)  Loading: see Section 34-985. 
*Except for a PUD, in which case the average density per gross acre may be increased as set forth in section 34-1333(b)(4). 
*Two additional dwelling units per gross acre may be permitted for up to every five acres that a minimum ten-foot-wide beach access easement is irrevocably dedicated for public use. (For example, if an eight-acre site provides two ten-foot-wide public beach access easements with the required improvements, then the project may be permitted an additional two dwelling units per gross acre for the total eight acres). The easement shall be located, constructed, and improved at a minimum with a paved walkway and a wooden dune walkover structure over the dune, covered and uncovered seating benches on the walkover, landscaping, irrigation, and lighting as determined by the town, and shall be at the expense of the property owner. 
**See also section 34-873. 
***See also section 34-899. 
****See also section 34-900. 
*****A 20-foot setback from the street line (R-O-W line) shall be permitted when a minimum 45-foot right-of-way is provided in front of the property. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.46, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 592, § 2(Exh. A), 5-24-2006; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997; Ord. No. 689 , § 9, 1-25-2017) 
Secs. 34-338-34-362. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE-FAMILY-HIGH-DENSITY (RH) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-363. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the RH residential multiple-family-high-density district is to provide for a variety of dwelling types. Permitted population density falls in the lower range of what is generally considered high-density development. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.51, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997) 
Sec. 34-364. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the RH residential multiple-family-high-density district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(4)  Clustered single-family dwellings (townhouses). 
(5)  Churches, synagogues and other houses of worship. 
(6)  Group homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(7)  Community residential homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(8)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.52, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997) 
Sec. 34-365. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the RH residential multiple-family-high-density district are as follows: 
(1)  Private nurseries and greenhouses. 
(2)  Private garages. 
(3)  Private swimming pools and/or cabanas. 
(4)  Other accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted or approved special exception uses. 
(5)  Limited home occupations (see article IV, division 10 of this chapter). 
(6)  Accessory apartments. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.53, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 393, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997) 
Sec. 34-366. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the RH residential multiple-family-high-density district are as follows: 
(1)  Planned unit development-residential (see article V of this chapter). 
(2)  Public and private utility structures. 
(3)  Public or private academic schools. 
(4)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.54, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997) 
Sec. 34-367. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required of all uses other than individual single-family detached dwellings, which shall be subject to review only by the town planning and zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.55, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 371, 7-19-1989; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997) 
Sec. 34-368. - Building site area regulations. 
    The following building site area regulations shall apply to the RH residential multiple-family-high-density district: 
(1)  Minimum total area: 
Single-family detached 10,000 sq. ft. Two-family 10,000 sq. ft. Townhouse, cluster 20,000 sq. ft. Multiple-family 40,000 sq. ft.  
(2)  Minimum lot width: 
Single-family detached 75 ft. total Two-family 75 ft. total Townhouse, cluster 100 ft. total Multiple-family 150 ft. total  
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 
Single-family detached 100 ft. total Two-family 100 ft. total Townhouse, cluster 200 ft. total Multiple-family 200 ft. total  
(4)  Density:* 
Single-family detached 4 dwelling units/gross acre Two-family 8 dwelling units/gross acre Townhouse 18 dwelling units/gross acre Multiple-family 18 dwelling units/gross acre  
(5)  Front yard setback:** 
Single-family detached 30 ft. from the street line***** Two-family 30 ft. from the street line***** Townhouse, cluster 30 ft. from the street line Multiple-family 30 ft. from the street line  
(6)  Side yard setback:*** 
Single-family detached 10 ft. per side Two-family 10 ft. per side Townhouse, single unit 0 ft. per side Townhouse, cluster 35 ft., with one side having a minimum of 15 ft. Multiple-family 35 ft., with one side having a minimum of 15 ft.  
(7)  Rear yard setback:**** 
Single-family detached 10 ft. Two-family 10 ft. Townhouse, single unit 0 ft. Townhouse, cluster 30 ft. Multiple-family 30 ft.  
(8)  Ocean setback: 50 feet west of the Coastal Construction Control Line 
(9)  High-rise setback: for multiple-family, all buildings shall be set back so as to provide at least a 30-foot setback from all property lines. There shall be added an additional five feet of setback at ground level for each additional story beyond the first two stories. Such setbacks need not exceed 60 feet. For those lots having a width of 200 feet or less as recorded in the office of the county property appraiser at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, maximum setbacks need not exceed 50 feet. However, the maximum building dimension on such lots shall not exceed 150 feet. 
(10)  Minimum floor space per dwelling unit: 
One-bedroom unit 1,000 sq. ft. habitable space Two-bedroom unit 1,200 sq. ft. habitable space Three- (or more) bedroom unit 1,400 sq. ft. habitable space  
(11)  Maximum building height: 
Single-family detached 2 stories not to exceed 30 ft. Two-family 2 stories not to exceed 30 ft. Townhouse 3 stories not to exceed 40 ft. Multiple-family 12 stories not to exceed 130 ft. Accessory structure 12.5 ft.  
(12)  Maximum building dimension: the maximum dimension of any structure or group of attached structures shall not exceed 150 feet; provided, however, that along the building face having the maximum dimension, said dimension may be increased to not more than 175 feet. 
(13)  Distance between structures on same property: The minimum distance between principal structures on the same lot for single-family detached, two-family, and townhouse structures shall be 30 feet. For high-rise multiple-family the minimum distance between principal structures on the same lot shall be equal to the average building heights up to a maximum of 120 feet. For high-rise multiple-family: the minimum distance between a principal structure and an accessory structure shall be 30 feet and a minimum distance between accessory structures shall be 15 feet. 
(14)  Maximum lot coverage: 
Single-family detached 35% Two-family 35% Townhouse, cluster 50% Multiple-family 50%  
(15)  Minimum landscaped open space: 
Single-family detached 20% of lot area Two-family 20% of lot area Townhouse, single unit not applicable Townhouse, cluster 15% of lot area Multiple-family 15% of lot area  
(16)  Maximum tower height: 
Single-family detached None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Two-family None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Townhouse, single unit None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Townhouse, cluster None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Multiple-family None, but must be in proportion with rest of building  
(17)  Maximum tower area: 
Single-family detached 225 sq. ft. Two-family 225 sq. ft. Townhouse, single unit 225 sq. ft. Townhouse, cluster 225 sq. ft. Multiple-family 225 sq. ft.  
(18)  Minimum parking: See article IV, division 4 of this chapter. For multifamily developments: two spaces per dwelling unit for the first 20 units; 1.75 spaces for the next 21-50 dwelling units; and 1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit in excess of 50. Also, one guest space for every seven dwelling units. 
(19)  Loading: see Section 34-985. 
(20)  A1A vehicular access restrictions: Properties along State Road A1A from Loggerhead Park to the northern town limits shall not be allowed a motorized vehicular driveway connection onto State Road A1A. Provided, however, that this shall not prohibit an access used for emergency purposes only. 
*Except for a PUD, in which case the average density per gross acre may be increased as set forth in section 34-1333(b)(4). 
*Two additional dwelling units per gross acre may be permitted for up to every five acres that a minimum ten-foot-wide beach access easement is irrevocably dedicated for public use. (For example, if an eight-acre site provides two ten-foot-wide public beach access easements with the required improvements, then the project may be permitted an additional two dwelling units per gross acre for the total eight acres). The easement shall be located, constructed, and improved at a minimum with a paved walkway and a wooden dune walkover structure over the dune, covered and uncovered seating benches on the walkover, landscaping, irrigation, and lighting as determined by the town, and shall be at the expense of the property owner. 
**See also section 34-873. 
***See also section 34-899. 
****See also section 34-900. 
*****A 20-foot setback from the street line (R-O-W line) shall be permitted when a minimum 45-foot right-of-way is provided in front of the property. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.56, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 689 , § 10, 1-25-2017) 
Secs. 34-369-34-394. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE-FAMILY-MODERATE DENSITY OPEN SPACE OPTION (RM-OO) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-395. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the RM-OO residential multiple-family-moderate density open space option district is to provide for a variety of housing types at a moderate population density or to provide for a resort hotel and its attendant uses, either of which are compatible with the natural terrain and neighboring housing areas. This zoning district contains natural terrain in the form of a portion of the coastal ridge which represents an asset to the town's overall appearance. To maintain or increase this asset, it is also the purpose of this district to provide the option of increased open space and encourage the preservation or improvement of the natural terrain in exchange for a decrease in dwelling unit density and an increase in building height for single-building residential or resort hotel developments. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.141, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 224, 2-25-1981; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-396. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the RM-OO residential multiple-family-moderate density open space option district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(4)  Clustered single-family dwellings (townhouse). 
(5)  Group homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(6)  Community residential homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(7)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.142, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 224, 2-25-1981; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-397. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the RM-OO residential multiple-family-moderate density open space option district are as follows: 
(1)  Private nurseries and greenhouses. 
(2)  Private garages. 
(3)  Private swimming pools and/or cabanas. 
(4)  Other accessory uses customarily incident to permitted or approved special exception uses, not involving the conduct of business. 
(5)  Limited home occupations (see article IV, division 10 of this chapter). 
(6)  Accessory apartments. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.143, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 393, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 224, 2-25-1981; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-398. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the RM-OO residential multiple-family-moderate density open space option district are as follows: 
(1)  Planned unit development-residential. 
(2)  Public and private utility structures. 
(3)  Public or private academic schools. 
(4)  Churches, synagogues and other houses of worship. 
(5)  A single building in excess of three stories which reduces the overall density of dwelling units but increases the open space and preserves or enhances the natural terrain. An additional building in excess of three stories may be permitted for every four acres above a minimum of four acres. 
(6)  Resort hotel and attendant uses. Attendant uses shall not be permitted unless there is a resort hotel. A resort hotel structure may contain attendant uses, or the attendant uses may be located in a separate structure or structures or in combination with the resort hotel. 
(7)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.144, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 224, 2-25-1981; Ord. No. 295, 2-19-1986; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 478, 2-28-1996; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-399. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required of all uses other than individual single-family detached dwellings, which shall be subject to review only by the town planning and zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.145, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 224, 2-25-1981; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-400. - Building site area regulations. 
    The following building site area regulations shall apply to the RM-OO residential multiple-family-moderate density open space option district: 
(1)  Minimum total area: 
Single-family detached 10,000 sq. ft. Two-family 10,000 sq. ft. Townhouse, cluster 20,000 sq. ft. Multiple-family 20,000 sq. ft. Resort hotel and attendant uses 11.5 acres  
(2)  Minimum lot width: 
Single-family detached 75 ft. total Two-family 75 ft. total Townhouse, cluster 100 ft. total Multiple-family 100 ft. total Resort hotel and attendant uses 630 ft. (north/south dimension)  
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 
Single-family detached 100 ft. total Two-family 100 ft. total Townhouse, cluster 150 ft. total Multiple-family 150 ft. total Resort hotel and attendant uses 730 ft. (east/west dimension)  
(4)  Density:* 
Single-family detached 4 dwelling units/gross acre Two-family 8 dwelling units/gross acre Townhouse 12 dwelling units/gross acre Multiple-family 12 dwelling units/gross acre Resort hotel and attendant uses Maximum number of resort hotels in the RM-OO zoning district is 1; minimum number of guest units (rooms or suites) in the resort hotel is 200.  
(5)  Setbacks for special exception in section 34-398(5): the single building shall be set back so as to provide at least a 35-foot setback from all property lines. There shall be added an additional five feet of setback for each additional story beyond the first three stories. Such setbacks need not exceed 60 feet. 
(6)  Setback for special exception in section 34-398(6): 
a.  The resort hotel and all other structures must be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the south property line, 200 feet from the west property line, 50 feet west of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL), and 100 feet from the north property line. If a public promenade is incorporated into the site plan adjacent to the Ocean Drive right-of-way, the town council may grant approval to located the promenade, all or portions of the primary hotel structure and attendant uses structures within the 50-foot setback from the Coastal Construction Control Line in accordance with section 34-1123 and where not otherwise prohibited by law. Modification of the south, west and north minimum setbacks may be granted only by the town council. Prior to a decision by the town council, the following conditions shall be met: 
1.  Review and recommendations by the planning and zoning board; 
2.  A public hearing with due public notice as provided in F.S. ch. 163 for all zoning actions. 
b.  Setback modifications may be approved only if such modifications will not be detrimental to the natural characteristics of the site or to existing and potential adjacent land uses, and will contribute to a higher quality site plan than can be achieved with 76 required minimum setbacks. The town council shall consider the effects of such impacts as light, air, appearance, fire protection and security. 
(7)  Front yard setback:** 
Single-family detached 30 ft. from the street line***** Two-family 30 ft. from the street line***** Townhouse, cluster 30 ft. from the street line Multiple-family 30 ft. from the street line  
(8)  Side yard setback:*** 
Single-family detached 10 ft. per side Two-family 10 ft. per side Townhouse, single unit 0 ft. per side Townhouse, cluster 35 ft. total with one side having a minimum of 15 ft., a total of 20 ft.; any combination which totals 20 ft. (e.g., 10 ft. per side, or zero ft. on one side, 20 ft. on the other) Multiple-family 35 ft. total with one side having a minimum of 15 ft.  
(9)  Rear yard setback:**** 
Single-family detached 10 ft. Two-family 10 ft. Townhouse, single unit 0 ft. Townhouse, cluster 30 ft. Multiple-family 30 ft.  
(10)  Ocean setback: 50 feet west of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL). 
(11)  Minimum floor space per dwelling unit: 
One-bedroom unit 1,000 sq. ft. habitable space Two-bedroom unit 1,200 sq. ft. habitable space Three- (or more) bedroom unit 1,400 sq. ft. habitable space Resort hotel guest unit 325 sq. ft. habitable space  
(12)  Maximum building height:* 
Single-family detached 2 stories not to exceed 30 ft. Two-family 2 stories not to exceed 30 ft. Townhouse 3 stories not to exceed 40 ft. Multiple-family 3 stories not to exceed 40 ft. Resort hotel 12 stories not to exceed 130 ft. Building height is measured from the crown of Ocean Drive or the lowest point of the grade surrounding the finished building, whichever is lower Attendant structures to a resort hotel 2 stories not to exceed 25 ft., as measured above  
a.  Upon request, the town may increase the maximum building height by up to one story and a maximum of ten feet in height where parking is provided under 75 percent of the building's floor area. The town shall consider the following criteria when making a decision to approve or deny an increase in building height: 
1.  The proportion, scale and massing of the proposed structure as it relates to the proportion, scale and massing of other structures within the zoning district and within neighboring areas; 
2.  The general character of the surrounding developed properties and established patterns of development; and 
3.  The physical characteristics of the subject property, including, but not limited to, the slope and elevation, as they relate to the physical characteristics of other properties within the zoning district and within neighboring areas. 
b.  The town's evaluation of such criteria shall not include matters related solely to design, style, architectural theme or other purely aesthetic issues. 
*The datum used to determine the building height need not be the crown of the road. Instead, it may be the average elevation of the crest of the dune. This will be determined during the site plan review process. 
(13)  Maximum building dimension: 
a.  Resort hotel: 150 feet. Underground parking shall not have maximum dimension limitations but shall be subject to review and approval by the town council with respect to distance and appearance from the property lines. Underground parking may be shared by the resort hotel and attendant structures. The town council shall consider the effects of such impacts as light, air, appearance, fire protection and security. 
b.  All other uses: 150 feet for all types of permitted principal structures. This maximum dimension shall not include parking and attached accessory structures less than 25 feet in height. 
(14)  Distance between structures on same property: 
a.  For a resort hotel and attendant facilities, the minimum distance between structures shall be subject to review and approval by the town council, which shall consider the effects of such impacts as, light, air, appearance, fire protection and security. All other uses: the minimum distance between principal structures on the same lot shall be 30 feet. 
b.  For all other uses: a minimum 75-foot distance shall be provided between a structure greater than 50 feet in height and any other principal structure on the same property, and the minimum distance between principal structures on the same lot which are 50 feet in height or less shall be 30 feet. 
(15)  Maximum lot coverage: 
Single-family detached 35% Two-family 35% Multiple-family 50%  
(16)  Minimum landscaped open space: 
Single-family 20% of lot area Two-family 20% of lot area Townhouse, single unit Not applicable Townhouse, cluster 15% of lot area Multiple-family 15% of lot area  
(17)  Maximum tower height: 
Single-family detached None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Two-family None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Townhouse, single unit None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Townhouse, cluster None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Multiple-family None, but must be in proportion with rest of building  
(18)  Maximum tower area: 
Single-family detached 225 sq. ft. Two-family 225 sq. ft. Townhouse, single unit 225 sq. ft. Townhouse, cluster 225 sq. ft. Multiple-family 225 sq. ft.  
(19)  Minimum parking: 
a.  Resort hotel: 
1.  1.25 spaces per each guest unit, plus one space for each three seats offered to the public for restaurant and lounge purposes. Additional parking for attendant facilities located with the resort hotel and in adjacent structures shall be calculated at one space per 200 gross square feet of building area. Additional parking for employees must be provided on the basis of one space per employee of the largest number employees in any one shift at the resort hotel. 
2.  The resort hotel must have underground parking to accommodate a minimum of one-third of the required spaces for the resort hotel. 
3.  The top of the roof of any underground parking structure is not to exceed the lowest point of the crown of the road of Ocean Drive adjacent to the property. 
b.  Minimum parking: see article IV, division 4 of this chapter. For multifamily developments: two spaces per dwelling unit for the first 20 units; 1.75 spaces for the next 21-50 dwelling units; and 1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit in excess of 50. Also, one guest space for every seven dwelling units. 
(20)  Loading: see section 34-985. 
(21)  A1A vehicular access restrictions: Properties along State Road A1A from Loggerhead Park to the northern town limits shall not be allowed a motorized vehicular driveway connection onto State Road A1A. Provided, however, that this shall not prohibit an access used for emergency purposes only. 
*Except for a PUD and Special Exception Use No. 5. In the case of a PUD, the average density per gross acre may be increased as set forth in section 34-1333(b)(4). For special exception use No. 5, the total number of dwelling units on a site must be decreased from the maximum permissible (12 units/acre) by a factor of 0.15 units × the number of additional floors × the total gross acreage of the site. A single building may not exceed 12 stories. 
*Two additional dwelling units per gross acre may be permitted for up to every five acres that a minimum ten-foot-wide beach access easement is irrevocably dedicated for public use. (For example, if an eight-acre site provides two ten-foot-wide public beach access easements with the required improvements, then the project may be permitted an additional two dwelling units per gross acre for the total eight acres). The easement shall be located, constructed, and improved at a minimum with a paved walkway and wooden dune walkover structure over the dune, covered and uncovered seating benches on the walkover, landscaping, irrigation, and lighting as determined by the town, and shall be at the expense of the property owner. 
**See also section 34-873. 
***See also section 34-899. 
****See also section 34-900. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.146, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 224, 2-25-1981; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 478, 2-28-1996; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997; Ord. No. 592, § 2(Exh. A), 5-24-2006; Ord. No. 689 , § 11, 1-25-2017) 
Secs. 34-401-34-428. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SATURN LANE HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT (HIST-S) 

Sec. 34-429. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the HIST-S Saturn Lane historic preservation district is to protect and maintain an area in town worthy of historical and architectural preservation so that present and future residents and visitors may experience the unique historical features and architectural styles of the town. Further purposes of this district include the enhancement of property values, the reduction or elimination of nonconformities, the preservation of scenic views, and the rehabilitation of the Saturn Lane district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.201, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-430. - Uses and structures permitted. 
    Permitted uses and structures in the HIST-S Saturn Lane historic preservation district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residential dwelling unit. 
(2)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(3)  Group homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.202, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-431. - Accessory structures and/or uses permitted. 
    Accessory structures and/or uses in the HIST-S Saturn Lane historic preservation district are as follows: 
(1)  Accessory apartments. 
(2)  Private nurseries and greenhouses. 
(3)  Private garages. 
(4)  Private swimming pools. 
(5)  Other accessory uses and/or structures customarily incidental to permitted uses. 
(6)  Limited home occupations (see article IV, division 10 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.203, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-432. - Applicability of chapter sections. 
    All sections of this chapter shall apply to the HIST-S Saturn Lane historic preservation district, except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.204, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-433. - Expansion of nonconforming structures. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of article VI of this chapter, any structure made nonconforming as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be permitted to expand its first floor structural footprint so long as: 
(1)  The structure is expanded into a conforming front, side, or rear yard setback; and 
(2)  All other regulations of this district are complied with. 
However, an addition to a nonconforming structure, above the first floor level, is permitted to match an existing, nonconforming first floor footprint, so long as the front yard setback is met. (See article VI of this chapter.) 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.205, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-434. - Street lot lines. 
    The street lot line shall be defined as the edge of the Saturn Lane right-of-way and Ocean Drive right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.206, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-435. - Corner lots. 
    The corner lot provision of this chapter is modified for lots in the Sea Dunes subdivision. The lots adjacent to the Ocean Drive right-of-way shall maintain a minimum ten-foot front yard setback from the Ocean Drive lot line, and a minimum 25-foot setback from the Saturn Lane lot line. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.207, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-436. - Extension of porches and balconies. 
    Porches, balconies, and similar structures may not extend into any front, side or rear yard setback, other than in the additional ten-foot front yard setback above the first floor level. Yard setback encroachments that may be authorized in sections 34-902 and 34-903 are expressly prohibited in the HIST-S Saturn Lane historic preservation district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.208, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-437. - Future subdivision of land. 
    All new lots subdivided in the Sea Dunes subdivision shall utilize the Saturn Lane lot line as the front lot line, in addition to meeting the minimum lot size, width and depth requirements. The Ocean Drive lot line shall not be utilized as a front lot line. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.209, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-438. - Design criteria. 
    All development and construction shall be representative of and generally consistent with and complementary to the Old Florida cottage style of architecture (detailed in section 34-442) and which is commonly known and identified by its late Victorian architectural style, Spanish Revival architectural style, or combination thereof. Summarized briefly, distinguishing features of the Old Florida cottage style of architecture include wood or concrete block stucco siding; simple pitched roofs; tile, metal, or asphalt roofs; ornate details such as exposed soffits and individualized vent and louver shapes; lush landscaping with private yards; and use of porches and patios. All additions, alterations, and new construction shall be of a design and proportion which is in harmony with the existing structures in the district. The facade of a two-unit dwelling which is constructed and visible from the street shall appear in design as a single-family dwelling, similar to the design of existing two-unit dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.210, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-439. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    Site plan review by the planning and zoning department shall be required for all new construction, additions, and alterations to existing structures. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.211, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-440. - Appeals. 
(a)  Design criteria and architectural standards. A decision by the director interpreting design criteria and architectural standards regulations may be appealed by an applicant by presenting his appeal to the planning and zoning board for review, and to the town council for a final decision on the appeal. 
(b)  Other development regulations. Any other decision made by the director interpreting any other regulation set forth in the Saturn Lane historic preservation district shall be appealed to the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.212, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-441. - Administration and enforcement of regulations. 
    Any construction requiring a building permit shall be reviewed by the director prior to the issuance of a building permit. Any improvement which does not require a building permit, for example painting a structure or installing a screen door shall be required to comply with these regulations. Any improvement which does not comply with these regulations shall be deemed a code violation, and shall be subject to removal or modification, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.213, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-442. - Architectural standards for Saturn Lane historic preservation district. 
    To maintain the historic character and architectural features of the Old Florida cottage style represented in the Saturn Lane historic preservation district, and to maintain and enhance property values, the following materials and design features are permitted for all additions, alterations, and new construction. Materials and design features other than those listed in this section shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the town to determine, based on the intent and purpose of the Saturn Lane historic preservation district, if such materials or design features closely resemble the natural materials and are complementary to the architectural style and character of Saturn Lane. 
(1)  Building wall materials: 
*Concrete block and stucco (CBS). 
*Board and batten (vertical wood siding). 
*Lap board (horizontal wood siding). 
*Cedar shingles. 
*Wood frame with stucco finish. 
(2)  Garden wall and fence materials and treatments: 
*Hedges. 
*Concrete block and stucco (CBS). 
*Decorative concrete ornamentation. 
*Lattice (PVC or wood). 
*Decorative wood pickets. 
*Gates and fences: wrought iron, wood, PVC, aluminum. 
*Wood that is not pressure treated must be painted or sealed. Any wood with ground contact (i.e., posts) must be pressure treated. 
*Chainlink is prohibited. 
*The color of all fences and walls shall be compatible with the color of the principal structure. Natural wood color is considered compatible. 
(3)  Landscaping features encouraged: 
*Hedges. 
*Arbors. 
*Trellises. 
*Fountains. 
*Decorative concrete, stone, or brick patio/walkway. 
*Wood decking/walkway (must be pressure treated). 
*Xeriscape landscaping. 
(4)  Porches and awnings: 
*Concrete block and stucco (CBS) or wood framing. 
*Porches may be open to the air, screened in, or enclosed with lattice. 
*Porches enclosed with any glass or solid material are discouraged when visible from the street. 
*Porch roof materials shall match principal building, unless a flat roof which may be tar and gravel or other acceptable material. 
*Awnings must be of durable materials (may include fabric/vinyl). 
*Awnings must be upgraded, replaced, or removed if torn, faded or in disrepair. 
(5)  Roof materials and treatments: 
*Tile roof. 
*Asphalt shingle roof (min. 210 pounds per square) (straight cuts only, not to simulate other materials, i.e., wood shingles, tile, slate, and so forth). 
*Metal roof. 
*Built-up aggregate surface roof (tar and gravel), permitted only for roofs with a pitch less than 3 to12. 
*Simple gable and hip roofs are permitted. Flat roofs are permitted but shall not extend over more than 30 percent of roof area. 
*Roof pitch shall conform to existing buildings in the district. 
*Bahama chimneys, cupolas, weather vanes, and decorative wood corners and detailing are encouraged. 
*Rafters at overhangs shall be exposed (open soffits). 
(6)  Shutters and window treatments: 
*Side-mounted and Bahama shutters (wood, aluminum, vinyl or PVC). 
*Awnings (see subsection (4) of this section). 
*Mullions are encouraged on windows. 
(7)  Door materials and treatments: 
*Painted and stained wood. 
*Embossed masonite (exterior grade only). 
*Wood frame screen doors. 
*Painted aluminum screen doors are encouraged over natural aluminum finish color. 
*Windows in doors are encouraged to use mullions when visible from the street (i.e., French doors, sliding glass doors with mullions). 
*If windows in doors do not use mullions, at a minimum such windows shall have a colored frame (i.e., a sliding glass door shall have a white frame, instead of the natural aluminum finish). 
(8)  Vents and louvers: 
*Decorative concrete, wood or painted aluminum ornamentation (exposed screening is not permitted). 
(9)  Colors: 
*Pastel, colonial, and neutral base (i.e., white, off-white, light earth tones). 
*Trim may be any color, but must be compatible with building base color. 
*Roof color shall be solid and compatible with building color scheme. 
(10)  Accessory structures: 
*Materials, design, and color shall match principal structure. 
(11)  Historic preservation districts: 
Building Site Area Regulations 
Sea Dunes (Saturn Lane) 
Minimum lot area 4,500 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 50 ft. Minimum lot depth 90 ft. Maximum density 10 units/acre (excluding accessory apartment) Minimum front setback *(See below)** Minimum side setback 5 ft. per side Minimum rear setback 5 ft. Maximum height 2 stories, 30 ft. Maximum tower height None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Maximum tower area 225 sq. ft. Maximum lot coverage 35% Ocean setback 50 ft. west of CCCL Minimum living area:  1-bedroom 500 sq. ft.  2-bedroom 750 sq. ft.  3-bedroom 1,000 sq. ft. Maximum living area accessory apartment 750 sq. ft. Maximum building dimension 60 ft. Landscaping requirement 25% Parking requirements 2 spaces/unit**** Loading N/A High-rise setback N/A Accessory structure setback 5 ft.*** Accessory structure maximum height 12 ft.  
*Lots 2, 19, 20: 25 feet. 
*Lots 3, 17, 18: 20 feet. 
*Lots 4, 5, 15, 16: 15 feet. 
*Lots 6, 14: Ten feet. 
*Lots 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13: Five feet. 
**All floors above the first floor level shall be set back an additional five feet from the first floor front yard setback, with the exception of Ocean Drive. 
***If accessory structure is in the front yard, the front yard setback shall apply. 
*****If the accessory apartment is 500 square feet or less, one parking space shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.215, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 632, § 2, 10-28-2009) 

Secs. 34-443-34-467. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ZEPHYR WAY HISTORIC PRESERVATION (HIST-Z) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-468. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the HIST-Z Zephyr Way historic preservation district is to protect and maintain an area in town worthy of historical and architectural preservation so that present and future town residents and visitors may experience the unique historical features and architectural styles of the town. Further purposes of this district include the enhancement of property values, the reduction or elimination of nonconformities, the preservation of scenic views, and the rehabilitation of the Zephyr Way historic preservation district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.301, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-469. - Uses and structures permitted. 
    Permitted uses and structures in the HIST-Z Zephyr Way historic preservation district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residential dwelling units. 
(2)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(3)  Group homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.302, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-470. - Accessory structures and/or uses permitted. 
    Accessory structures and uses in the HIST-Z Zephyr Way historic preservation district are as follows: 
(1)  Private nurseries and greenhouses. 
(2)  Private garages. 
(3)  Private swimming pools. 
(4)  Other accessory uses and/or structures customarily incidental to permitted uses. 
(5)  Limited home occupations (see article IV, division 10 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.303, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-471. - Applicability of chapter sections. 
    All sections of this chapter shall apply to the HIST-Z Zephyr Way historic preservation district, except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.304, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-472. - Expansion of nonconforming structures. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of article VI of this chapter, any structure made nonconforming as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be permitted to expand its first floor structural footprint so long as: 
(1)  The structure is expanded into a conforming front, side, or rear yard setback; and 
(2)  All other regulations of this district are complied with. 
However, an addition to a nonconforming structure, above the first floor level, is permitted to match an existing, nonconforming first floor footprint. (See article VI of this chapter.) 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.305, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-473. - Street lot lines. 
    The street lot line shall be defined as the edge of the Zephyr Way right-of-way, Ocean Drive right-of-way, and Donald Ross Road right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.306, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-474. - Corner lots. 
    The corner lot provision of this chapter is modified for lots in the Surfside subdivision. Lots fronting on three or more streets shall be required to have only one street frontage meet the minimum front yard setback, which shall average 20 feet. Yard setbacks for any additional street frontage are required to meet a minimum ten foot setback, in lieu of the required average 20-foot front yard setback. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.307, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-475. - Extension of porches and balconies. 
    Porches, balconies, and similar structures may not extend into any front, side or rear setback. Yard setback encroachments that may be authorized in sections 34-902 and 34-903 are expressly prohibited in this district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.308, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-476. - Design criteria. 
    All development and construction shall be representative of and generally consistent with and complementary to the Old Florida cottage style of architecture (detailed in section 34-480) and which is commonly known and identified by its late Victorian architectural style, Spanish Revival architectural style, or combination thereof. Summarized briefly, distinguishing features of the Old Florida cottage style of architecture include wood or concrete block stucco siding; simple pitched roofs; tile, metal, or asphalt roofs; ornate details such as exposed soffits and individualized vent and louver shapes; lush landscaping with private yards; and use of porches and patios. All additions, alterations, and new construction shall be of a design and proportion which is in harmony with the existing structures in the district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.309, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-477. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    Site plan review by the planning and zoning department shall be required for all new construction, additions, and alterations to existing structures. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.310, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-478. - Appeals. 
(a)  Design criteria and architectural standards. A decision by the director interpreting design criteria and architectural standards regulations may be appealed by an applicant by presenting his appeal to the planning and zoning board for review, and to the town council for a final decision on the appeal. 
(b)  Other development regulations. Any other decision made by the director interpreting any other regulation set forth in the Zephyr Way historic preservation district shall be appealed to the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.311, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-479. - Administration and enforcement of regulations. 
    Any construction requiring a building permit shall be reviewed by the director prior to the issuance of a building permit. Any improvement which does not require a building permit, for example painting a structure or installing a screen door shall be required to comply with these regulations. Any improvement which does not comply with these regulations shall be deemed a code violation, and shall be subject to removal or modification, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.312, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-480. - Architectural standards for Zephyr Way historic preservation district. 
    To maintain the historic character and architectural features of the Old Florida cottage style of Zephyr Way and to maintain and enhance property values, the following materials and design features are permitted for all additions, alterations, and new construction. Materials and design features other than those listed in this section shall be considered on a case by case basis by the town to determine, based on the intent and purpose of this zoning district, if such materials or design features closely resemble the natural materials and are complementary to the architectural style and character of Zephyr Way. 
(1)  Building wall materials: 
*Concrete block and stucco (CBS). 
*Board and batten (vertical wood siding). 
*Lap board (horizontal wood siding). 
*Wood frame with stucco finish. 
(2)  Garden wall and fence materials and treatments: 
*Hedges. 
*Concrete block and stucco (CBS). 
*Decorative concrete ornamentation. 
*Lattice (PVC or wood). 
*Decorative wood pickets. 
*Gates and fences; wrought iron, wood, PVC, aluminum. 
*Chainlink is prohibited. 
*Wood that is not pressure treated must be painted or sealed. Any wood with ground contact (i.e., posts) must be pressure treated. 
*The color of all fences and walls shall be compatible with the color of the principle structure. Natural wood color is considered compatible. 
(3)  Landscaping features encouraged: 
*Hedges. 
*Arbors. 
*Trellises. 
*Fountains. 
*Decorative concrete, stone, or brick patio/walkway. 
*Wood decking/walkway (must be pressure treated). 
*Xeriscape landscaping. 
(4)  Porches and awnings: 
*Concrete block and stucco (CBS) or wood framing. 
*Porches may be open to the air, screened in, or enclosed with lattice. 
*Porches enclosed with any glass or solid material are discouraged when visible from the street. 
*Porch roof materials shall match principal building, unless a flat roof which may be tar and gravel or other acceptable material. 
*Awnings must be of durable materials (may include fabric/vinyl). 
*Awnings must be upgraded, replaced, or removed if torn, faded or in disrepair. 
(5)  Roof materials and treatments: 
*Tile roof. 
*Asphalt shingle roof (min. 210 pounds per square) (straight cuts only, not to simulate other materials, i.e., wood shingles, tile, slate, and so forth). 
*Built-up aggregate surface roof (tar and gravel), permitted only for roofs with a pitch less than 3 to12. 
*Simple gable and hip roofs are permitted. Flat roofs are permitted but shall not extend over more than 30 percent of roof area. 
*Roof pitch shall conform to existing buildings in the district. 
*Bahama chimneys, cupolas, weather vanes, and decorative wood corners and detailing are encouraged. 
*Rafters at overhangs shall be exposed (open soffits). 
(6)  Shutters and window treatments: 
*Side-mounted and Bahama shutters (wood, aluminum, vinyl or PVC). 
*Awnings (see subsection (4) of this section). 
*Mullions are encouraged on windows. 
(7)  Door materials and treatments: 
*Painted and stained wood. 
*Embossed masonite (exterior grade only). 
*Wood frame screen doors. 
*Painted aluminum screen doors are encouraged over natural aluminum finish color. 
*Windows in doors are encouraged to use mullions when visible from the street (i.e., French doors, sliding glass doors with mullions). 
*If windows in doors do not use mullions, at a minimum such windows shall have a colored frame (i.e., a sliding glass door shall have a white frame, instead of the natural aluminum finish). 
(8)  Vents and louvers: 
*Decorative concrete, wood or painted aluminum ornamentation (exposed screening is not permitted). 
(9)  Colors: 
*Pastel and neutral base (i.e., white, off-white, light earth tones). 
*Trim may be any color, but must be compatible with building base color. 
*Roof color shall be solid and compatible with building color scheme. 
(10)  Accessory structures: materials, design, and color shall match principal structure. 
(11)  Historic preservation districts: 
Building Site Area Regulations 
Surfside (Zephyr Way) 
Minimum lot area 4,750 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 50 ft. Minimum lot depth 95 ft. Maximum density 10 units/acre Minimum front setback 20 ft. average, minimum 14 ft. Minimum side setback 5 ft. per side Minimum rear setback 5 ft. Maximum height 2 stories, 30 ft. Maximum tower height None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Maximum tower area 225 sq. ft. Maximum lot coverage 35% Ocean setback 50 ft. west of CCCL Minimum living area:  1-bedroom 500 sq. ft.  2-bedroom 750 sq. ft.  3-bedroom 1,000 sq. ft. Maximum living area accessory apartment N/A Maximum building dimension 60 ft. Landscaping requirement 25% Parking requirements 2 spaces/unit Loading N/A High-rise setback N/A Accessory structure setback 5 ft.*** Accessory structure maximum height 12 ft.  
***If accessory structure is in the front yard, the front yard setback shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.314, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 

Secs. 34-481-34-498. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - BEACHBOUND HISTORIC PRESERVATION (HIST-B) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-499. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the HIST-B Beachbound historic preservation district is to protect and maintain an area in town worthy of historical and architectural preservation so that present and future town residents and visitors may experience the unique historical features and architectural styles of the town. Further purposes of this district include the enhancement of property values, the reduction or elimination of nonconformities, the preservation of scenic views, and the rehabilitation of the Beachbound district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.401, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-500. - Uses and structures permitted. 
    Permitted uses and structures in the HIST-B Beachbound historic preservation district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residential dwelling unit. 
(2)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(3)  Group homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.402, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-501. - Accessory structures and/or uses permitted. 
    Accessory structures and uses in the HIST-B Beachbound historic preservation district are as follows: 
(1)  Private nurseries and greenhouses. 
(2)  Private garages. 
(3)  Private swimming pools. 
(4)  Other accessory uses and/or structures customarily incidental to permitted uses. 
(5)  Limited home occupations (see article IV, division 10 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.403, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-502. - Applicability of chapter sections. 
    All sections of this chapter shall apply to the HIST-B Beachbound historic preservation district, except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.404, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-503. - Expansion of nonconforming structures. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of article VI of this chapter, any structure made nonconforming as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be permitted to expand its first floor structural footprint so long as: 
(1)  The structure is expanded into a conforming front, side, or rear yard setback; and 
(2)  All other regulations of this district are complied with. However, an addition to a nonconforming structure, above the first floor level, is permitted to match an existing, nonconforming first floor footprint. (See article VI of this chapter.) 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.405, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-504. - Street lot lines. 
    The street lot line shall be defined as the edge of the Galaxy Circle right-of-way and Celestial Way right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.406, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-505. - Side yard setback. 
    The side yard setbacks shall total a minimum of 13 feet, with no side being less than five feet. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.407, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-506. - Corner lots. 
    The corner lot provision of this chapter shall apply to this division. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.408, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-507. - Extension of porches and balconies. 
    Porches, balconies, and similar structures may not extend into any front, side or rear setback. Yard setback encroachments that may be authorized in sections 34-902 and 34-903 are expressly prohibited in the HIST-B Beachbound historic preservation district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.409, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-508. - Location of garden walls and fences. 
    Along Galaxy Circle, walls and fences are prohibited to run parallel with Galaxy Circle when located in the front yard. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.410, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-509. - Design criteria. 
    All development and construction shall be representative of and generally consistent with and complementary to the Old Florida cottage style of architecture (detailed in section 34-513) and which is commonly known and identified by its late Victorian architectural style, Spanish Revival architectural style, or combination thereof. Summarized briefly, distinguishing features of the Old Florida cottage style of architecture include wood or concrete block stucco siding; simple pitched roofs; tile, metal, or asphalt roofs; ornate details such as exposed soffits and individualized vent and louver shapes; lush landscaping with private yards; and use of porches and patios. All additions, alterations, and new construction shall be of a design and proportion which is in harmony with the existing structures in the HIST-B Beachbound historic preservation district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.411, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-510. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    Site plan review by the planning and zoning department shall be required for all new construction, additions, or alterations to existing structures. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.412, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-511. - Appeals. 
(a)  Design criteria and architectural standards. A decision by the director interpreting design criteria and architectural standards regulations may be appealed by an applicant by presenting his appeal to the planning and zoning board for review, and to the town council for a final decision on the appeal. 
(b)  Other development regulations. Any other decision made by the director, interpreting any other regulation set forth in the Beachbound historic preservation district shall be appealed to the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.413, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-512. - Administration and enforcement of regulations. 
    Any construction requiring a building permit shall be reviewed by the director prior to the issuance of a building permit. Any improvement which does not require a building permit, for example painting a structure or installing a screen door shall be required to comply with these regulations. Any improvement which does not comply with these regulations shall be deemed a code violation, and shall be subject to removal or modification, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.414, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-513. - Architectural standards for Beachbound historic preservation district. 
    To maintain the historic character and architectural features of the Old Florida cottage style of Beachbound and to maintain and enhance property values, the following materials and design features are permitted for all additions, alterations, and new construction. Materials and design features other than those listed in this section shall be considered on a case by case basis by the town to determine, based on the intent and purpose of this zoning district, if such materials or design features closely resemble the natural materials and are complementary to the architectural style of Beachbound. 
(1)  Building wall materials: 
*Concrete block and stucco (CBS). 
*Board and batten (vertical wood siding). 
*Lap board (horizontal wood siding). 
*Wood frame with stucco finish. 
(2)  Garden wall and fence materials and treatments: 
*Hedges. 
*Concrete block and stucco (CBS). 
*Decorative concrete ornamentation. 
*Lattice (PVC or wood). 
*Decorative wood pickets. 
*Gates and fences; wrought iron, wood, PVC, aluminum. 
*Wood that is not pressure treated must be painted or sealed. Any wood with ground contact (i.e., posts) must be pressure treated. 
*Chainlink is prohibited. 
*The color of all fences and walls shall be compatible with the principal building color. Natural wood color is considered compatible. 
(Along Galaxy Circle, walls and fences are prohibited to run parallel with Galaxy Circle when located in the front yard.) 
(3)  Landscaping features encouraged: 
*Hedges. 
*Arbors. 
*Trellises. 
*Fountains. 
*Decorative concrete, stone, or brick patio/walkway. 
*Wood decking/walkway (must be pressure treated). 
*Xeriscape landscaping. 
(4)  Porches and awnings: 
*Concrete block and stucco (CBS) or wood framing. 
*Porches may be open to the air, screened in, or enclosed with lattice. 
*Porch roof materials shall match principal building, unless a flat roof which may be tar and gravel or other acceptable material. 
*Awnings must be of durable materials (may include fabric/vinyl). 
*Awnings must be upgraded, replaced, or removed if torn, faded or in disrepair. 
(5)  Roof materials and treatments: 
*Tile roof. 
*Asphalt shingle roof (min. 210 pounds per square) (straight cuts only, not to simulate other materials, i.e., wood shingles, tile, slate, and so forth). 
*Built-up aggregate surface roof (tar and gravel), permitted only for roofs with a pitch less than 3 to12. 
*Simple gable and hip roofs are permitted. Flat roofs are permitted but shall not extend over more than 30 percent of roof area. 
*Roof pitch shall conform to existing buildings in the district. 
*Bahama chimneys, cupolas, weather vanes, and decorative wood corners and detailing are encouraged. 
*Rafters at overhangs shall be exposed (open soffits). 
(6)  Shutters and window treatments: 
*Side-mounted and Bahama shutters (wood, aluminum, vinyl or PVC). 
*Awnings (see subsection (4) of this section). 
(7)  Door materials and treatments: 
*Painted and stained wood. 
*Embossed masonite (exterior grade only). 
*Wood frame screen doors. 
*Painted aluminum screen doors are encouraged over natural aluminum finish color. 
*Windows in doors are encouraged to use mullions (i.e., French doors). 
(8)  Vents and louvers: 
*Decorative concrete, wood or painted aluminum ornamentation (exposed screening is not permitted). 
(9)  Colors: 
*Tropical pastel (i.e., white, light pink, grey, yellow, green). 
*Trim may be any color, but must be compatible with building base color. 
*Roof color shall be solid and compatible with building color scheme. 
(10)  Accessory structures: materials, design, and color shall match principal structure. 
(11)  Historic preservation districts: 
Building Site Area Regulations 
Beachbound (Galaxy Circle) 
Minimum lot area 4,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 50 ft. Minimum lot depth 48 ft. Maximum density 10 units/acre Minimum front setback 15 ft.**** Minimum side setback 13 ft. total, 5 ft. per side Minimum rear setback 9 ft.**** Maximum height 1-story, 15 ft. Maximum tower height None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Maximum tower area 225 sq. ft. Maximum lot coverage 35% Ocean setback 50 ft. west of CCCL Minimum living area:  1-bedroom 700 sq. ft.  2-bedroom 700 sq. ft.  3-bedroom 1,000 sq. ft. Maximum living area accessory apartment N/A Maximum building dimension 60 ft. Landscaping requirement 25% Parking requirements 1 space/unit Loading N/A High-rise setback N/A Accessory structure setback 5 ft.*** Accessory structure maximum height 15 ft.  
***If accessory structure is in the front yard, the front yard setback shall apply. 
****Lots 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16: Nine feet set back from three-foot walkway; lots 14, 15, 16: Nine feet set back from Wexford Court property line. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.416, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 409, 5-15-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 

Secs. 34-514-34-534. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DUPLEX (R-DUP) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-535. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the R-DUP two-family residential duplex district is to provide for an area in the town which shall be used exclusively for single-family detached or two-family homes. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.501, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 467, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-536. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the R-DUP two-family residential duplex district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residences. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(4)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.502, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 467, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-537. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the R-DUP two-family residential duplex district are as follows: 
(1)  Private nurseries and greenhouses. 
(2)  Private garages. 
(3)  Private swimming pools and/or cabanas. 
(4)  Accessory uses customarily incident to the permitted uses. 
(5)  Limited home occupations (see article IV, division 10 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.503, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 467, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-538. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the R-DUP two-family residential duplex district are as follows: 
(1)  Public and private utility structures. 
(2)  Churches, synagogues, and other houses of worship. 
(3)  Planned unit development-residential only (single-family detached). (See article V of this chapter.) 
(4)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.504, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 467, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-539. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required of all uses other than individual single-family detached dwellings, which shall be subject to review only by the town planning and zoning department. 
Building Site Area Requirements 
Residential Zoning District (R-DUP) 
Minimum lot area:  Single-family 8,750 sq. ft.  Two-family 17,500 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 70 ft. Minimum lot depth 100 ft. Maximum density 5 units/acre Minimum front setback 25 ft. (a)(b) Minimum side setback:  Single-family 7.5 ft. (a)  Two-family 15 ft. Minimum rear setback 12 ft. Maximum height 2 stories, 30 ft. (d) Maximum tower height None, but must be in proportion with rest of building Maximum tower area 225 sq. ft. Maximum lot coverage 35% Minimum ocean setback 50 ft. west of CCCL Minimum living area, two-family (Habitable space):  1-bedroom 800 sq. ft. per unit (c)  2-bedroom 1,000 sq. ft. per unit (c)  3-bedroom 1,200 sq. ft. per unit (c) Maximum building dimension 100 ft. Minimum landscaping requirement 25% Minimum parking requirements 2 spaces/unit (b) Minimum accessory structure setback 5 ft. (e) Accessory structure maximum height 12 ft.* Accessory structure maximum building dimension 12 ft.* (f)  
NOTES: 
*Screened pool enclosures are excluded. 
(a) Corner lots: section 34-899 is modified for the RS districts as follows: one street side: minimum 15 feet setback; other street side: minimum required front yard setback (see table in section 34-539). 
(b) A minimum 19-foot-long driveway or parking area is required in front of a garage or carport for stacking depth. 
(c) The minimum living area (habitable space) for single-family homes in the R-DUP district shall be the same as in the R-DUP district: one-bedroom, 1,000 sq. ft.; two-bedroom, 1,200 sq. ft.; and three-bedroom, 1,400 sq. ft. 
(d) Building height is measured from average existing grade (prior to land alteration) at structure's proposed location or from the crown of the road at its highest elevation abutting in the property, whichever is greater. 
(e) If the accessory structure is in the front yard, the front yard setback shall apply. 
(f) If the accessory structure is set back a minimum of ten feet from the side or rear property line, then section 34-873 shall apply and there shall be no maximum building dimension requirement. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.505, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 467, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Secs. 34-540-34-556. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK (RV PARK) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-557. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the RV Park recreational vehicle park district is to create an area for the use of recreational vehicles (RVs), as defined by and according to F.S. §§ 320.01(1)(b) and 513.01(9). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.601, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 527, 11-15-2000) 
Sec. 34-558. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the RV Park recreational vehicle park district are recreational vehicles (RVs) within an RV park. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.602, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 527, 11-15-2000) 
Sec. 34-559. - Accessory uses. 
(a)  Generally. Accessory uses in the recreational vehicle park district are as follows: 
(1)  Clubhouse/recreational building. 
(2)  Rental office for RV lots. 
(3)  Manager's office. 
(4)  Bathhouses. 
(5)  Laundry rooms. 
(6)  Storage area/storage building. 
(7)  Private swimming pools or cabanas. 
(8)  Cooking/barbecue grill structure. 
(b)  Individual lots within RV park. Accessory uses for individual lots within the recreational vehicle park district are as follows: 
(1)  Screen room (three-sided only, RV shall form fourth side). 
(2)  Storage building. 
(3)  Porches (open air or enclosed with nonglazed windows; three-sided only, RV shall form fourth side). 
(4)  Deck. 
(5)  Cooking/barbecue grill structure. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.603, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 527, 11-15-2000) 
Sec. 34-560. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the RV Park recreational vehicle park district are as follows: satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
Sec. 34-561. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required of all RV parks. However, individual RV lots within the park which are to have an RV remain on a lot consecutively for six months or more, or accessory structures which are to be affixed to the ground permanently, shall be subject to review by the town planning and zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.604, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 527, 11-15-2000) 
Sec. 34-562. - Building permit requirements. 
    All RVs remaining on a lot consecutively for six months or more at a time shall be required to obtain the following building permits: tiedown permit, plumbing permit, and electrical permit. In addition, during hurricane season, June 1-November 30, any RV that is on a lot unoccupied or unattended by the owner for more than five consecutive days shall be required to be tied down and a tiedown building permit obtained. A survey of the property, signed and sealed by a surveyor registered in the state, shall be submitted when applying for a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.605, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 527, 11-15-2000) 
Sec. 34-563. - Materials. 
    All materials to be used for an RV or accessory structure shall be constructed of metal or wood frame with aluminum, stainless steel, vinyl, and or fiberglass siding. However, an accessory storage building may also be made of commercially molded plastic if permitted by the Florida Building Code. Permanent cooking/barbecue grill structures may be made of brick, stone, metal or masonry block and shall meet Florida Building Code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.606, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 527, 11-15-2000) 
Sec. 34-564. - Nonconforming status. 
(a)  As of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, all RVs which are properly tied down and accessory structures with valid building permits shall be considered structures, as defined in this chapter, provided they are documented by an as-built survey submitted to the town within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Therefore, article VI of this chapter shall apply to these structures. All as-built surveys shall meet the requirements of F.A.C. ch. 61G17-6. 
(b)  In addition, a lot, as recorded in the public records prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which does not meet the minimum lot size, lot width, or lot depth requirements shall be permitted to have an RV and accessory structures erected on the property, provided the remaining building site area requirements are adhered to. 
(c)  However, all designated "C" lots on the original condominium documents of Yogi by the Sea, as recorded in the official record book 4693, page 1853, of the public records of the county, shall be permitted to be amended and recorded in the public records after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, even though the minimum lot size, width or depth requirements are not met, provided the lot boundaries are as shown on the unrecorded surveyor's exhibit to the Declaration of Condominium, prepared by Benchmark Land Surveying and Mapping, Inc., as revised on May 12, 1988. In addition, any of these lots which do not meet the minimum lot size, lot width, or lot depth requirements shall be permitted to have an RV and accessory structures erected on the property, provided the remaining building site area requirements are adhered to. 
(d)  The existing Juno Ocean Walk RV Park (as recorded in the official record book 4693, page 1853, of the public records of the county as Yogi by the Sea condominium) shall have the following lot designations for setback purposes: 
(1)  Perimeter lots (section A). 
(2)  Interior lots (section C). 
(3)  Common area lots (sections B, D, E, and F). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.607, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 527, 11-15-2000) 
Sec. 34-565. - Building site area requirements for RV park. 
    The following building site area requirements for RV parks shall apply: 
(1)  Minimum RV park lot area: 20 acres 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 300 feet 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 300 feet 
(4)  Maximum density: 12 RV units/acre 
(5)  Height of accessory structure: Two stories, 30 feet (max.) 
(6)  Common area open space: 15 percent minimum 
(7)  Perimeter landscape buffer or barrier: A minimum 15-foot-wide landscape buffer or barrier, as determined by the town during site plan and appearance review, shall be provided along the entire perimeter of the property. 
(8)  RV park storage area requirements: Only the following items are permitted to be stored in this area: RVs, automobiles, car trailers, boats on trailers, and utility trailers. In order to allow for ingress/egress during emergency situations, no permitted items shall exceed 45 feet in total length. All permitted items must have a current registration and license tag. Also, RV park dumpsters and golf carts are permitted in this area. 
(9)  All other requirements not stated herein shall comply with F.A.C. ch. 64E-15. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.608, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 527, 11-15-2000) 
Sec. 34-566. - Building site area requirements for individual lots within RV park. 
(a)  The following building site area requirements for individual lots within an RV park shall apply: 
Minimum lot area 1,500 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 30 ft. Minimum lot depth 50 ft. Minimum front setback:  Perimeter lots 15 ft. (a), (f)  Interior lots 0 ft. (b)  Common area lots 5 ft. (a) Minimum side setback 5 ft. (h) Minimum rear setback:  Perimeter lots 15 ft. (c), (g)  Interior lots 3 ft.  Common area lots 0-foot setback (c) Maximum height 1-story, 14.5 ft. (d) Maximum lot coverage 60% Minimum ocean setback 50 ft. west of CCCL RV and building dimension (maximum length) 45 ft. Minimum landscaping requirement The side setbacks shall be preserved as permeable surfaces to provide for drainage. Only a maximum 2-foot-wide path of pervious or semi-pervious materials may be used in a single row in this area. Minimum parking requirements 1 space/unit (8 ft. × 18 ft.) Minimum accessory structure setback Same as for RV (e) Maximum accessory structure height:  Screen room/porch Not to exceed height of RV  Storage building 9 ft. Maximum accessory structure floor area:  Screen room/porch 400 sq. ft.  Storage building 36 sq. ft.  
NOTES: 
(a) Section 34-899 shall not apply to these lots. Therefore, when a lot has frontage on two streets, the street frontage in which the hitch (the hooking device to transport the RV) faces shall be considered the front yard and the other street frontage shall be considered a side yard. 
(b) Section 34-899 shall apply, except for those lots which abut a ten-foot-wide driveway easement, the yard facing that ten-foot-wide driveway easement shall have a front yard setback of ten feet. Those lots which do not abut a ten-foot-wide driveway easement shall have a minimum front yard setback requirement of five feet. Section 34-899 shall not apply to these interior lots; therefore, the street or driveway easement frontage in which the hitch (the hooking device to transport the RV) faces shall be considered the front yard and the other street frontage shall be considered a side yard. 
(c) Those lots whose rear yard faces an adjacent lot shall be required to have a rear yard setback of five feet. 
(d) RV and building height is measured from the finished floor elevation of the concrete foundation. Existing concrete foundations shall not be raised in height. 
(e) All accessory structures shall be freestanding structures, not permanently attached to the RV and must not protrude beyond the front corner of the RV walls; however, protrusion may occur between tip-outs. No plumbing, air conditioning unit or ducts are permitted within an accessory structure. Electricity, however, shall be permitted to serve an accessory structure. Accessory structures, other than storage buildings, are permitted only when an RV is located on the lot. When an RV is removed from a lot, all accessory structures, other than storage buildings and cooking/barbecue grill structures, must also be removed. A freestanding air conditioning unit shall be considered an accessory structure (see definition of accessory structure in section 34-4). 
(f) Those lots with a lot depth of 50 feet or less shall be permitted a five-foot front yard setback. 
(g) Those lots whose rear yard faces and is adjacent to common area shall be permitted a zero-foot rear yard setback. 
(h) Those lots whose side yard faces and is adjacent to common area (excluding roadways) at least ten feet wide shall be permitted a zero-foot side yard setback. Those lots whose side or rear yards face common area of less than ten feet wide shall be required to maintain a ten-foot-wide open area; these lots may reduce their setbacks to the extent that they maintain a ten-foot-wide open and unobstructed area. 
(b)  All other requirements not stated herein shall comply with F.A.C. ch. 64E-15. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Common area lots means individual lots whose rear yard faces and is adjacent to common area, excluding any perimeter buffer common area. 
    Electrical permit means a permit required for hooking up an RV to electricity. A maximum of two 50-amp cord cap connections are the only acceptable electrical hookup for an RV. (In other words, the electrical hookup must be a plug in.) 
    Interior lots means individual lots that are not perimeter or common area lots. 
    Perimeter lots means individual lots that are adjacent to the perimeter property lines and/or perimeter landscape buffer or barrier of the development. 
    Plumbing permit means a permit required for hooking up an RV to a water and sewer connection. 
    Recreational vehicle (RV) means as defined by F.S. §§ 320.01(1)(b) and 513.01(9). However, in addition, all RVs must be temporary in that the wheels remain on the RV, all electrical and plumbing hookups must be plug in, and all skirting on RVs must be temporary. 
    Tip-outs means the sliding portion of the RV which extends beyond the typical eight to 8.5 feet RV width. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.609, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 527, 11-15-2000) 
Secs. 34-567-34-595. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY (MH) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-596. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the MH manufactured home community district is to create an environment suitable for single-family manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.701, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 482, 4-10-1996; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-597. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the MH manufactured home community district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family manufactured homes within a manufactured home community. 
(2)  Group homes (see article IV, division 11 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.702, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 482, 4-10-1996; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-598. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory structures for community or individual lots in the MH manufactured home community district may be of conventional block or frame construction or manufactured construction. Permitted accessory uses are: 
(1)  Manufactured home community: 
a.  Clubhouse/recreational building. 
b.  Manager's office. 
c.  Laundry rooms. 
d.  Storage area/storage building. 
e.  Private swimming pools or cabanas. 
(2)  Individual lots within manufactured home community: 
a.  Manufactured home accessory building or structure, as defined by the National Fire Protection Association Standards, NFPA 501A. 
b.  Hot tub/whirlpool. 
c.  Limited home occupations (see article IV, division 10 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.703, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 482, 4-10-1996; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 689 , § 12, 1-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-599. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the MH manufactured home community district are as follows: satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
Sec. 34-600. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required of all manufactured home communities. However, individual manufactured home lots within the community shall be subject to review by the town planning and zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.704, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 482, 4-10-1996; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-601. - Nonconforming status. 
    Within a manufactured home community zoning district, an individual lot, as recorded in the public records prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which does not meet the minimum lot size, lot width, or lot depth requirements shall be permitted to have a manufactured home and accessory structures erected on the property, provided the remaining building site area requirements are adhered to. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.705, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 482, 4-10-1996; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-602. - Building site area requirements for manufactured home community. 
    The following building site area requirements for manufactured home communities shall apply to the MH manufactured home community district: 
Minimum lot area for mobile home park 5 acres Minimum lot width 300 ft. Minimum lot depth 700 ft. Maximum density 12 units/acre Perimeter landscape buffer or barrier A minimum 15-foot-wide landscape buffer or barrier, as determined by the town during site plan and appearance review, shall be provided along the entire perimeter of the property.  
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.706, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 482, 4-10-1996; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-603. - Building site area requirements for individual lots within manufactured home community. 
    The following building site area requirements for individual lots within manufactured home communities shall apply to the MH manufactured home community district: 
Minimum lot area 3,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 40 ft.* Minimum lot depth 75 ft.* Minimum front setback 3 ft.* (a) Minimum side setback 5 ft.* (a) Minimum rear setback 10 ft.* Maximum height 1-story, 18 ft. (b) Maximum lot coverage 75% Minimum living area (habitable space) 600 sq. ft. Maximum building dimension 100 ft. Minimum landscaping requirement 20% Minimum ocean setback 50 ft. west of CCCL Minimum parking requirements 1 space/unit (8 ft. wide by 18 ft. deep) Minimum setback for accessory structure constructed entirely of materials that do not support combustion 0 ft., provided a minimum 3-foot separation is maintained from a structure on an adjacent property (c) Minimum setback for accessory structure constructed of combustible materials 5 ft. (c) Accessory structure maximum height Height of manufactured home (b)  
NOTES: 
*Lots that are designed to have the longest portion of the manufactured home (length) run parallel with the front property line shall have the following minimum requirements: 
Minimum lot width: 90 ft. 
Minimum lot depth: 25 ft. 
Minimum front setback: 3 ft. (a) 
Minimum side setback: 10 ft. (a) 
Minimum rear setback: 5 ft. 
(a) Corner lots: section 34-899 shall apply to this district. One street side: minimum three-foot setback; other street side: minimum three-foot setback. If adjacent to an arterial or collector street, the arterial or collector street side setback shall be a minimum of ten feet. 
(b) Building height is measured from average existing grade (prior to land alteration) at the structure's proposed location or from the crown of the road at its highest elevation abutting the property, whichever is greater. 
(c) If accessory structure is in the front yard, the front yard setback shall apply. However, a storage building shall be located only in the rear one-third depth of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.707, 8-8-1979) 
Secs. 34-604-34-624. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - COMMERCIAL GENERAL (CG) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-625. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of the CG commercial general district is to provide attractive and efficient retail shopping and personal service uses, to be developed either as a planned unit or in individual parcels. Retail drive-in businesses are not permitted. To enhance the general character of the district and its compatibility with its residential surroundings, this district is also suitable for professional, administrative, and general sales offices together with certain commercial uses designed primarily to serve employees in the district. 
(b)  Certain preferred uses are identified in the district and provided incentives to encourage their development. The purpose of the preferred uses is to encourage an environment which is particularly compatible and complementary to the adjacent residential area. The town desires a traditional town center atmosphere in its commercial areas, so as to link the commercial areas with the residential areas by both aesthetics and vehicular/pedestrian access, and to encourage residents to patronize such businesses. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.61, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 302, 6-25-1986; Ord. No. 375, 11-15-1989; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997) 
Sec. 34-626. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the CG commercial general district are as follows: 
(1)  Retail and service establishments, hardware stores, food stores, clothing stores, drugstores, barbershops, beauty salons and jewelry stores. 
(2)  Business services. 
(3)  Department stores. 
(4)  Churches, synagogues or other houses of worship. 
(5)  Nonprofit cultural centers. 
(6)  Professional offices (greater than 40,000 gross floor area (GFA)). 
(7)  Medical and dental offices. 
(8)  Health spa/gym (greater than 20,000 GFA). 
(9)  Banks and financial institutions (greater than 50,000 GFA). 
(10)  Professional or studio-type schools (greater than 50,000 GFA). 
(11)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(12)  Day care centers, if not adjacent to a residential use or residentially zoned property. 
(13)  Adult entertainment establishments. 
(14)  Outpatient substance abuse treatment provider. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.62, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 302, 6-25-1986; Ord. No. 375, 11-15-1989; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 644, § 2, 1-12-2011; Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-627. - Preferred permitted uses. 
    Preferred permitted uses in the CG commercial general district are as follows: 
(1)  Professional offices (40,000 gross floor area (GFA) or less). 
(2)  Residential (single-family and/or multifamily dwellings). A maximum 75 percent of the total gross floor area on the site may be used for residential. 
(3)  Health spa/gym (20,000 GFA or less). 
(4)  Banks and financial institutions (50,000 GFA or less). 
(5)  Retail deli, bakery, and sandwich shop. 
(6)  Retail landscape nursery with outdoor displays. 
(7)  Temporary festive outdoor markets (only fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, arts, and handcrafted items shall be sold). Maximum two-year temporary permit, renewable at the discretion of the town council. 
(8)  Professional or studio type schools (50,000 GFA or less). 
(9)  Transient residential facilities (maximum 30 units or less for timeshare and maximum 15 rooms or less for bed and breakfast). 
(10)  Hotel/motel (150 rooms/units or less). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.62.1, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 302, 6-25-1986; Ord. No. 375, 11-15-1989; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 581, § 2(exh. A), 8-24-2005; Ord. No. 644, § 3, 1-12-2011; Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014; Ord. No. 689 , § 13, 1-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-628. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the CG commercial general district are as follows: 
(1)  Off-street parking and loading. 
(2)  Signs. 
(3)  Drive-in financial facilities. 
(4)  Accessory uses customarily incident to the permitted or approved special exception uses. 
(5)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.63, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 302, 6-25-1986; Ord. No. 375, 11-15-1989; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997) 
Sec. 34-629. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the CG commercial general district are as follows: 
(1)  Public parking garages 
(2)  Public and private utility structures. 
(3)  Fuel service stations (see section 34-869). 
(4)  Supplemental off-site parking. 
(5)  Public and private academic schools. 
(6)  Assisted living facilities (see article IV, division 12 of this chapter). 
(7)  Transient residential facility (greater than 30 units for timeshare). 
(8)  Convenience stores (see section 34-868). 
(9)  Vehicle minor repair facility (see section 34-870). 
(10)  Hotel/motel (greater than 150 rooms/units). 
(11)  Day care centers, if adjacent to a residential use or residentially zoning property. 
(12)  Uses utilizing optional building site area development modifications identified in section 34-632. 
(13)  Restaurants and drinking establishments. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.64, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 302, 6-25-1986; Ord. No. 375, 11-15-1989; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 581, § 2(exh. A), 8-24-2005; Ord. No. 644, § 4, 1-12-2011; Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-630. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required for all uses. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.65, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 302, 6-25-1986; Ord. No. 375, 11-15-1989; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997) 
Sec. 34-631. - Building site area regulations. 
    The following building site area regulations shall apply to the CG commercial general district: 
(1)  Minimum total area: 40,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 150 feet. 
(4)  Density: When applied to residential uses in this district, the maximum densities shall be those which are in effect for the RH zoning district, i.e., 18 dwelling units per gross acre for multiple-family dwellings. The maximum density for transient residential facilities and hotel/motel facilities within this district shall be 30 guest units per gross acre. 
(5)  Setbacks: 
a.  The following setback schedule shall apply, and all properties adjoining or adjacent to property with a residential or "R" zoning district designation shall incorporate a minimum of a 15-foot landscaped buffer within such adjoining yard or setback: 
Setback Distance Requirements from Property Line Total Lot Area Front Side Rear 1.5 acres or less 25' 20' 20' More than 1.5 acres to 3 acres 35' 20'* 20'* More than 3 acres 45' 20'* 20'* *Where the rear or side setback adjoins property with a residential or "R" zoning district designation, the required setback shall be increased from 20 feet to 30 feet.  
b.  For all buildings higher than two stories, all stories above the first two stories shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the first story building facade and shall include an architecturally compatible roof treatment or element along such building line break (see graphic representation in Exhibit 2 appended to the end of this section). 
(6)  Ocean setbacks: 50 feet west of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL). 
(7)  High-rise setback: see subsection (5) of this section. 
(8)  Maximum building height: 
a.  For buildings having two stories, the maximum building height shall not exceed 30 feet. For buildings having three stories, the maximum building height shall not exceed 45 feet. No building shall exceed three stories, except for those buildings which contain a minimum of one floor of residential space which shall be permitted a maximum of four stories and 60 feet in height. 
b.  For properties with a total lot area exceeding two acres, all structures within 60 feet of a rear or side property line adjoining property with an "R" or residential zoning district designation shall not exceed the maximum building height for the adjacent residential property (see graphic representation of this concept in Exhibit 1 and Exhibit 2 appended to the end of this section). 
c.  A minimum 20-foot building separation shall be required between all principal structures on site. 
(9)  Maximum building dimension: 200 feet. 
(10)  Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent. 
(11)  Minimum landscaped open space: 15 percent of total lot area. All building sides shall be required to install foundation planting materials along a minimum of 40 percent of the length of each facade. Such foundation plantings shall be at least four feet deep, as measured from the edge of the building. 
(12)  Minimum parking: 
a.  See article IV, division 4 of this chapter. In addition, a minimum of two parking spaces shall be required per residential dwelling unit for permitted residential uses. 
b.  A shared parking study shall be required for all mixed use projects proposing less than the amount of parking otherwise required. The town council, in the exercise of its discretion, may approve a shared parking plan if the study clearly demonstrates that all uses included in the shared parking will not require more than the proposed amount. Projects utilizing shared parking shall not designate spaces for any specific use within the project, with the exception of approved valet parking as provided in subsection (12)d of this section. 
c.  Parking shall be located behind the principal buildings and screened from the roadway by structures and/or a heavily landscaped buffer unless the town council determines, in the exercise of its discretion, that this requirement shall create an unsafe or hazardous condition on site. In such event, the town council may allow parking in other locations on site. 
d.  Any use proposing valet parking shall submit a plan to the town council for review and approval. Such plan shall be reviewed in conjunction with site plan review. Valet parking shall not utilize more than 30 percent of the required on-site parking for the approved use or uses. The valet parking plan shall address each of the following: 
1.  The location of the valet parking booth or area; 
2.  The location and number of parking spaces to be utilized for valet parking; 
3.  Evidence that the business owns the parking spaces proposed for valet use or a copy of any agreement or lease that provides the business with the right to use spaces owned by another individual or entity for valet parking; 
4.  The impacts of valet parking on the shared parking plan for the project (if one exists) and on patrons who do not utilize such service; 
5.  The hours of operation; and 
6.  The location and text of any signage associated with the valet parking operation and assigned spaces. 
(13)  Loading: see section 34-985; however, if it can be proven that a preferred permitted use requires only typical nine-foot by 19-foot parking space to service the majority of loading needs, then said preferred permitted use shall be permitted a nine-foot by 19-foot loading space. If the use changes in the future, then the new use will have to meet the requirements of section 34-985 or, if the new use is a preferred permitted use, demonstrate that the majority of loading needs may be serviced by the existing loading space. 
(14)  Specific requirements for preferred permitted uses: 
a.  A temporary festive outdoor market must be of a design which creates a festive outdoor market atmosphere. This atmosphere shall be created by a site plan which integrates the site with the rest of the town by creating real streets on the site, creating a public square on which goods may be sold, and other similar means so as to create a traditional town center atmosphere. The majority of outdoor displays must be covered, but may be open aired. Such covered structures shall be made of high quality materials such as wooden posts, and the roofs may be of canvas, metal, or other high-quality materials, Such outdoor displays shall be of the Old Florida style of architecture as required in article II, division 4 of this chapter. 
b.  If the quality and merits of a site plan for preferred permitted use warrant it, the town council may waive requirements in article IV, division 7 of this chapter. However, the landscape buffer requirements, along with barriers, trees and shrubs, on the sides and rear property lines shall not be waived. 
(15)  Minimum architectural treatments: All sides of any building within the CG zoning district shall be designed with a variety of treatments matching the general architectural theme of the project. The intent of this requirement is to have all sides of the building appear as the front facade, including those fronting a roadway, alley or parking area. 
EXHIBIT 1 

EXHIBIT 2 

(Ord. No. 207, § 4.66, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 302, 6-25-1986; Ord. No. 375, 11-15-1989; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 581, § 2(exh. A), 8-24-2005) 
Sec. 34-632. - Site area development modification option. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  The commercial general (CG) district incorporates the predominant business corridor along U.S. Highway 1, which serves as a gateway to the town. In order to foster quality development patterns and practices along this corridor, the town council may consider modifications to the building site area regulations specifically identified in this section. Any of the identified modifications shall be requested in the form of a special exception to the town council during site plan review and shall be subject to any additional conditions necessary to address the criteria set forth in section 34-93. No applicant shall be entitled to such modifications by right; rather, the applicant shall be required to demonstrate that the proposed project meets the purpose and intent of this section. 
(2)  The purpose of this potential flexibility is to provide for creative and innovative designs and approaches by the applicant that will clearly promote a sustainable and livable mixed use environment within the district. 
(3)  The potential modifications are intended to provide a vehicle for quality, innovative development and redevelopment within the town's commercial corridors. Consequently, all applicants requesting such modification shall provide for the enhancement of the physical appearance of landscaping, architecture, signage and site development over and above the site plan appearance standards generally applicable within the town (see section 34-116). 
(4)  Each applicant shall also identify the public benefits derived from the proposed development, such as the promotion of public use, the preservation of natural resources, and the integration of the project with the town's extensive natural environment. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions for modifications to the site area development requirements set forth herein shall be made by special exception, and may be applied to any proposed development order application within the CG district that involves any mix of uses (i.e., retail/office; retail/residential; office/residential, etc.). 
(c)  Boundaries. The site area development modification shall apply within the CG commercial general zoning district. 
(d)  Conflict with applicable regulations. Where the provisions of the modifications are in conflict with other zoning regulations applicable to the property, the provisions of this section shall control, and are subject to town council approval. 
(e)  Performance standards. All development within the CG district shall comply with the rules and regulations of all agencies having jurisdiction within the town and with all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  Additional criteria. All applicants seeking development approval in accordance with the CG district shall comply with the standards of the district, and with the town council's approval, as modified herein. Furthermore, all applicants shall demonstrate the following: 
(1)  The proposed development is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the town comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The proposed development is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, including, but not limited to, innovative and enhanced architecture, landscaping, and public use areas. 
(3)  The proposed development includes adequate, safe and appropriate public facilities and services. 
(4)  The proposed development provides for pedestrian and vehicular interconnection between adjacent projects as well as a public focal point and/or public gathering place which shall include a water, landscape or art feature. 
(5)  The proposed development is not detrimental to existing land uses or the native ecosystems within the district. 
(g)  Potential building site area regulation modifications. 
(1)  Minimum total lot area: 10,000 square feet; and the creation of any new lots must meet the minimum requirement of 40,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(4)  Setbacks: See section 34-631(5); covered arcades, cafes, awnings and walkways may extend up to eight feet into a required front or side yard setback provided that the property adjacent to such yard or setback does not have a residential or "R" zoning district designation. 
(5)  Maximum building height: See section 34-631(8). No building shall exceed 60 feet in height. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town council may approve five stories within this overall height limitation for buildings with a mix of uses, including a residential component, provided that the town council determines that the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed project meets the purpose and intent of this section. 
(6)  Maximum building dimension: 300 feet. 
(7)  Maximum lot coverage: 45 percent. 
(8)  Minimum landscaped open space: 15 percent. Additionally, all building sides shall be required to install foundation planting materials along a minimum of 30 percent of the length of each facade. Such foundation plantings shall be at least four feet deep, as measured from the edge of the building. 
(9)  Parking: 
a.  See section 34-631(12) for parking standards. A minimum of 90 percent of the parking provided for a project shall be located behind the principal buildings and screened from the roadway by structures and/or a heavily landscaped buffer. 
b.  Preferred permitted nonresidential uses may be permitted up to a 25 percent reduction in the number of spaces required pursuant to section 34-981(b)(5) provided that the town council determines that the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed project meets the purpose and intent of this section. This reduction in required parking shall not be available in conjunction with a shared parking plan. 
(10)  Signage: Mixed use developments may be entitled to utilize both the commercial and residential sign standards (see article IV, division 6 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, §§ 4.67-4.67.7, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 302, 6-25-1986; Ord. No. 375, 11-15-1989; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 581, § 2(exh. A), 8-24-2005; Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014; Ord. No. 689 , § 13, 1-25-2017) 
Secs. 34-633-34-652. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - COMMERCIAL OFFICE (CO) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-653. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the CO commercial office district is to provide attractive and efficient office space together with appropriately related retail and service functions. Furthermore, this district is created to ensure compatibility with surrounding residential uses of all types. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.71, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997) 
Sec. 34-654. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the CO commercial office district are as follows: 
(1)  Business or professional offices. 
(2)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(3)  Churches, synagogues and other houses of worship. 
(4)  Nonprofit cultural centers. 
(5)  Medical and dental offices. 
(6)  Business and professional training facilities. 
(7)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(8)  Residential (single-family and/or multifamily dwellings). A maximum 75 percent of the total gross floor area on the site may be used for residential. 
(9)  Outpatient substance abuse treatment provider. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.72, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014; Ord. No. 689 , § 14, 1-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-655. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the CO commercial office district are as follows: 
(1)  Garage, off-street parking and loading. 
(2)  Signs. 
(3)  Drive-in financial facilities. 
(4)  Helistop. 
(5)  Newsstands, restaurants, dining rooms with or without kitchens, lounges, beauty shops, barbershops, and similar personal service uses for the convenience of personnel, trainees and bona fide guests of uses permitted. 
(6)  Accessory uses customarily incident to the permitted or approved special exception uses. 
(7)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.73, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997) 
Sec. 34-656. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the CO commercial office district are as follows: 
(1)  Public and private utility structures. 
(2)  Assisted living facilities (see article IV, division 12 of this chapter). 
(3)  Planned unit developments (see article V of this chapter). 
(4)  Community shopping centers. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.74, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-657. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required for all uses in the CO commercial office district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.75, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997) 
Sec. 34-658. - Building site area regulations. 
    The following building site area regulations shall apply to the CO commercial office district: 
Minimum total lot area 15,000 sq. ft. for any freestanding building, or 12,000 sq. ft. in mixed use areas where residential uses are provided. Minimum lot width 100 ft. Minimum lot depth 150 ft., or 120 ft. in mixed use areas where residential uses are permitted. Density When applied to a residential use permitted as special exception use in this district, the maximum densities shall be those which are in effect for the RH district, e.g., 18 dwelling units per gross acre for a multiple-family dwelling. Front yard setback** 30 ft. from the street line Side yard setback*** 10 ft. per side Rear yard setback**** 15 ft. Ocean setback 50 ft. west of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL) Maximum building height 6 stories not to exceed 90 ft. Maximum building dimension 300 ft.; this dimension excludes breezeways and enclosed passageways. High-rise setback For structures of more than one story there shall be added to the basic setbacks (front, sides and rear) an additional 5 ft. at ground level for each additional story Maximum lot coverage 50% Minimum landscaped open space 10% of total lot area Minimum parking See article IV, division 4 of this chapter. However, one parking space shall be required per residential dwelling unit and one guest parking space shall be required for every three residential dwelling units. Loading See section 34-985  
**See also section 34-873. 
***See also section 34-899. 
****See also section 34-900. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.76, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 516, 8-14-1999; Ord. No. 625, § 2, 8-26-2009) 
Secs. 34-659-34-689. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - BEACH (BCH) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-690. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the BCH beach district is to preserve the flora, fauna and overall natural environment in those areas determined in the comprehensive plan to be environmentally sensitive and in need of protection. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.81, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-691. - Uses permitted. 
    No structures are permitted in the BCH beach district other than: 
(1)  Dune walkover structures; 
(2)  Government-owned minor structures. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.82, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-692. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses are not applicable in the BCH beach district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.83, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-693. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses are not applicable in the BCH beach district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.84, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-694. - Site plan and appearance review requirement. 
    Site plan and appearance review requirements are not applicable in the BCH beach district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.85, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-695. - Building site area regulations. 
    Building site area regulations are not applicable in the BCH beach district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.86, 8-8-1979) 
Secs. 34-696-34-718. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - PUBLIC RECREATION (REC-PUB) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-719. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the REC-PUB public recreation district is to create an environment especially suited for public recreation. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.91, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 468, 12-14-1994) 
Sec. 34-720. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the REC-PUB public recreation district are as follows: 
(1)  Ball parks. 
(2)  Tennis courts. 
(3)  Playgrounds. 
(4)  Swimming and fishing. 
(5)  Boating. 
(6)  Golfing. 
(7)  Hiking, walking, jogging. 
(8)  Bicycling. 
(9)  Shuffleboard. 
(10)  Handball and racquetball. 
(11)  Any other similar recreational use. 
(12)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.92, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 468, 12-14-1994) 
Sec. 34-721. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the REC-PUB public recreation district are as follows: 
(1)  Accessory uses customarily incident to the permitted uses. 
(2)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.93, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 468, 12-14-1994) 
Sec. 34-722. - Site plan approval criteria. 
    Due to the potential for townwide impact of public recreation uses, the following criteria shall be considered by the planning and zoning board and town council in addition to those required in section 34-116 for all site plans proposed in the REC-PUB public recreation zoning district: 
(1)  Whether or not the proposed development will adversely affect groundwater and surface waters; 
(2)  Whether the proposed development is compatible with land categorized as environmentally sensitive; 
(3)  Whether the proposed development is compatible with adjacent land which is considered environmentally sensitive, considering buffers and mitigation areas along such adjacencies; 
(4)  Whether or not the proposed development will constitute a nuisance; 
(5)  Whether the proposed development will enrich human life in its educational and cultural dimensions; 
(6)  Whether or not the proposed development will positively affect the economy or will create a positive image that will influence the future of the town; and 
(7)  Weighing and balancing the affects and influences the proposed plan presents, whether the plan promotes the general improved economic development, as well as recreation value of the town. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.94, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 468, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-723. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required for all uses in the REC-PUB public recreation district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.95, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 468, 12-14-1994) 
Sec. 34-724. - Building site area regulations. 
    The following building site area regulations shall apply to the REC-PUB public recreation district: 
(1)  Recreational uses shall be permitted only upon authorization by the town council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning board through the special exception use procedure as set forth in section 34-93. Accessory uses to a permitted use are not required to go through the special exception use procedure. 
(2)  A1A vehicular access restrictions: Properties along State Road A1A from Loggerhead Park to the northern town limits shall not be allowed a motorized vehicular driveway connection onto State Road A1A; provided, however, that this shall not prohibit an access used for emergency purposes. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.96, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 433, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 468, 12-14-1994) 
Secs. 34-725-34-746. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 18. - PRIVATE RECREATION (REC-PRIV) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-747. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the REC-PRIV private recreation district is to establish and protect certain areas for limited private recreational uses. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.101, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 465, 12-14-1994) 
Sec. 34-748. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the REC-PRIV private recreation district are golf courses. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.102, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 465, 12-14-1994) 
Sec. 34-749. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the REC-PRIV private recreation district are as follows: 
(1)  Accessory uses customarily incident to the permitted uses, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Caretaker housing (including but not limited to housing for maintenance superintendent, club manager, and their families). 
b.  Private clubhouses. 
c.  Maintenance buildings. 
d.  Private restaurants. 
e.  Pro shops. 
f.  Swimming pools. 
g.  Tennis courts. 
h.  Croquet courts. 
i.  Driving ranges and golf practice areas. 
(2)  Private utility structures. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.103, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 465, 12-14-1994) 
Sec. 34-750. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the REC-PRIV private recreation district are as follows: 
(1)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(2)  Public utility structures. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.104, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 316, 3-18-1987; Ord. No. 465, 12-14-1994) 
Sec. 34-751. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required for all uses in the REC-PRIV private recreation district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.105, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 465, 12-14-1994) 
Sec. 34-752. - Building site area regulations. 
(a)  The following building site area regulations shall apply to the REC-PRIV private recreation district: 
Minimum total area 140 acres Density Not applicable Front yard setback 50 ft. Side yard setback 70 ft. Rear yard setback 70 ft. Ocean setback 50 ft. west of Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL) Maximum building height 3 stories, 45 ft. Maximum building dimension 200 ft. High-rise setback Not applicable Maximum lot coverage 5% Minimum landscaped open space 95% Minimum parking 1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of clubhouse gross floor area. Loading See section 34-985 Landscape buffer and landscape barrier During site plan and appearance review the town may require a minimum 25-foot-wide landscape buffer and/or landscape barrier along any property line, as deemed necessary and appropriate by the town.  
(b)  Specific requirements for private utilities: 
(1)  All private utility structures shall be required to be screened with landscaping or other appropriate material in order to be completely screened from view from all streets and adjacent properties. In addition, there shall be no noise, smell, or other nuisance generated from a private utility structure. All private utility structures, other than submersible wells which are no greater than 25 square feet in area and three feet in height, shall be located a minimum of 250 feet from the side and rear property lines, and a minimum 50 feet from the front property line. 
(2)  Submersible wells no greater than 25 square feet in area and three feet in height shall be set back a minimum 15 feet from any property line. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.106, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 465, 12-14-1994) 
Secs. 34-753-34-772. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 19. - UTILITIES (UTL) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-773. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the UTL utilities district is to create an environment especially suited for operating and maintaining essential utility facilities. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.111, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-774. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the UTL utilities district are as follows: essential services and service structures relating to potable water, sanitary sewers, stormwater drainage, solid waste, telephone, gas, electric, cable television and any other related utility systems. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.112, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-775. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the UTL utilities district are as follows: accessory uses customarily incident to the permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.113, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-776. - Special exception uses. 
    A special exception is required for all uses in the UTL utilities district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.114, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-777. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required for all uses in the UTL utilities district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.115, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-778. - Building site area regulations. 
    The following building site area regulations* shall apply to the UTL utilities district: 
Minimum total area 10,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 100 ft. Minimum lot depth 75 ft. Density Not applicable Front yard setback** 30 ft. Side yard setback*** 15 ft. per side Rear yard setback**** 15 ft. Ocean setback 50 ft. west of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL) High-rise setback Not applicable Maximum building height 35 ft. except water tower may be 150 ft. Maximum building dimension 100 ft. Maximum lot coverage 60% Minimum landscaped open space 15% Minimum parking See article IV, division 4 of this chapter Loading Not applicable  
*Utility uses and their related accessory uses shall be permitted only upon authorization by the town council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning board through the special exception use procedure. See section 34-93 for said procedure. 
**See also section 34-873. 
***See also section 34-899. 
****See also section 34-900. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.116, 8-8-1979) 
Secs. 34-779-34-809. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 20. - GOVERNMENT (GOV) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-810. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the GOV government district is to create an environment especially suited for the conduct of essential government functions. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.121, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-811. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the GOV government district are as follows: 
(1)  Governmental office buildings. 
(2)  Police stations. 
(3)  Fire stations. 
(4)  Courthouses. 
(5)  Public works. 
(6)  Other public safety facilities. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.122, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-812. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the GOV government district are as follows: 
(1)  Accessory uses customarily incident to the permitted uses. 
(2)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.123, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-813. - Special exception uses. 
    A special exception is required for all uses other than accessory uses in the GOV government district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.124, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-814. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required for all uses in the GOV government district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.125, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-815. - Building site area regulations. 
    The following building site area regulations* shall apply to the GOV government district: 
Minimum total area: 10,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width: 100 ft. Minimum lot depth: 75 ft. Density: Not applicable Front yard setback:** 30 ft. Side yard setback:*** 15 ft. per side Rear yard setback:**** 15 ft. Ocean setback: 50 ft. west of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL) High-rise setback: Not applicable Maximum building height: 35 ft. except firemen's training tower which may be 50 ft. Maximum building dimension: 200 ft. Maximum lot coverage: 60% Minimum landscape, open space: 15% of lot area Minimum parking: 1 space for every 300 sq. ft. of office space one space for every 500 sq. ft. of assembly space Loading: See section 34-985  
*All uses shall be permitted only upon authorization by the town council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning board . 
**See also section 34-873. 
***See also section 34-899. 
****See also section 34-900. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.126, 8-8-1979) 
Secs. 34-816-34-838. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 21. - INSTITUTIONAL (INS) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-839. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of INS institutional district is to create an environment especially suited for institutional facilities. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.131, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-840. - Uses permitted. 
    Permitted uses in the INS institutional district are as follows: 
(1)  Academic schools. 
(2)  Colleges. 
(3)  Churches, synagogues and other houses of worship. 
(4)  Hospitals. 
(5)  Medical and dental clinics. 
(6)  Sanitoriums. 
(7)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(8)  Day care. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.132, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-841. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the INS institutional district are as follows: accessory uses customarily incident to the permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.133, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-842. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the district are as follows: satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.134, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-843. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    A site plan and appearance review is required for all uses in the INS institutional district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.135, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 371, 7-19-1989) 
Sec. 34-844. - Building site area regulations. 
    The following building site area regulations shall apply to the INS institutional district:* 
Minimum total area 10,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 100 ft. Minimum lot depth 75 ft. Density Not applicable Front yard setback** 30 ft. Side yard setback*** 15 ft. per side Rear yard setback**** 15 ft. Ocean setback 50 ft. west of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL). High-rise setback For all buildings in excess of 30 ft., excluding steeples and spires, for each additional ten ft. in height, an additional ten ft. in height, an additional five ft. of setback shall be required on all property line. Maximum building height 50 ft. Maximum building dimension 200 ft. Maximum lot coverage 50% Minimum landscaped open space 15% of lot area Minimum parking See article IV, division 4 of this chapter Loading See section 34-985  
*See also section 34-873. 
**See also section 34-899. 
***See also section 34-900. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 4.136, 8-8-1979) 
Secs. 34-845-34-849. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 22. - MEDICAL COMMERCIAL (MC) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-850. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the medical commercial (MC) district is to provide appropriate zoning locations where medical facilities may be established when the need exists, in addition to compatible commercial use such as retail shopping and personal service uses. Retail drive-in businesses are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-851. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the medical commercial (MC) district are as follows: 
(1)  Retail and service establishments, hardware stores, food stores, clothing stores, drugstores, barbershops, beauty salons and jewelry stores. 
(2)  Business services. 
(3)  Department stores. 
(4)  Churches, synagogues or other houses of worship. 
(5)  Nonprofit cultural centers. 
(6)  Professional offices. 
(7)  Medical and dental offices. 
(8)  Health spa/gym. 
(9)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(10)  Professional or studio-type schools. 
(11)  Public safety facilities such as fire and/or police stations. 
(12)  Day care centers, if not adjacent to a residential use or residentially zoned property. 
(13)  Adult entertainment establishments. 
(14)  Retail deli/bakery. 
(15)  Residential (single-family and/or multifamily dwellings). A maximum of 75 percent of the total gross floor area on the site may be used for residential. 
(16)  Hotel/motel (150 rooms/units or less). 
(17)  Retail landscape nursery with outdoor displays. 
(18)  Temporary festive outdoor markets (only fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, arts, and handcrafted items shall be sold). Maximum two-year temporary permit, renewable at the discretion of the town council. 
(19)  Outpatient substance abuse treatment provider. 
(20)  Residential substance abuse treatment provider, subject to a maximum permitted density of 18 dwelling units per acre. 
(21)  Assisted living facilities (see article IV, division 12 of this chapter). 
(22)  Transient residential facility (greater than 30 units for timeshare). 
(Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-852. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the medical commercial (MC) district are as follows: 
(1)  Off-street parking and loading. 
(2)  Signs. 
(3)  Drive-in financial facilities. 
(4)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the permitted or approved special exception uses. 
(5)  Satellite dish antennas (see article IV, division 13 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-853. - Special exception uses. 
    Special exception uses in the medical commercial (MC) district are as follows: 
(1)  Public parking garages. 
(2)  Public and private utility structures. 
(3)  Fuel service stations (see section 34-869). 
(4)  Supplemental off-site parking. 
(5)  Public and private academic schools. 
(6)  Convenience stores (see section 34-868). 
(7)  Vehicle minor repair facility (see section 34-870). 
(8)  Hotel/motel (greater than 150 rooms/units). 
(9)  Day care centers, if adjacent to a residential use or residentially zoned property. 
(10)  Restaurants and drinking establishments. 
(11)  Uses utilizing optional building site area development modifications identified in section 34-856. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014; Ord. No. 677, § 3, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 701 , § 3, 10-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-854. - Site plan and appearance review requirements. 
    Site plan and appearance review is required for all uses. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-855. - Building site area regulations. 
    The following building site area regulations shall apply to the medical commercial (MC) district: 
(1)  Minimum total area: 40,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 150 feet. 
(4)  Setbacks: 
a.  The following setback schedule shall apply, and all properties adjoining or adjacent to property with a residential or "R" zoning district designation shall incorporate a minimum of a 15-foot landscaped buffer within such adjoining yard or setback: 
Setback Distance Requirements from Property Line Total Lot Area Front Side Rear 1.5 acres or less 25' 20' 20' More than 1.5 acres to 3 acres 35' 20'* 20'* More than 3 acres 45' 20'* 20'* *Where the rear or side setback adjoins property with a residential or "R" zoning district designation, the required setback shall be increased from 20 feet to 30 feet.  
b.  For all buildings higher than two stories, all stories above the first two stories shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the first story building facade and shall include an architecturally compatible roof treatment or element along such building line break (see graphic representation in Exhibit 2 to section 34-631 of this Code). 
(5)  High-rise setback: See subsection (4) of this section. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 
a.  For buildings having two stories, the maximum building height shall not exceed 30 feet. For buildings having three stories, the maximum building height shall not exceed 45 feet. No building shall exceed three stories, except for those buildings which contain a minimum of one floor of residential space which shall be permitted a maximum of four stories and 60 feet in height. 
b.  For properties with a total lot area exceeding two acres, all structures within 60 feet of a rear or side property line adjoining property with an "R" or residential zoning district designation shall not exceed the maximum building height for the adjacent residential property (see graphic representation of this concept in Exhibit 1 and Exhibit 2 to section 34-631 of this Code). 
c.  A minimum 20-foot building separation shall be required between all principal structures on site. 
(7)  Maximum building dimension: 200 feet. 
(8)  Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent. 
(9)  Minimum landscaped open space: 15 percent of total lot area. All building sides shall be required to install foundation planting materials along a minimum of 40 percent of the length of each facade. Such foundation plantings shall be at least four feet deep, as measured from the edge of the building. 
(10)  Minimum parking: 
a.  See article IV, division 4 of this chapter. In addition, a minimum of two parking spaces shall be required per residential dwelling unit for permitted residential uses. 
b.  Parking shall be located behind the principal buildings and screened from the roadway by structures and/or a heavily landscaped buffer unless the town council determines, in the exercise of its discretion, that this requirement shall create an unsafe or hazardous condition on site. In such event, the town council may allow parking in other locations on site. 
c.  Any use proposing valet parking shall submit a plan to the town council for review and approval. Such plan shall be reviewed in conjunction with site plan review. Valet parking shall not utilize more than 30 percent of the required on-site parking for the approved use or uses. The valet parking plan shall address each of the following: 
1.  The location of the valet parking booth or area; 
2.  The location and number of parking spaces to be utilized for valet parking; 
3.  Evidence that the business owns the parking spaces proposed for valet use or a copy of any agreement or lease that provides the business with the right to use spaces owned by another individual or entity for valet parking; 
4.  The impacts of valet parking on the shared parking plan for the project (if one exists) and on patrons who do not utilize such service; 
5.  The hours of operation; and 
6.  The location and text of any signage associated with the valet parking operation and assigned spaces. 
(11)  Loading: see section 34-985. 
(12)  Minimum architectural treatments: All sides of any building within this district shall be designed with a variety of treatments matching the general architectural theme of the project. The intent of this requirement is to have all sides of the building appear as the front facade, including those fronting a roadway, alley or parking area. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 4, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-856. - Site area development modification option. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  The medical commercial (MC) district incorporates the predominant business corridor along U.S. Highway 1, which serves as a gateway to the town. In order to foster quality development patterns and practices along this corridor, the town council may consider modifications to the building site area regulations specifically identified in this section. Any of the identified modifications shall be requested in the form of a special exception to the town council during site plan review and shall be subject to any additional conditions necessary to address the criteria set forth in section 34-93. No applicant shall be entitled to such modifications by right; rather, the applicant shall be required to demonstrate that the proposed project meets the purpose and intent of this section. 
(2)  The purpose of this potential flexibility is to provide for creative and innovative designs and approaches by the applicant that will clearly promote a sustainable and livable mixed use environment within the district. 
(3)  The potential modifications are intended to provide a vehicle for quality, innovative development and redevelopment within the town's commercial corridors. Consequently, all applicants requesting such modification shall provide for the enhancement of the physical appearance of landscaping, architecture, signage and site development over and above the site plan appearance standards generally applicable within the town (see section 34-116). 
(4)  Each applicant shall also identify the public benefits derived from the proposed development, such as the promotion of public use, the preservation of natural resources, and the integration of the project with the town's extensive natural environment. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions for modifications to the site area development requirements set forth herein shall be made by special exception, and may be applied to any proposed development order application within the MC district that involves any mix of uses (i.e., retail/office; retail/residential; office/residential, etc.). 
(c)  Boundaries. The site area development modification shall apply within the MC medical commercial zoning district. 
(d)  Conflict with applicable regulations. Where the provisions of the modifications are in conflict with other zoning regulations applicable to the property, the provisions of this section shall control, and are subject to town council approval. 
(e)  Performance standards. All development within the CG district shall comply with the rules and regulations of all agencies having jurisdiction within the town and with all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  Additional criteria. All applicants seeking development approval in accordance with the MC district shall comply with the standards of the district, and with the town council's approval, as modified herein. Furthermore, all applicants shall demonstrate the following: 
(1)  The proposed development is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the town comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The proposed development is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, including, but not limited to, innovative and enhanced architecture, landscaping, and public use areas. 
(3)  The proposed development includes adequate, safe and appropriate public facilities and services. 
(4)  The proposed development provides for pedestrian and vehicular interconnection between adjacent projects as well as a public focal point and/or public gathering place which shall include a water, landscape or art feature. 
(5)  The proposed development is not detrimental to existing land uses or the native ecosystems within the district. 
(g)  Potential building site area regulation modifications. 
(1)  Minimum total lot area: 10,000 square feet; and the creation of any new lots must meet the minimum requirement of 40,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(4)  Setbacks: See section 34-631(5); covered arcades, cafes, awnings and walkways may extend up to eight feet into a required front or side yard setback provided that the property adjacent to such yard or setback does not have a residential or "R" zoning district designation. 
(5)  Maximum building height: See section 34-631(8). No building shall exceed 60 feet in height. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town council may approve five stories within this overall height limitation for buildings with a mix of uses, including a residential component, provided that the town council determines that the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed project meets the purpose and intent of this section. 
(6)  Maximum building dimension: 300 feet. 
(7)  Maximum lot coverage: 45 percent. 
(8)  Minimum landscaped open space: 15 percent. Additionally, all building sides shall be required to install foundation planting materials along a minimum of 30 percent of the length of each facade. Such foundation plantings shall be at least four feet deep, as measured from the edge of the building. 
(9)  Parking: 
a.  See section 34-631(12) for parking standards. A minimum of 90 percent of the parking provided for a project shall be located behind the principal buildings and screened from the roadway by structures and/or a heavily landscaped buffer. 
b.  Preferred permitted nonresidential uses may be permitted up to a 25 percent reduction in the number of spaces required pursuant to section 34-981(b)(5) provided that the town council determines that the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed project meets the purpose and intent of this section. This reduction in required parking shall not be available in conjunction with a shared parking plan. 
(10)  Signage: Mixed use developments may be entitled to utilize both the commercial and residential sign standards (see article IV, division 6 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 689 , § 15, 1-25-2017) 
Secs. 34-857-34-866. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-867. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses shall be clearly supplementary and incidental to the principal use of the lot and shall be located on the same lot as the principal use to which it is subordinate. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.31, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-868. - Convenience stores. 
(a)  No more than three of any combination of convenience store and fuel service station shall be located within 5,500 feet of one another. For example, if three of any combination of convenience store and fuel service station (e.g., two convenience stores and one fuel service station, or three fuel service stations and no convenience store) are clustered in a group, each within 5,500 feet of one another, then a fourth convenience store or fuel service station must be located greater than 5,500 feet from at least one member of the cluster. For the purposes of this section, all measurements of distances shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on any property line of any property used as a convenience store or fuel service station. (See illustration following section 34-869.) 
(b)  There shall be a minimum distance of 500 feet shortest airline measurement between the nearest points on a parcel of land occupied for convenience store purposes and to be occupied by a house of worship. 
(c)  The proposed facility shall not have as a part of its operation amusement devices which may be operated by coin, currency or tokens. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.32, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 376, 11-15-1989; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-869. - Fuel service stations. 
(a)  No more than three of any combination of convenience store and fuel service station shall be located within 5,500 feet of one another. For example, if three of any combination of convenience store and fuel service station (e.g., two convenience stores and one fuel service station, or three fuel service stations and no convenience store) are clustered in a group, each within 5,500 feet of one another, then a fourth convenience store or fuel service station must be located greater than 5,500 feet from at least one member of the cluster. For the purposes of this section, all measurements of distance shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on any property line of any property used as a convenience store or fuel service station. (See illustration following this section.) 
(b)  There shall be a minimum distance of 500 feet shortest airline measurement between the nearest points on a parcel of land occupied for fuel service station purposes which sells alcoholic beverages and a parcel to be occupied by a house of worship. 
(c)  The proposed facility shall not have as a part of its operation amusement devices which may be operated by coin, currency or tokens. 
(d)  All outdoor displays of merchandise are prohibited. 
(e)  A raised curb of at least six inches in height shall be erected along all street property lines, except for driveway openings. 
(f)  Curb breaks are limited to two per street frontage. 
(g)  All fuel pumps, tanks, vents, pump islands and pump island canopies shall conform to setback requirements for the district except that no such pumps, tanks, vents, pump islands or pump island canopies shall be located closer than 25 feet to any side property line. 
(h)  Off-street loading spaces which are provided for delivery of materials, merchandise, fuel oils, or any similar accessory or product, shall be located in such a manner on the site that they are completely separate from the customer parking area and access drives and aisles thereto. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.33, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 376, 11-15-1989; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 

Sec. 34-870. - Vehicle minor repair facilities. 
(a)  No more than two vehicle minor repair facilities shall be located within 8,000 feet of each other. For the purposes of this section, all measurements of distances shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on any property line of any property used as a vehicle minor repair facility. 
(b)  A raised curb of at least six inches in height shall be erected along all street property lines, except for driveway openings. 
(c)  Repairs shall be restricted to the enclosed bay areas, except when emergency repairs are required to transfer vehicles into the enclosed bay areas. 
(d)  Quarterly testing and monitoring of environmental conditions on site shall be performed for review and approval by the town and appropriate environmental agencies. 
(e)  Adsorbents shall be kept on site for oil spills, or a contract with a private vendor shall be provided to ensure that oil, grease and other spillage will be serviced. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.34, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 376, 11-15-1989; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-871. - Swimming pools. 
(a)  Swimming pools shall be set back at least 15 feet from the front property line and five feet from the side and rear property lines measured to the water's edge. Swimming pools may be enclosed by screening in the side and rear yards, providing a minimum five-foot setback is provided from the side and rear property lines to the screen enclosure. Screen enclosures for zero lot line homes may be placed on the property line on the zero setback side and must be set back five feet from the other side and rear property line. Screen enclosures for townhouses may be placed on the property lines on the zero setback sides and must be set back five feet from the rear property line. 
(b)  Furthermore, hot tubs/whirlpools or pools within zero lot line communities may encroach into the minimum one-foot setback from the property line of the zero wall of the adjacent home, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  If a planned unit development (PUD), no 25 percent reduction is applied to the minimum one-foot setback from the zero wall. 
(2)  The hot tub/whirlpool or pool must have a maximum depth of 30 inches below grade within five feet of zero wall. 
(3)  The hot tub/whirlpool or pool must be completely against the adjacent house wall and extend no closer than five feet to each end of the adjacent house wall. Beyond the house wall, in rear or front yard, the five-foot side and rear yard setbacks must be adhered to. 
(4)  Pools, fountains, hot tubs/whirlpools, etc., that have jets, blowers, waterfalls, mechanical equipment, or any other mechanisms that generate noise, must be completely sound-insulated from adjacent houses with a minimum two-inch thick urethane insulation or better against all surfaces within two feet of the zero line. 
(c)  In addition, hot tubs/whirlpools or pools within individual townhouse lots may encroach into the required side yard setback to a minimum of one foot from the side property line, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  If a PUD, no 25 percent reduction is applied to the minimum one-foot setback from the side property line. 
(2)  Pools, fountains, hot tubs/whirlpools, etc., that have jets, blowers, waterfalls, mechanical equipment, or any other mechanisms that generate noise, must be completely sound insulated from the adjacent property with a minimum two-inch thick urethane insulation or better around the noise generator within five feet of the property line. 
(3)  A minimum five-foot-high wall or fence, consistent with the architecture of the building, shall be installed along the side property lines to screen the pool or hot tub/whirlpool from the adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.35, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 388, 4-18-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 689 , § 16, 1-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-872. - Tennis courts, shuffleboard courts. 
    Tennis courts, shuffleboard courts and similar uses not to be enclosed by a structure may be constructed within yard areas except the required front yard, as prescribed by this chapter; provided, however, that any walls or fences shall conform with section 34-905. However, in no instance shall any tennis court or shuffleboard court be closer than ten feet to a lot line. In determining the percentage of coverage of a lot by buildings, tennis courts, shuffleboard courts and similar uses shall not be counted in such computation. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.36, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-873. - Setback of accessory structures. 
    Accessory structures shall provide a minimum of ten feet from rear and side lot lines and shall be set back by the required front setback in the district which is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.100, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Sec. 34-874. - Hurricane and flood damage protection. 
    To minimize hazards to life and damage to property in portions of the town exposed to severe wave action during hurricanes or other periods of extraordinary wind-driven high tides and to portions exposed to flooding as a result of such occurrences or heavy rainfall, and to qualify for protection under the National Flood Insurance Program of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of Housing and Urban Development, the following special requirements are enacted. For the purposes of these regulations, it is assumed that all of the area within the town is subject to either coastal damage due to such wave action or to flooding, or both. The laws and ordinances concerning land use and control and other measures designed to reduce flood losses shall take precedence over any conflicting laws, ordinances or codes. Upon certification by the administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program that any area within the town is not so subject to either of these perils, it is intended that the special requirements herein shall not be applied to such area. In the absence of such certification, the following special requirements shall apply: first floor slab shall be not less than 7.5 feet above mean sea level; building permit applications require special review. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.110, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Sec. 34-875. - Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities. 
    Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities are prohibited within the town's corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 4, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 701 , § 4, 10-25-2017) 
Secs. 34-876-34-895. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-896. - Street lot lines. 
    The front lot line, side street line or rear street line of any lot shall be the right-of-way line (the street line) of the abutting street. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.12, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Sec. 34-897. - Lot area. 
    All lot, yard and bulk regulations for both the principal and accessory uses shall be calculated within the confines of a contiguous platted lot. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.13, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Sec. 34-898. - Intersection vision. 
    As an aid to free and safe movement of vehicles at and near street intersections and in order to promote more adequate protection for the safety of children, pedestrians, operators of vehicles and of property at all street intersections, no obstruction to vision (other than an existing structure) between 30 inches and six feet in height above the established grade of the street at the property line shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the triangle formed by the street lot lines of such lot and a line drawn between the points along such street lot lines 30 feet distance from their point of intersection. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.14, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Sec. 34-899. - Corner lots. 
(a)  Where any lot is located on any street intersection or where two or more intersecting street lines outline any lot, or where any lot is located upon any corner, one side of the lot facing a street shall be determined to be the front street line of the lot by the orientation of the building facing a street and the other side of the lot facing a street shall be determined to be the street side of the lot. The required street side yard shall have the same setback as the front street yard of such lot, and shall have the same provisions, requirements and restrictions as a required front street yard. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall apply to the street side yard for a corner lot. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.16, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Sec. 34-900. - Through lots. 
    Where any lot extends the entire depth or width of a block and has frontage on more than one street at opposite ends of the lot, one side of the lot facing a street shall be determined to be the front street line of the lot by the orientation of the building facing a street and the other side of the lot facing a street shall be determined to be the rear street frontage. The required rear street yard shall have the same setback as the front of such lot, and shall have the same provisions, requirements and restrictions as a required front yard. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.17, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Sec. 34-901. - Restriction on use of required yards. 
(a)  Every part of a required front, side and rear yard must be open to the sky and unobstructed except for accessory buildings in a rear or side yard, garden walls and fences, as permitted, and except for the ordinary projection of open porches, balconies, steps, sills, belt courses, cornices. (See sections 34-902(1) and 34-903.) 
(b)  Metal storage accessory buildings shall be permitted only in the following zoning districts: CG commercial general, CO commercial office, UTL utility, RV Park recreational vehicle park, and MH manufactured home community. All metal storage buildings shall have skirting and landscaping around the entire base of the structure, except in the RV park and MH zoning districts, where only skirting shall be required if landscaping is not possible. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.18, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 393, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 494, 9-24-1997) 
Sec. 34-902. - Yard restrictions-General, all districts. 
    The following restrictions shall apply to all districts: 
(1)  Chimneys, cornices, bay windows and balconies may extend 24 inches from the main building into the yard area, and eaves may extend 36 inches from the main building into the yard area. Chimneys and bay windows shall not exceed ten feet in horizontal dimension measured parallel to the building wall, and the total lineal dimension for such projection shall not exceed 25 percent of the total dimension along the building wall from which such chimney and/or bay window may project. 
(2)  First floor entrance platforms, open terraces or steps may extend six feet into the front yard or street area provided no closed part shall exceed four feet in height above the average lot level. 
(3)  Any mechanical equipment, excluding public utility fixtures, including telephone, telegraph, electric and water and sewer facilities, shall not be located in the front yard and shall be located a minimum of five feet from any side or rear property line. When a nonresidential or multifamily use is located adjacent to any residential use, then such mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of ten feet from any property line. Notwithstanding the foregoing, fuel oil and propane tanks that are placed completely underground may be located in the front yard provided that they are in compliance with the most current Florida Building Code and National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.19, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 382, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 705 , § 3, 9-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-903. - Same-RM-1, RM-2, RMT, RM-OO and RH districts. 
    The following restrictions shall apply to the RM-1, RM-2, RMT, RM-OO and RH districts: 
(1)  Cornices, chimneys and fire escapes may extend 48 inches from the main building into any yard areas. 
(2)  Areaways, ramps, or steps may extend into side or rear yard area within 24 inches from adjacent property line. 
(3)  Canopies or architectural features covering driveway access to any building may extend ten feet into the required yard. 
(4)  Balconies may extend up to 72 inches only into yards which are 30 feet or more in width. Balconies may not extend into yards of less than 30 feet. 
(5)  Canopies and/or architectural features covering a yard adjacent to a public or private alley may extend up to the adjacent right-of-way line of the alley. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.20, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-904. - Same-CG and CO districts. 
    The following restrictions shall apply to the CG and CO districts: 
(1)  Cornices, solid canopies, or architectural features may extend 48 inches into the required yard area. 
(2)  Marquees or canvas-covered fireproof canopies, no wider than entrance ways, may be constructed over main entrances to hotels, theaters and places of public assembly and may extend to the face of the curb, provided that no support shall be nearer than 18 inches to the face of the curb, and said installation shall have a minimum of nine feet of vertical clearance between any solid construction and the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.21, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 426, 8-12-1992) 
Sec. 34-905. - Walls and fences. 
    Walls or fences may be located or constructed within the required yard areas or on the lot line and shall conform to the following regulations except where special requirements are set forth for specific screening purposes elsewhere in this chapter: 
(1)  Maximum height of walls and fences: 
Front yard* 4 ft. Side and rear yard (residential)** 6 ft. Side and rear yard (nonresidential)** 8 ft.  
*Swimming pools in the front yard shall be permitted a maximum five-foot-high wall or fence in order to meet safety code requirements. Lots fronting on U.S. Highway 1 shall be permitted to have a maximum six-foot-high wall or fence. 
**Corner and through lots (yards facing a street) shall conform to the front yard maximum height requirement, unless otherwise specified in other sections of this chapter. 
The height shall be measured from the exterior side (side facing the adjacent property) of the wall or fence from the top of the wall or fence to the finished grade at any given point along the wall or fence. 

Walls or fences for dangerous areas, such as utility plants or substations, may exceed the height limitation upon approval by the town council. 
(2)  General regulations. 
a.  Design, color, and materials must be compatible with the principal structures on site. Natural wood is considered a compatible color. 
b.  Perimeter walls/fences around a development, excluding an individual single-family lot, must have an ornamental feature at least every 30 linear feet. 

c.  Ornamental features, excluding wall caps, may exceed the height limitation upon approval by the director. 

d.  All front yard walls and fences must have continuous landscaping along the street side of the wall or fence, unless it is an open wall/fence (such as railings), in which case, the landscaping may be on either side of the wall/fence. 
e.  All wood fences shall have a minimum one-half-inch thick boards, have two-inch by four-inch pressure treated back rails (support structure), and have four-inch by four-inch pressure treated posts (0.40 pounds per cubic foot treatment for in ground use). Fasteners, clips and anchors shall be hot-dipped galvanized, coated to resist rust, or stainless steel. 
f.  The finished side of a fence (the side that does not have the supports) shall face the street and any adjacent property. Only in those cases where the adjacent property has an existing fence, hedge or other structure which would hide the unfinished side of the fence shall the finished side not be required to face the adjacent property. 
g.  Chainlink fences are prohibited in the front yard. In addition, all chainlink fences shall be hot-dipped galvanized, vinyl coated, or aluminum, in order to resist rust. 
h.  Walls and fences must be maintained properly or removed when dilapidated, in need of paint, or in disrepair. 
(3)  Combination wall/fence. Metal picket-style fences may be attached to a retaining wall, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The wall does not exceed to the maximum total height provided for in this section when measured from the exterior grade. 
b.  The combined wall and fence does not exceed the maximum total height provided for in this section when measured from the interior grade. 
c.  The interior grade is continually landscaped to the extent that the landscaping is visible for at least two feet in height when viewed from the exterior of the property. 
d.  The design, color and materials must be compatible with the principal structures on site. 
e.  All other requirements of this section are satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.22, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 645, § 2, 1-12-2011) 
Sec. 34-906. - Building site area regulations for individual townhouse units. 
    All individual townhouse units within a townhouse cluster shall comply with the following regulations: 
Minimum total area 750 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 16 ft. Minimum lot depth 30 ft. Maximum lot coverage 80%  
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.23, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Sec. 34-907. - Landscape buffers and landscape barriers separating CG commercial general and all residential zoning districts. 
    Whenever a commercial development in the CG commercial general zoning district abuts a residential development, the design and height of the landscape buffer and barrier shall take into account the following: 
(1)  The building styles and building heights of the residential district and the building styles and building heights of the commercial district; 
(2)  The location of traffic areas and service areas (e.g., truck deliveries, pickups, dumpster, etc.) of the commercial development, vis-a-vis those of residential development; 
(3)  The design of delivery and service area (covered vs. open, exterior vs. interior); and 
(4)  The relationship of the finished floor elevations of the residential commercial structures. 
The minimum height of the landscape barrier shall be at least six feet. Greater heights may be required in accordance with the criteria cited herein. If a single wall is constructed, it must be set back from the property line to accommodate landscaping material on the side facing the residential development. If a proposed structure is in excess of eight feet, it must be terraced or accompanied by a berm on the side of the residential development. The maximum height of a landscape barrier shall not exceed 16 feet, exclusive of trees used as part of the landscape barrier. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.24, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Sec. 34-908. - Screening-Mechanical equipment. 
    All mechanical equipment, including but not limited to heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and pool equipment machinery; water filtration systems; fuel oil and propane tanks; accessory communications equipment such as signal sending and receiving dishes, etc.; public utility service boxes and similar fixtures, including telephone, telegraph, electric, natural or propane gas, potable water, and sewer facilities; and elevator facilities shall be screened from public view on all sides when feasible, or to the maximum extent possible. Such screening may include any combination of landscaping and opaque materials. Building materials to be utilized for screening purposes shall be consistent with the architectural design of the principal structure. Screening shall extend at least one foot above the object to be screened. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.25, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 705 , § 3, 9-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-909. - Same-Solid waste disposal facilities. 
    All dumpsters or other solid waste containers shall be screened on all four sides from public view. Both sides and the rear of such facilities shall be screened by an opaque concrete wall, or similar quality material. The front of a screen enclosure shall be gated and shall consist of durable materials with a solid surface consistent with the overall design of the project. Walls shall be landscaped with shrubs and hedges planted at two foot intervals, unless there are physical limitations on the site which prevent this. All landscaping and materials utilized to screen an enclosure shall be consistent with the overall design of the principal structures located on the site. Screening shall extend at least one foot above the facility to be screened. All dumpsters or other solid waste containers shall be placed on a concrete pad appropriate to the size of the container, and enclosures shall appropriately house all dumpsters, garbage and recycle bins on site. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.26, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999) 
Sec. 34-910. - Storage areas for nonresidential and multiple-family uses. 
    All storage areas shall be screened on all four sides from public view. Both sides and the rear of the screening enclosure shall consist of an opaque concrete wall, pressure treated wood, or similar quality material. The front of the screen enclosure shall be gated and shall consist of durable materials with a solid surface consistent with the overall design of the project. Dependent upon the location of an enclosure, landscaping may be required in addition to the opaque screening material. All materials utilized in the screen enclosure shall be consistent with the overall design of the principal structures located on the site. A roof may be required on the enclosure at the discretion of the town. All enclosures shall be placed on a concrete pad or asphalt. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.27, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Sec. 34-911. - Required ingress and egress points for commercial uses and commercially zoned properties. 
    All commercially zoned properties or properties developed or utilized for commercial purposes shall be required to have ingress and egress points open directly onto collector or arterial roadways (as defined in the Unified County Land Development Code). Additional ingress and egress points shall be permitted to open directly onto any public roadway. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.28, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Sec. 34-912. - Simple lot split/subdivision. 
(a)  A simple lot split (see definition) shall hereby be known as a de minimus development. Application and procedures for any de minimus development shall be administered and maintained by the director of planning and zoning, and may be amended from time to time by the town council (requiring approval by the town council). An application shall be reviewed and obtain acceptance of the director of planning and zoning, town engineer, and town manager who shall make professional recommendation to the town council regarding any application. Although the application may be amended, it shall always contain approval and acceptance signature lines and, where appropriate, seal spaces for the town officials and town council mentioned in this section. 
(b)  Requirements/criteria for de minimus development. All subdivision requirements shall be adhered to as per the adopted town subdivision regulations. In supplementation to said regulations, for a de minimus development the following shall apply/be required: 
(1)  The director shall consider a proposed de minimus development for recommendation upon the submission of the following materials: 
a.  An application form provided by the town accompanied by the application fee established for this process, which shall be the same as the base fee for subdivisions and platting (identified in Resolution 93-23[N], including waiver requirements of section 34-206). 
b.  Four paper copies of the proposed de minimus development. 
c.  A statement from the appropriate provider indicating whether water and/or sanitary sewer service, capacity of power, as well as other utilities/services are available to the property. 
d.  Legal descriptions including the acreage and square footage of the original and proposed lots and a scaled drawing showing the intended division shall be prepared, including any existing or required easements and/or restrictions. Such survey shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor registered in the state. In the event a lot contains any principal or accessory structures, a survey showing the structures on the lot shall accompany the application; and a metes and bounds description shall accompany each description. 
e.  The director shall provide a copy of all materials to the town engineer for review, comments and acceptance/denial. The town engineer may require drainage, topographic or other specific information, as necessary. 
f.  If the proposed de minimus development meets the conditions of this section and otherwise complies with all applicable laws and ordinances including, but not limited to, this chapter and the town subdivision regulations; and meets with the approval of the town engineer, then the director shall make recommendation of the de minimus development to the town council based upon the criteria set forth herein. 
(2)  Each proposed lot must conform to the following standards: 
a.  Each proposed lot must conform to the requirements of this chapter and shall maintain and provide necessary easements consistent with easement requirements as established by the town's subdivision regulations; 
b.  Each lot shall abut a public or private street for the required minimum lot width for the zoning district where the lots are located, or otherwise stated in the town's subdivision regulations; 
c.  If any lot abuts a right-of-way that does not conform to the design specifications provided in the town's subdivision regulations, the owner may be required to dedicate the appropriate width necessary to meet the minimum design requirement; 
d.  The proposed de minimus development shall be consistent with surrounding lots. In determining consistency and compatibility with surrounding lots, the town council may consider, among other things, whether the existing or platted lots have been divided; and whether the majority of existing or platted lots are comparable in size or configuration along the same street within 250 feet of the subject lot; 
e.  No further division of an approved de minimus development is permitted under this section, unless a development plan and plat/replat is prepared and submitted in accordance with the town's subdivision regulations, and this chapter; 
f.  At any time, the director of planning and zoning may require approval and acceptance for a proposed de minimus development from other agencies, including but not limited to the county, department of transportation, South Florida Water Management District, department of environmental protection, or other agencies, as deemed necessary; and 
g.  A de minimus development cannot be approved if property taxes are not current for any part or parent of a subject petition. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.29, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 536, 5-9-2001) 
Secs. 34-913-34-948. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 34-949. - Intent; findings of fact; definitions. 
(a)  Legislative intent. This division is intended to provide for the proper location of adult entertainment uses in order to protect the integrity of adjacent neighborhoods, educational uses, religious uses, parks and other commercial uses. Proper separation of adult entertainment uses prevents the creation of skid row areas that result from the concentration of these uses and their patrons. It is the intent of this division to limit the secondary effects of adult entertainment uses as set out in subsection (b) of this section. The standards in this division are intended to ensure that residential districts, religious uses, educational uses, parks and other commercial uses are located in areas free from the secondary effects of adult entertainment uses. The location of residential districts, religious uses, educational uses, parks and other commercial uses within viable, unblighted and desirable areas supports the preservation of property values and promotes the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(b)  Findings of fact. Based on the evidence and testimony which was presented originally to the board of county commissioners, at the time that the county adopted Ordinance No. 88-31 in reference to adult entertainment establishments, which is hereby incorporated herein by reference, and based upon the evidence and testimony presented at first reading and at the public hearing before the town council, including the findings incorporated in the Adult Entertainment Study for City of New York (November 1994) prepared by the Department of City Planning; Seattle Washington Director's Report of Department of Construction and Land Use on Proposed Land Use Code Text Amendment Adult Cabarets (1989); A Study of Land Use Regulation of Adult Entertainment Establishments prepared by the Springfield, Missouri, Department of Community Development (November, 1986); Report of St. Paul, Minnesota, entitled Effects on Surrounding Area of Adult Entertainment Businesses (June, 1978); Study and Recommendations for Adult Entertainment Businesses in the Town of Islip, New York, Department of Planning and Development (1980); and United States Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986), A Summary of a National Survey of Real Estate Appraisers Regarding the Effect of Adult Bookstores on Property Values, conducted by the Division of Planning, Department of Metropolitan Development, City of Indianapolis, January 1984; the town council hereby finds that: 
(1)  Commercial establishments exist or may exist within the unincorporated areas of the county, the town and adjacent municipalities, where books, magazines, motion pictures, prints, photographs, periodicals, records, novelties and/or devices which depict, illustrate, describe or relate to specified sexual activities are possessed, displayed, exhibited, distributed and/or sold; 
(2)  Such commercial establishments are or may be located within the town, or are so close in proximity to the town that the same may seek location within the town for such purpose and wherein such establishments the following occurs: 
a.  The superficial tissues of one person are manipulated, rubbed, stroked, kneaded, and/or tapped by a second person, accompanied by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas; 
b.  Dancers, entertainers or other individuals, who, for any form of commercial gain, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area; or 
c.  Lap dancing; 
(3)  The activities described in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section occur at commercial establishments for the purpose of making a profit, and as such, are subject to regulation within and by the town, in the interest of the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people of the town; 
(4)  This competitive commercial exploitation of such nudity and seminudity is adverse to the public's interest and the quality of life, tone of commerce, and total community environment in the town; 
(5)  When the activities described in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section are presented in commercial establishments within the town, other activities which are illegal, immoral or unhealthful tend to accompany them, concentrate around them, and be aggravated by them. Such other activities include, but are not limited to, prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and property; 
(6)  When the activities described in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section are present in commercial establishments, they tend to blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring businesses, lower property values, promote crime, particularly the kinds detailed in subsection (5) of this section, and ultimately lead residents and businesses to move to other locations; 
(7)  There is a direct relationship between the display or depiction of specified anatomical areas in subsection (2) of this section and an increase in criminal activities, moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and good order of the community, and the occurrence of these activities is hazardous to the health and safety of those persons in attendance and tends to depreciate the value of adjoining property and harm the economic welfare of the community as a whole. These secondary effects are adverse to the public's interest and quality of life, tone of commerce and total community environment in the town; 
(8)  There will be an increased demand on the town's limited law enforcement resources as a result of these secondary effects and increase in criminal activities associated with adult entertainment establishments located in or near the town; 
(9)  Existing retail centers over 50,000 square feet within the town maintain on-site management/leasing offices and monitor the conduct of tenants which will assist the town in controlling criminal activity and reducing the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments; and 
(10)  Locating adult entertainment establishments in existing and future large retail centers within the town will reduce certain secondary effects and visual blight which often accompany such establishments as they will be less visible to the general public, and such retail centers regulate their own aesthetics and signage. In order to minimize the visibility and visual blight, such establishments should be prohibited from locating in outbuildings and on outparcels of retail centers. 
(c)  Supplemental definitions. In addition to the definitions in section 34-4 of this chapter, the following supplemental definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this division: 
    Adult arcade means any place or establishment operated for commercial gain which invites or permits the public to view adult material. For purposes of this section, the term "adult arcade" is included within the definition of adult theater. 
    Adult bookstore/adult video store means an establishment which sells, offers for sale or rents adult material for commercial gain; unless the establishment demonstrates either: 
(1)  The adult material is accessible only by employees and the gross income from the sale or rental of adult material comprises less than 40 percent of the gross income from the sale or rental of goods or services at the establishment; or 
(2)  The individual items of adult material offered for sale or rental comprise less than ten percent of the individual items, as stock in trade, publicly displayed in the establishment and which is not accessible to minors at the establishment. 
    Adult booth means a small enclosed or partitioned area inside an adult entertainment establishment which is: 
(1)  Designed or used for the viewing of adult material by one or more persons; and 
(2)  Is accessible to any person, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access. The term "adult booth" includes, but is not limited to, a peep show booth or other booth used to review adult material. The term "adult booth" does not include a foyer through which any person can enter or exit the establishment, or a restroom. 
    Adult dancing establishment means an establishment where employees display or expose specified anatomical areas to others regardless of whether the employees actually engage in dancing. 
    Adult entertainment establishment means any adult arcade, adult theater, adult bookstore/adult video store, adult motel, or adult dancing establishment; or any establishment or business operated for commercial gain where any employee, operator or owner exposes specified anatomical areas for viewing by patrons, including, but not limited to: massage establishments, whether or not licensed pursuant to F.S. ch. 480, tanning salons, modeling studios or lingerie studios. Excluded from this definition are any educational institutions where the exposure of specified anatomical areas is associated with a curriculum or program. 
    Adult material means any one or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter; photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual representations; recordings or other audio matter; and novelties or devices which have as their primary or dominant theme subject matter depicting, exhibiting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    Adult motel means any hotel, motel, boardinghouse, roominghouse or other place of temporary loading which includes the word "adult" in any name it uses or which otherwise advertises the presentation of adult material. The term "adult motel" is included within the definition of adult theater. 
    Adult theater means an establishment operated for commercial gain which consists of an enclosed building, or a portion or part thereof or an open-air area used for viewing of adult material. Adult motels, adult arcade, adult hotel and adult motion picture theater are included within the definition of adult theater. An establishment which has adult booths is considered to be an adult theater. 
    Adult video store . See Adult bookstore . 
    Commercial establishment means any business, location or place which conducts or allows to be conducted on its premises any activity for commercial gain. 
    Commercial gain means operated for pecuniary gain, which shall be presumed for any establishment which has received a business tax receipt. For the purpose of this Code, commercial or pecuniary gain shall not depend on actual profit or loss. 
    Educational institution means a premises or site within a municipality or within the unincorporated area of the county, upon which there is an institution of learning, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes and/or courses of study required for accreditation by or membership in the state department of education, Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, the state council of independent schools, or a similar accrediting organization. The term "educational institution" includes a premises or site upon which there is a day care center, nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, professional institution of higher education including a community college, junior college, four-year college or university, libraries, art galleries and museums open to the public or any special institution of learning. The term "educational institution," however, does not include a premises or site upon which there is a vocational institution operated for commercial gain. 
    Employee means any person who works, performs or exposes his specified anatomical areas in an establishment, irrespective of whether said person is paid a salary or wages by the owner or manager of the business establishment, or premises. The term "employee" shall include any person who pays any form of consideration to an owner or manager of an establishment for the privilege to work, perform or expose his specified anatomical areas within the establishment. 
    Establishment means the site or premises on which the adult entertainment establishment is located, including the interior of the establishment, or portion thereof, upon which certain activities or operations are being conducted for commercial gain. 
    Park means a tract of land within a municipality or unincorporated area which is: 
(1)  Kept for ornament and/or primarily recreation, and which is open to the public whether or not the land is publicly owned; or 
(2)  Land privately owned which is kept for ornament and/or primarily recreation purposes and which is limited to surrounding landowners. A playground shall be considered a park. 
    Person includes an individual, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation and all other or any other similar entity. 
    Religious institution means a premises or site which is used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious activities. A church, ecclesiastical or denominational organization or established place of worship, retreat site, camp or similar facility owned or operated by a bona fide religious group for religious activities shall be considered a religious institution. 
    Residential zoning district , for the purpose of this division only, includes any residential zoning districts in unincorporated Palm Beach County, adjacent municipalities and the following zoning districts in the town: 
RS Residential single-family RM-1 Residential multiple-family-medium density RM-2 Residential multiple-family-moderate density RMT Residential transient and multiple-family-moderate density RH Residential multiple-family-high density RM-OO Residential multiple-family-moderate density, open space option HIST-S Saturn Lane historic preservation district HIST-Z Zephyr Way historic preservation district HIST-B Beachbound historic preservation district R-DUP Residential duplex (two-family) RV PARK Recreational vehicle park MH Manufactured home community  
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals and pubic region; 
b.  Cleavage of human buttocks; or 
c.  That portion of the human female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of the areola (the colored ring around the nipple). This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or any wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(2)  Acts of human analingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellatio, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
(Ord. No. 207, §§ 5.370-5.373, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 354, 2-15-1989; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 514, 6-23-1999) 
Sec. 34-950. - Applicable zoning districts. 
    Adult entertainment establishments may be permitted in retail centers of a minimum size of 50,000 square feet located in the CG commercial general zoning district and medical commercial (MC) zoning district provided the locational criteria of section 34-951 are met. Such establishments may not be located in outbuildings or on outparcels of such retail centers. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.374, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 668, § 5, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-951. - Distance requirements for location. 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit the operation of any proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment within 250 feet from the existing specified uses: 
(1)  Another adult entertainment establishment. 
(2)  Church or religious institution. 
(3)  Educational institution. 
(4)  Park. 
(5)  Residential zoning district. 
(b)  The subsequent approval of a religious institution, educational institution, park or residentially zoned land within these distances shall not require an existing adult entertainment establishment to relocate; however, such establishment shall be considered a nonconforming use. 
(c)  Method of measurement. The location distances set forth shall be measured by drawing a straight line between the nearest point on the perimeter of the exterior wall or bay housing the proposed adult entertainment establishment to the nearest point on the property line of such religious institution, educational institution, park, residential zoning district or another adult entertainment establishment. Measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.375, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-952. - Variances not applicable. 
    Variances to the locational standards of section 34-951 shall not be included within the scope of approval for the issuance of variances by the town, pursuant to the procedure for variances under section 34-64(b), and shall not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.376, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-953. - Application process. 
    Any person desiring to operate an adult entertainment establishment in the town shall submit an application for the same to the town's planning and zoning director. A signed and sealed survey prepared by a licensed state surveyor shall also be submitted showing a 250-foot radius around the proposed structure or bay housing the proposed use. An affidavit, signed by both the surveyor and the applicant, shall accompany the survey indicating whether the locational criteria of section 34-951 have been met. Zoning approval or denial shall be issued within 14 days of submittal of a completed application. An aggrieved party has the right to immediately appeal a denial of zoning approval by the filing of a petition for writ of certiorari or other available relief within the timeframe provided by the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure and the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. Notwithstanding conformance with the zoning requirements of this division, no certificate of occupancy or completion shall be issued unless and until the proposed operator complies with and receives a license pursuant to the Palm Beach County Adult Entertainment Code, Ordinance No. 88-31, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.377, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Secs. 34-954-34-979. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 34-980. - Purpose and intent. 
    The regulations and requirements of this division are intended to minimize traffic congestion and facilitate vehicular and pedestrian safety by providing guidelines for the provision of off-street and on-street parking for all uses in all zoning districts of the town. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.40.1, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-981. - General requirements; off-street parking plan. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  All parking facilities which are required under this chapter shall be continued for as long as a use requiring parking is continued. 
(2)  Any building or structure existing as of the date of the adoption of this chapter, may be renovated, altered or repaired without providing additional parking facilities if there is no increase in the number of dwelling units, square footage in nonresidential developments, or change in use which requires more parking than the existing use. Any additional number of dwelling units, square footage in nonresidential developments, or change in use which requires more parking than the existing use shall meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  A site plan drawn to scale showing parking shall be submitted to and reviewed by the planning and zoning board and approved by the town council before a permit is issued for the construction of or use of the building, structure, or facility being considered. This plan shall show the location, and accurately designate the number of required spaces, their size or sizes, access aisles, driveways, and their relation to the site plan. Landscaping of parking areas shall comply with the landscape requirements of article IV, division 7 of this chapter. 
(4)  Parking facilities shall be maintained for as long as the use for which they are provided is continued. 
(b)  Off-street parking plan. 
(1)  Coordination. The building size and parking plan shall be coordinated for the following uses: three or more attached single-family residential, multiple-family residential, and nonresidential including but not limited to commercial, institutional, governmental, and recreational. Coordinating the parking layout, number of spaces and size of structures shall consist of the following two planning steps: 
a.  Step 1. The minimum number of parking spaces shall be determined from the schedule of off-street parking required according to the intended use or uses and the corresponding number of spaces required. The minimum parking area shall then be determined by assuming each off-street parking space will occupy 200 square feet and the parking plan will meet required minimum aisles and backing space. 
b.  Step 2. Additional parking may be created by then reducing the size of the parking space according to the off-street parking standards set forth in subsection (b)(5) of this section (standard stall dimensions, compact stall dimensions, and disabled parking stall dimensions). 
(2)  Compact car spaces. Compact car spaces shall be permitted only for office developments greater than 25,000 square feet in gross floor area, and the percentage of compact car spaces shall not exceed 15 percent of the total number of spaces provided. Furthermore: 
a.  The location of compact car spaces shall be neither more nor less convenient than larger car spaces. Compact spaces shall be well-marked and quickly distinguished from standard spaces. Compact car spaces should not be sprinkled here and there in such a way that the individual parking the larger car is deceived by the size of any empty space, finding it too small for use. 
b.  Compact spaces shall be identified in one of two ways: 
1.  By signs only; or 
2.  By signs and color-coded stall lines. A line can be painted at the entry to the smaller stall. The line is to be parallel to the aisle and mark the point beyond which the car should not extend. 
(3)  Disabled parking and sign detail. All parking regulations for persons with disabilities shall be governed by F.S. §§ 316.1957, 316.1958, 316.1959, and 553.501 et seq. 
(4)  Vehicular and pedestrian access. 
a.  Individual ingress and egress drives extending across the public sidewalks and curbs and connecting the off-street parking spaces to the public street area shall not exceed a maximum of 30 feet. 
b.  Nonresidential developments approved after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be required to provide an internal accessway and/or alleyway connecting the approved development with adjacent future nonresidential development, providing for vehicular (automobile and bicycle) and pedestrian traffic. Existing nonresidential developments adjacent to new nonresidential developments shall be encouraged to provide internal cross access. Such cross access shall be provided in a recordable instrument in a form acceptable to the town attorney. A nonresidential development adjacent to a residential development may be required to provide a vehicular and/or pedestrian accessway if the residential development desires such connection. 
c.  An efficient and safe pedestrian and vehicular (automobile and bicycle) traffic system shall be provided throughout the parking and other vehicular use areas. 
d.  The design, number and placement of such drives, accessways, and alleyways shall be subject to review by the planning and zoning board and approval by the town council, and, if applicable, county and state authorities having jurisdiction over such matters. 
(5)  Schedule of off-street parking requirements. 
a.  Generally. The schedule of off-street parking requirements is as follows. The town encourages the use of angled parking for its residents. 
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
JUNO BEACH, FLORIDA 
Use Space Required Per Unit (unless otherwise specified in a particular zoning district) Accessory apartment 1 space per dwelling unit if 750 sq. ft. or less; 2 spaces per dwelling unit if greater than 750 sq. ft. Single- and two-family dwellings and townhouses 2 spaces per dwelling unit. In addition, for developments with 3 or more attached units, one guest space shall be required for every 7 units. Multiple-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit for the initial 20 units; 1.75 spaces for each from 21 through 50; 1.50 spaces for units 51 and more. In addition, one guest space shall be required for every 7 units. Churches and other places of worship 1 space per three fixed seats (schools and gymnasiums calculated separately). Beach, swimming, tennis, golf and yacht clubs 1 space per each 300 sq. ft. of clubhouse space plus 20 spaces for each swimming pool, 2 spaces for each tennis court, 2 spaces for each golf hole and one space for each boat slip. Beauty shops, barbershops, medical and dental clinics and/or offices, outpatient substance abuse treatment providers, other personal services 1 parking space per 200 sq. feet of gross floor area. Commercial retail establishments (excluding convenience stores) 1 parking space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area. Convenience stores 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area. Trust companies 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area. Commercial banks, savings and loan associations 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area; stacking lane of 5 cars per window. Business and professional offices 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area. Furniture stores (over 5,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area) 1 space per 600 sq. ft. of gross floor area. Furniture stores (under 5,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area) 1 space per 350 sq. ft. of gross floor area. Transient residential facilities 1 space per each occupancy unit. Hotel/motel 1.25 spaces per each occupancy unit plus one space for each three seats offered to the public for restaurant and lounge purposes and one space per 100 sq. ft. of meeting space. Additional spaces may be required for retail shops, beauty shops and barbershops, athletic clubs, etc. if expected to attract additional outside traffic. Restaurants, nightclubs and/or other eating places 1 space per 90 sq. ft. of gross floor area. For restaurants and shopping plazas with restaurants, a minimum of 60% of the required spaces shall occur on the back yard of the site, not on the street side. Libraries, museums 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area. Schools (public or private)  Grades K-8 1 parking space per employee plus 20 visitor spaces  Grades 9-12 1 parking space per employee, one space per every four students, and 25 visitor spaces. Assisted living facilities 1 parking space for each adult extended care residence plus one parking space per four patient beds or residents plus one space per employee, including nurses and staff doctor, on shift of greatest employment. Residential substance abuse treatment providers 1 parking space per four patient beds or residents plus one space per employee on shift of greatest employment.  
b.  Exceptions. If a proposed use is not listed or if special circumstances exist for a particular use which causes it not to need the required minimum spaces or if shared parking is desired, a parking study acceptable to the town planning and zoning department shall be submitted for review by the planning and zoning board and approval by town council. 
1.  If the number of required spaces is reduced, the area that would have been used for parking shall be reserved as landscape open space. The number of spaces reduced multiplied by 200 square feet (see subsection (b)(1)a of this section) shall be required to be maintained as landscape open space and shall not be counted toward the minimum landscape open space requirement. 
2.  A shared parking plan shall be enforced through written agreement, unity of title, or unity of control. 
c.  Parking in the side and rear yard. If a minimum of 75 percent of all parking spaces on site are located in the side and rear yard areas, then the total parking space requirement may be reduced by 15 percent. 
(c)  On-street parking. Any new development constructed upon an entirely new roadway shall be permitted, at the discretion of the town, to have on-street parking directly fronting a lot provided said roadway is designed for continuous and successive on-street parking. Such on-street parking shall count toward fulfilling the off-street parking requirement. 
(d)  Parking dimensions for on-street and off-street parking. The parking dimensions for standard stalls, compact car stalls and disabled stalls shall be as specifically set in Exhibits A, B and C, respectively, at the end of this section. Based on the frequency of use, the planning and zoning director may recommend to the planning and zoning board and to the town council that guest spaces, excess spaces, and infrequently used parking spaces be provided in grassed areas, or other acceptable material, with a stabilized sub-base. 
(e)  Bicycle parking facilities. 
(1)  Bicycle parking facilities with a minimum of eight bicycle parking spaces, in a design acceptable to the town, shall be provided for each nonresidential development. In a mixed-use or shopping center development, a minimum of eight bicycle parking spaces shall be provided for each anchor tenant. The bicycle parking facilities shall be located close to the principal building entrance and shall be sheltered. The number of required bicycle parking spaces may be increased or decreased by the town, based upon its review of the proposed project and the reasonable amount of expected bicycle parking space needs. Shower and locker facilities, sufficient in amount to accommodate need, are encouraged in all nonresidential developments greater than 10,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
(2)  All multifamily and three or more attached single-family residential developments shall be required to provide bicycle storage facilities. Such storage facilities shall be fully enclosed within a structure and shall be of a sufficient size to accommodate expected storage needs. 



(Ord. No. 207, § 5.40.2, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 287, 7-10-1985; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999; Ord. No. 668, § 5, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-982. - Commercial areas. 
(a)  The following restrictions shall apply to the parking of vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats and boat trailers in commercial areas: 
(1)  Any vehicles parked in a commercial area for more than a 24-hour period must be owned or leased by the business owner on the property and parked at the rear of the building, unless no rear parking area is available. 
(2)  No recreational vehicles, boats and boat trailers shall be parked or stored in a commercial area. 
(b)  The restrictions set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the temporary parking of vehicles when construction is underway, for which a current and valid building permit has been issued by the town and said permit is properly displayed on the premises. 
(c)  See article IV, division 6 for vehicle signage requirements. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.40.3, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 487, 9-18-1996; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-983. - Residential areas. 
(a)  Prohibited vehicles; exceptions. No dual-wheeled vehicles, vehicles exceeding three-fourths-ton rated capacity, and vans exceeding one-ton rated capacity; and no bus, pole trailer, semitrailer, trailer, truck, and truck tractor, as defined in F.S. ch. 316, shall be parked or stored on any residential property or public or private street rights-of-way or alleys within any residential district in the town except for the following situations: 
(1)  This restriction will not apply to those vehicles described and regulated in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(2)  This restriction shall not apply to the temporary parking of such vehicles on private property in residential districts whereon construction is underway, for which a current and valid building permit has been issued by the town and said permit is properly displayed on the premises. 
(3)  This restriction shall not apply to routine deliveries by tradesmen or the use of trucks in making service calls providing that such parking is actually in the course of business deliveries or servicing as the case may be. 
(4)  This restriction shall not apply to the parking of emergency vehicles providing that the time parked is actually necessary for the emergency. Further, the restriction shall not apply to emergency vehicles driven by residents of the town and parked on their property. 
(5)  This restriction shall not apply to a situation where such vehicle becomes disabled and, as a result of such emergency is required to be parked within a residential district for longer than the time allowed herein. However, any such vehicle shall be removed from the residential district within 24 hours by towing if necessary regardless of the nature of the emergency, and the cost of such towing shall be at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. 
(6)  This restriction shall not apply the recreational vehicle park (RV park) zoning district. 
(b)  Any commercial and noncommercial pickup truck, sport utility vehicle, automobile, or similar type of motor vehicle (as defined by F.S. ch. 316) not exceeding three-fourths-ton rated capacity and any van not exceeding one-ton rated capacity, may be parked on a lot improved with a permitted structure in any residential district in the town. All commercial motor vehicles shall adhere to the following: 
(1)  Any equipment or inventory shall be placed in the interior of the vehicle or within the confines of the bed of a truck. 
(2)  Any commercial vehicle that cannot abide by subsection (b)(1) of this section must be placed in a garage, carport, or in the side or rear yard and screened as described in subsection (c)(3) or (4) of this section. 
(3)  See article IV, division 6 for vehicle signage requirements. 
(c)  Boats, boat trailers, utility trailers; or recreational vehicles, excluding the park trailer (as defined by F.S. ch. 320) may be parked on a lot improved with a permitted structure in any residential district in town subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
(1)  One boat, one boat trailer, one utility trailer, and one recreational vehicle (RV), but not more than one of each, may be parked on a lot (See section 34-984 for exceptions). 
(2)  The equipment described in this section must be owned and used primarily by a resident of the premises; provided, however, that a guest of the resident may park such equipment, excluding the utility trailer, in the front yard driveway for not more than three days in any 14-day period. 
(3)  The location for such parked equipment, excluding the utility trailer, shall be in the rear yard or in the side yard placed to the rear of a line established by the front building wall or corner, whichever is applicable (see section 34-984 for exceptions). Such parked equipment, however, shall be screened on three sides against direct view from adjacent properties. Compliance with the screening described, herein, shall permit the planting of a minimum 42-inch-high hedge. The hedge shall be maintained in a healthy condition to a minimum height of six feet, which will become an effective opaque screen from adjacent properties in a reasonable period of time not to exceed two years. A six-foot-high fence/wall such as wood or concrete block stucco (CBS) will also be allowed as a screen in place of a hedge. (See figure 1, which follows this section, for examples.) See sections 34-905 and 34-1088. 
(4)  All utility trailers must be parked in a garage or carport. Any other of the vehicles or equipment described herein may be parked in a garage or carport. The garage or carport must be effectively screened on three sides; provided however that no portion of the vehicle or equipment shall extend horizontally beyond the roof overhang (eave). (See figure 1, which follows this section, for examples). 
(5)  Such equipment shall at all times have attached a current vehicle registration, license plate and, if required, a current sticker. 
(6)  No vehicle major repairs or overhaul work on such equipment which constitute either a public or private nuisance shall be made or performed on the site. 
(7)  When parked on the site such equipment shall not be used for living or sleeping quarters or for housekeeping or storage purposes and shall not have attached thereto any service connection lines except as may periodically be required to maintain the equipment and appliances. 
(8)  All vehicles shall abide by the town's sign ordinance (see article IV, division 6 of this chapter). 
(9)  The restrictions herein shall not prohibit the temporary parking of vehicles used for recreational purposes on lots within the town which are set aside specifically for recreational use, for example, the RV park zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.40.4, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 487, 9-18-1996; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 

Sec. 34-984. - Legal nonconforming use status. 
    In the RS-5 and R-DUP zoning districts a maximum of two boats and two boat trailers shall be permitted to be parked in the front yard, provided neither boat and trailer can fit in the side or rear yard. Such boat and boat trailer shall be permitted as legal nonconforming uses for a limited period of time as specified herein provided the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The granting of the legal nonconforming use status shall only apply to those boats and boat trailers which are owned by the owner or current tenant of the residence as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Property owners or tenants who own said boats and boat trailers shall register same as legal nonconforming uses with the town within 90 days of the adoption date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(3)  Upon registration, the town shall issue a registration decal which must be permanently affixed and displayed in a manner as to be visible from the street and renewable yearly. The town shall also issue a copy of a document to be recorded by the town clerk which limits the parking of said boats and boat trailers during the time the registering property owner or current tenant maintains ownership or rental of the real property upon which the boats and boat trailers are parked. The fee for this registration and decal and recording shall be such fee as is charged by the town to cover its administrative costs. After the September 18 renewal date a late penalty as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the town council from time to time may be assessed for each month of delinquency or part thereof. In the event a property owner or tenant does not register or renew its registration within 90 days from adoption of this chapter anniversary date, the property owner's or tenant's legal nonconforming status shall cease to exist and the town shall record a document in the public records evidencing same. 
(4)  The legal nonconforming use status for said boats and boat trailers shall not be transferable to a subsequent owner or tenant of the property. However, owners or tenants may replace their boats and boat trailers for the cost of a new registration decal. 
(5)  The conditions described in section 34-983(c)(5)-(8) shall be adhered to. 
(6)  These boats and boat trailers shall be parked perpendicular to the street (except when on a corner lot) and shall not extend into any street right-of-way or create a vehicular traffic hazard. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.40.5, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 487, 9-18-1996; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-985. - Off-street loading. 
(a)  In any district in connection with every building or building group or part thereof, thereafter created and having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more, which is to be occupied by commercial uses or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same lot with such building, off-street loading or unloading berths in a number not less than that set forth in the following schedule: 
Use Minimum Required Number of Berths Commercial Uses:  10,000-50,000 sq. ft 1 berth  50,001-100,000 sq. ft 2 berths  100,001 sq. ft. or more 3 berths Office Uses:  25,000-100,000 sq. ft 1 berth  100,001-200,000 sq. ft 2 berths  200,001 sq. ft. or more 3 berths  
(b)  A loading demand statement shall be required at the time of application submittal for all nonresidential uses, detailing the land use's projected normal demands for loading and unloading. The number of required loading berths may be increased or decreased by the town based upon its review of the loading demand statement. 
(c)  The loading berth required in each instance shall not be less than 12 feet in width, 40 feet in length, and 14 feet in height, and may occupy all or any part of any required yard except for a required front yard; provided, however, that the loading berth shall be screened from the street or public way and any adjoining residential property. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.50, 8-8-1979) 
Secs. 34-986-34-1013. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SIDEWALK CAFES 

Sec. 34-1014. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to set forth the conditions and requirements under which a sidewalk cafe, as defined, may be permitted to operate on a sidewalk within the town. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.56, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 343, 9-21-1988) 
Sec. 34-1015. - Limitations and requirements. 
(a)  Where permissible. A sidewalk cafe may be permitted as an accessory use only in the CG commercial general zoning district which allows indoor restaurants and then only if the sidewalk cafe is situated adjacent, as specified in subsection (b) of this section, to an indoor restaurant. 
(b)  A sidewalk cafe may be located on the sidewalk immediately adjacent to and abutting the indoor restaurant which operates the cafe, provided that the area in which the sidewalk cafe is located extends no farther along the sidewalk's length than the actual sidewalk frontage of the operating indoor restaurant or, in the instance where the restaurant occupies a corner of the building, both front and side can be utilized for these purposes, and all other applicable provisions of these regulations are fulfilled. A letter of consent shall first be received from the owner of the commercial center in which said sidewalk cafe is proposed. If the owner objects to the application for a sidewalk cafe, the town shall not consider said application. 
(c)  Common open plazas may be used in front of an indoor restaurant if access to other businesses/tenants adjacent or next to the plaza area is not impeded or blocked. A letter of consent shall be received from the owner of the commercial center by the applicant. If the owner has no objections to such a use, then letters of consent shall be received from adjacent businesses/tenants and submitted to the planning and zoning department. If the owner objects to the application for a sidewalk cafe in an open plaza area, the town shall not consider such an application. If there are letters of objection from adjacent businesses/tenants, the matter shall be brought to the town pursuant to site plan review procedures. If there are no objections to using the open plaza area for sidewalk cafes, the planning and zoning department may process and administer said application and the letter shall be placed in the applicant's file. 
(d)  Number of sidewalk cafes. An indoor restaurant may be permitted to operate only one sidewalk cafe and each sidewalk cafe shall be confined to a single location of the sidewalk or open plaza area: 
(e)  Sidewalk clearance. A sidewalk cafe may be permitted only where the sidewalk is wide enough to adequately accommodate both the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the operation of the proposed cafe. 
(f)  Dining area shall be directly accessible to the physically disabled. 
(g)  Dining areas shall be required to maintain adequate building egress as defined by the building code of the town. 
(h)  Location of furniture. All tables and chairs comprising a sidewalk cafe shall be set back in a safe manner from any curb and from any sidewalk or street barrier, and shall not be situated within eight feet of any designated bus stop, alley or other such areas. 
(i)  The design and colors used for chairs, tables, lighting and other fixtures including umbrellas shall be consistent with the architectural style and colors used on the building facade. Where an outdoor eating area is proposed adjacent to an existing one, the design of the new fixtures shall relate to, but need not be identical with, the fixtures of the existing outdoor eating area. 
(j)  No signs are permitted in the outdoor dining area with the exception of signs which shall give notice to the cafe's customers that the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the carrying of any open container which contains alcoholic beverages is prohibited and unlawful outside the delineated area of the sidewalk cafe. 
(k)  The use of landscaping and planters is encouraged to reinforce a plaza setting. However, large scale landscaping which will obscure important elements of the building facade is not allowed. 
(l)  Lighting shall be incorporated into the facade of the building, and shall complement the style of the building. Lights on buildings shall not be glaring to pedestrians on the sidewalk and should illuminate only the outdoor eating area. No wired electrical fixtures will be allowed outside the face of the building. 
(m)  Service requirements. The outdoor preparation of food and busing or service stations are prohibited at sidewalk cafes. All exterior surfaces within the sidewalk cafe shall be easily cleanable and shall be kept clean at all times by the permittee. 
(n)  Trash and refuse storage for the sidewalk cafe shall not be permitted within the outdoor dining area or on adjacent sidewalk areas and the permittee shall remove all trash and litter as they accumulate. The permittee is responsible for maintaining the outdoor dining area, including the sidewalk surface and furniture and adjacent area in a clean and safe condition. 
(o)  The maximum hours of operation of an outdoor eating area shall be established by the town and may be less than, but shall not exceed, the hours of operation of the associated indoor restaurant. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.57, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-1016. - Permit-Conditions and limitations. 
    In connection with granting approval for any sidewalk cafe permit, the director shall make findings that the proposed operation meets the limitations of these regulations and the director may impose such conditions in granting its approval as he deems are needed or at his discretion may require that the application be subject to site plan review procedure to ensure that the proposed operation will meet the operating requirements and conditions set forth herein and to ensure that the public safety and welfare will be protected. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.58, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-1017. - Same-Form; requirements; annual renewal; fee. 
    In addition to naming the permittee and any other information deemed appropriate by the director, the permit shall contain, and be subject to, the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit an exhibit that is drawn to scale and which shows the proposed location and placement of tables, chairs and other furniture in relation to the sidewalk, open plaza and or indoor restaurant. 
(2)  The permit shall be specifically limited to the area shown on the exhibit attached to and made part of the permit. 
(3)  Any future additions or revisions to the approved exhibit and permit, shall be subject to review pursuant to these regulations. 
(4)  The permit issued shall be issued to the premises only and shall not be transferable in any manner. 
(5)  The director may require the temporary removal of sidewalk cafes when street, sidewalk, or utility repairs necessitate such action. 
(6)  The department of public works or the police department may immediately remove or relocate all or parts of the sidewalk cafe in emergency situations. 
(7)  The town and its officers and employees shall not be responsible for sidewalk cafe components relocated during emergencies. 
(8)  The permittee shall use positive action to ensure that its use of the sidewalk in no way interferes with or embarrasses sidewalk users or limits their free unobstructed passage. 
(9)  Use of the sidewalk cafe shall be restricted to patrons of the permittee. 
(10)  Tables, chairs, umbrellas, and any other objects provided with a sidewalk cafe shall be maintained with a clean and attractive appearances and shall be in good repair at all times. 
(11)  Each permit shall be effective for one year subject to annual renewal and the permit fee shall be assessed by the town that is consistent with the town's existing fee structure for this type of use. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.59, 8-8-1979) 
Secs. 34-1018-34-1047. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SIGNS 

Sec. 34-1048. - Purpose and intent. 
    The intent of this division is to: 
(1)  Establish rules and regulations to control and regulate all signs in the town; 
(2)  Maintain a high degree of excellence in the quality of all signs, both aesthetically and structurally; 
(3)  Prevent the proliferation of signs which cause visual clutter and disharmony; and 
(4)  Encourage a rational pattern of signs with regard to the area where such signs are located. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.61, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 309, 10-8-1986; Ord. No. 389, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 489, 12-11-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 538, 4-25-2001) 
Sec. 34-1049. - Permit required; regulated by district. 
    Signs shall be permitted in the various districts as accessory uses in accordance with the regulations contained in this division. A permit is required. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.62, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 309, 10-8-1986; Ord. No. 389, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 489, 12-11-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 538, 4-25-2001) 
Sec. 34-1050. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Any sign, other than an official sign, within the right-of-way lines of any street or public way. 
(2)  Flashing, animated, emitting, reflectorized, glowing, radiating, moving signs (e.g., revolving signs). 
(3)  Banner signs in all zoning districts, except the CG commercial general, medical commercial (MC) and CO commercial office zoning districts (see section 34-1051(12) for restrictions). Ornamental signs are regulated separately (see section 34-1055 for restrictions). 
(4)  Off-premises signs (signs unrelated to the property upon which it is being displayed). Such signs do not further the town's goal for an aesthetically valuable environment, nor do they contribute to a safe environment. They may visually clutter highly traveled areas for vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic and can contribute to unsafe travel conditions. They are, therefore, prohibited within the town. 
(5)  Searchlights. 
(6)  Changeable copy signs, except: 
a.  Public, charitable, and religious signs; 
b.  Fuel service station price signs; 
c.  Theater signs; 
d.  Permanent special event signs; and 
e.  Temporary special event message area on a freestanding identification sign (as provided for herein). 
(7)  Portable, folding, and similar movable signs (e.g., A-frame or sandwich board signs). 
(8)  Flags (other than corporate flags for commercial uses and properly flown governmental flags for all uses, provided such flags do not exceed three per property), streamers, balloons, other air or gas-filled feature, pennants, streamers, wind-driven whirligigs, propellers or other devices. 
(9)  Bench signs and bench shelter signs, except for those provided by the town for public use in public areas. 
(10)  Any sign not provided for in this section, including, but not limited to, the background area such as an awning, canopy, or fixed ornamental banner, which becomes unsightly, unsafe, faded in color, or in need of repair. 
(11)  Roof signs. 
(12)  Painted wall signs. 
(13)  Vehicles used for advertising purposes. 
a.  Any sign displayed on an automobile, truck, or other motorized vehicle when that vehicle is used primarily for the purpose of such advertising display. Motor vehicles used solely for sign purposes or advertising purposes are prohibited. No person shall park any motor vehicle in a location visible from a public right-of-way, which has attached thereto or located thereon any sign, for the basic purpose of advertising products or directing people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property or any other premises. This section is not intended to prohibit any form of informational vehicular signage which is limited to the name of a business, address, phone number, and products offered; provided that such sign is either painted on or attached by magnetic strips or bolts or other form of adhesive to the side of the vehicle. Such signage, however, shall not protrude from or above the exterior surface (front, back, side, roof, trunk, or truck bed) of the vehicle greater than one-half inch nor have a directional arrow as part of the message. 
b.  This provision shall not apply to licensed taxicabs, the shortterm use of political campaign signs, nor temporary signs placed on vehicles when making a delivery and removed when parked at business location. This provision shall also not apply to any vehicle owned or operated by an individual, business, or other entity residing outside of the town, which is just passing through or temporarily serving or visiting any individual, business, or place in town. 
c.  Nonmotorized vehicular signs or sign structures attached or affixed in any manner on or to any nonmotorized wheeled vehicle are expressly prohibited in any zoning district. 
(14)  Billboard/off-premises signs. 
(15)  Signs painted on, attached to or supported by a tree, utility pole, or other similar object. 
(16)  Representational signs, permanent or temporary, such as beer cans or bottles, oil cans, soft drink cans or bottles, animals, or other similar device indicating a product. 
(17)  Translucent awnings. 
(18)  Permanent or temporary nuisance signs which utilize or incorporate such words as "stop," "look," "danger," etc. 
(19)  Flashing or moving neon signs; however, nonmoving, nonflashing neon signs are permitted. 
(20)  Signs made with fluorescent materials or paint, including both temporary and permanent signs. 
(21)  Any abandoned signs or supporting structures, and signs displayed on property containing a discontinued or abandoned project. Such signs may include those which represent approved developments or projects where work associated with an approved permit has discontinued for a period of at least 60 days; or is deemed abandoned or discontinued by the town. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.63, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 309, 10-8-1986; Ord. No. 377, 10-18-1989; Ord. No. 389, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 489, 12-11-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 538, 4-25-2001; Ord. No. 668, § 5, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-1051. - Signs exempt from permit requirement. 
    The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirement: 
(1)  Individual residential single-family nameplates and identification signs, not to exceed a total sign area of one square foot. 
(2)  Sale or rental signs for individual single-family dwellings and multifamily residential developments with less than five units. Such signs shall not exceed a total of four square feet. (See section 34-1055(d).) 
(3)  Garage sales and yard sales: a maximum of one sign is permitted on a lot hosting the sale, with a total sign area not to exceed two square feet. A maximum height of three feet is permitted with a minimum setback required. Such sign shall remain a maximum of five days on the property. (See section 34-1055(d).) 
(4)  Signs indicating the private nature of a road, driveway, or other premises, and signs controlling the use of private property, such as the prohibition of trespassing, parking, fishing, etc., provided such signs do not exceed an area of four square feet. 
(5)  Vehicle signs: See section 34-1050(13) for vehicle sign regulations. 
(6)  Political signs: See section 34-1054(h) for political sign regulations. 
(7)  Official signs (traffic signs, public notices). 
(8)  At the discretion of the planning and zoning department, commercial sponsor names or logos printed on umbrellas, chairs and tables used in a sidewalk cafe. When such logos are used, the sidewalk cafe must have current approval for its use, as well as maintain a clean and orderly appearance. The applicant for such a cafe shall be responsible for the upkeep of the umbrellas, chairs and tables. 
(9)  Holiday decorations. (See section 34-1055(d)(4).) 
(10)  Special event signs for institutional and government uses, and charitable groups, provided town approval is received. 
(11)  Temporary and permanent window signs (see section 34-1053(7) and 34-1054(g)). 
(12)  Banner signs in the CG commercial general, medical commercial (MC) and CO commercial office zoning districts, provided such banner signs meet the following criteria: 
a.  Such banner sign shall not be used in place of a permanent wall sign. 
b.  There shall be only one banner per use/business. 
c.  The banner shall be made of durable material, such as but not limited to, plastic or vinyl, and have professional lettering/characters/design. The paint on said banner shall be weatherproof. 
d.  The banner shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and shall be attached to the building face or building columns. 
e.  Banner signs shall be permitted to be flown in accordance with section 34-1055. Prior to flying the banner the applicant is required to submit a letter to the director of planning and zoning stating the date that the banner will begin flying, the size, material, and wording of the banner. 
(13)  The outdoor display of merchandise in the CG commercial general and CO commercial office zoning districts, provided such outdoor displays meet the following criteria: 
a.  The displays shall be permitted only during business hours. The displays shall be taken inside the building after business hours. 
b.  The displays shall be placed adjacent to and against the front building wall on the sidewalk. 
c.  A minimum five-foot-wide unobstructed pedestrian walkway shall be provided adjacent to the outdoor display and in no case shall the display extend more than three feet from the front building wall. 
d.  Signage on outdoor displays shall not exceed two square feet in area. 
e.  The maximum height of any display, including signage, shall not exceed five feet. 
f.  The length of the outdoor display (horizontal dimension) shall not exceed 25 feet in length and/or two-thirds of the length of the store frontage (length of front building wall), whichever is less. 
(14)  Open house signs (see section 34-1055(d)(5)). 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.64, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 309, 10-8-1986; Ord. No. 389, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 489, 12-11-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 538, 4-25-2001; Ord. No. 593, § 5.64, 6-14-2006; Ord. No. 668, § 5, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-1052. - Permit procedure; fees and administration. 
(a)  All temporary or permanent signs shall require a letter of approval from the property owner or property management prior to approval from the town. 
(1)  Temporary signs. 
a.  All temporary signs, other than those stated in section 34-1051, shall require submittal of a sign plan to the planning and zoning department for approval prior to erection, alteration, display, or reconstruction. 
b.  All sign plans shall be drawn to scale, reveal the entire sign area, message, and supporting structure, show all dimensions (i.e., height, sign area, lettering, logo, etc.), and materials and colors to be used. 
c.  Temporary signs shall be recorded with the town building department and recording shall identify the message, location, type of temporary sign, and the amount of time to be erected. 
(2)  Permanent signs. 
a.  All permanent signs, other than those stated in section 34-1051, are required to receive a sign permit prior to erection, alteration, reconstruction, illumination, display or painting. 
b.  All permanent signs for a new project shall be part of the site plan review procedure. Any sign within an existing project shall be required to receive approval by the planning and zoning department prior to any change, or at the discretion of the town, may be required to be reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning board and the town council. 
c.  In order to obtain a sign permit, a sign plan and application form must be submitted to the planning and zoning department. Such sign plan shall be drawn to scale and show: 
1.  The location of the sign on the property (i.e., on a site plan if a freestanding sign, or on the building facade if a wall sign); 
2.  The entire sign area, message, and supporting structure; 
3.  All dimensions (i.e., height, sign area, lettering, logo, etc.); 
4.  Materials and colors to be used; 
5.  Lighting details if illuminated, and construction and attachment details; 
(b)  For existing buildings, color photographs shall be submitted showing the facade of the building on which the sign is to be placed, together with adjacent existing signs on the building or abutting structure and any freestanding signs along the street frontage, if applicable. 
(c)  If a sign is illuminated, an electrical permit will be required in addition to a sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.65, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 309, 10-8-1986; Ord. No. 389, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 489, 12-11-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 538, 4-25-2001) 
Sec. 34-1053. - General regulations. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all permitted signs: 
(1)  All permanent and temporary signs must have a professional appearance, meaning that said signs shall have no apparent flaws which would suggest that such sign was not made by a professional sign company or designer. 
(2)  Signs and/or lettering visible from a public or private roadway, aisle, and/or sidewalk shall be classified as signs regardless of whether they are freestanding or attached to, painted on, or in the principal building to which they are accessory. In all cases, signs shall be constructed of durable materials which meet the Florida Building Code requirements, maintained in good condition, and not dilapidated. 
(3)  Sign measurements. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising message, announcement, display, logo, picture or any figure of a similar nature, together with any frame, background area of sign, structural trim, or other material, color, or condition which forms an integral part of the display, excluding the necessary supports, base or uprights on which such sign is placed provided that such supporting structures shall not exceed the maximum allowable sign area and shall carry only street numbers. A maximum of two sign faces are permitted per sign. When a sign has two faces then only one face shall be counted toward the sign area. A cube sign with adjacent sign faces is not permitted; and a V-shaped sign is not permitted. 
(4)  Sign height measurement. The height of all signs shall be measured from the crown of the road, grade or walkway surface, whichever is applicable. Architectural features (such as roof structures, wall caps, varying forms) shall be permitted at the discretion of the town to add a proportional amount (which shall be no more than 20 percent) to the allowable height of any permanent sign. In no way shall this provision allow an increase in the allowable sign area square footage defined in this section. 
(5)  Projection of signs. No sign shall project from the face of the main wall of a building more than one foot, provided, however, that no sign shall project into, or over a public way or sidewalk which is less than eight feet above the walkway or grade. 
(6)  All signs on a site situated along the street frontage, including outbuildings and out-parcels, shall be separated a minimum of 100 feet, unless otherwise indicated in section 34-1055; however, at the town council's discretion these minimum distances may be waived if thought to be more aesthetically appealing. 
(7)  Permanent window signs, including signs painted directly upon window glass and interior hanging signs within 12 inches of glass, shall not exceed 20 percent of total window area, a maximum height of 20 feet, and a letter and logo height of 12 inches. See section 34-1054 for temporary window sign regulations. 
(8)  Each building, structure or tenant space with a separate street address shall install street address numbers over the main entrance or within ten feet of such entrance and be placed in a consistent location throughout the development. Street numbers must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward permitted sign area; and must occur within the top one-third portion of a sign. If no sign exists, street numbers will be required on the structure. 
(9)  Nonconformance. Any signs made nonconforming as a result of this chapter shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter. However, any sign which is nonconforming as a result of this section and which requires repair or replacement of more than 50 percent of the structure or sign face shall be discontinued from use rather than repaired or replaced, and any new sign put in its place shall conform to this chapter. An outparcel monument sign made nonconforming because more than one occupant locates on the outparcel shall be permitted to have only one tenant on the sign. 
(10)  All signs must abide by the Florida Building Code and National Electrical Code adopted by the town. 
(11)  All signs shall be erected so as to not obstruct or impair driver vision at ingress-egress points, aisles, and intersections, as regulated under sections 34-898 and 34-1089. 
(12)  Illumination of signs. 
a.  Lighting methods for internally lit signs shall be cabinet signs with an opaque/nontranslucent background and translucent copy, resulting in only the lettering color visible on a dark-appearing background; or backlit reverse channel letter signs. Internally lit individual letter signs are not permitted. 
b.  Lighting methods are not to be harsh or unnecessarily bright. Ground- or sign-mounted lighting shall be directed only at the sign area, without spillover on adjacent areas. 
c.  All lighting fixtures for signs must be concealed from public view. 
d.  Lighting, including neon tubing or other similar devices, and fluorescent paint or materials shall not be used to outline any building, fence, landscaping, wall or any other structure except for strings of nonblinking white lights (with bulbs no greater than 11/2 inches in length and diameter) may be permitted to permanently outline principal structures or decorate trees and shrubs on commercially zoned property provided that such display does not interfere with neighboring land uses. 
e.  All awnings must be entirely opaque and nontranslucent. Signage on an awning, however, may be externally lit. 
f.  Signs used on/near reflective or mirrored buildings shall be located in a manner which will not permit the reflection of the sign off the reflective or mirrored material on the building. 
(13)  Standards for design, colors, and materials. 
a.  The design, colors, and materials of a sign shall be compatible, and in addition, consistent with the architectural design of the building. 
b.  Signs shall be of standard geometric shapes and shall not be cut out so as to form a particular object or logo (i.e., soda bottles, hamburgers, or other figures, etc.). 
c.  The silhouette and outlined shape of freestanding signs shall be simple and compatible with the building to which it relates. Signs of excessively complicated outline or composed of many different connected shapes are prohibited. 
d.  The silhouettes and outlined shapes of wall signs shall be compatible with the building facade they are mounted on. Signs with shapes that disrupt the architectural order and composition of a building facade are prohibited. 
e.  The sign copy, color scheme, size, illumination, materials, design, and location of all signs within a development shall be coordinated and are required to be compatible with the architectural design of the principal building structure. 
f.  No wall sign shall be installed on a flat building wall without an architectural feature such as a roof overhang, awning, widow, or similar feature appropriate to the architectural design of the building. 
g.  All signs on canopies and awnings shall be on a vertically flat surface and shall not exceed 50 percent of the canopy or awning horizontal length. A maximum of two lines of sign copy are permitted for awning and canopy signs. 
h.  Sign copy shall not be crowded onto the surface of a sign or building surface and shall be composed to leave ample space around the copy to preserve legibility. 
i.  The number of different lettering styles on a sign or on a series of signs within a complex of buildings shall be minimized and shall relate to the overall architectural concept for the property. 
j.  The base or supporting structures of a freestanding sign shall not exceed the sign area and shall be consistent with the materials used in the principal building structure. 
k.  The maximum horizontal length of a freestanding sign shall be regulated by section 34-1055 where such a regulation is specifically mentioned, otherwise the maximum horizontal length of a freestanding sign shall be 12 feet for nonresidential signs and ten feet for residential signs. 
l.  The vertical dimension for all wall signs shall not exceed four feet in height. 
m.  A permanent special event sign shall have its message area enclosed with a clear plexiglass cover with a lock, to be controlled and maintained by property manager only. 
(14)  Landscaping. 
a.  The base (supporting structure) of a freestanding sign shall be erected within a landscaped area. The landscaped area shall extend a minimum of three feet in all directions from the sign face and ends thereof. The height of the landscaping shall be within a minimum one-foot distance of the lower edge of the sign area. 
b.  The landscaped area shall be consistent with the overall landscaping plan for the site and provided with automatic irrigation when needed. 
c.  Landscape/topiary signs may be permitted in place of a freestanding or monument sign for a residential multiple-family or commercial use. Sign areas and other regulations shall apply accordingly (see section 34-1055). Such landscape signs shall be maintained at all times to be legible, groomed and attractive (healthy plant materials), so as to keep with safe and aesthetic principals of the town. 
(15)  Orientation. Freestanding monument signs shall be placed perpendicular or diagonal to approaching vehicular traffic. Other freestanding signs shall be placed perpendicular to approaching vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.66, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 309, 10-8-1986; Ord. No. 389, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 489, 12-11-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 538, 4-25-2001) 
Sec. 34-1054. - Temporary signs general regulations. 
(a)  All temporary signs must have a professional appearance, meaning that said signs shall have no apparent flaws which would suggest that such sign was not made by a professional sign company or designer. 
(b)  All temporary signs shall abide by the size, time, and other regulations described in this section. 
(c)  All temporary signs shall be nonilluminated. 
(d)  All freestanding temporary signs shall be of wood or other durable material. 
(e)  All temporary signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines, unless otherwise indicated. 
(f)  See article IV, division 9 of this chapter for special events (grand openings, sidewalk sales, etc.) regulations. 
(g)  Temporary window signs, not exceeding ten percent of total window area, 20 feet in height, and a letter and logo height of 12 inches are permitted. 
(h)  Political signs are permitted at a total aggregate sign area of 20 square feet per lot; four-foot height maximum; five-foot minimum setback from all property lines. They are limited only to the political event for which it is displayed and must be located on private property with the consent of the property owner. They shall be displayed only during the 60-day period preceding any local, state, or national election; and must be removed within 48 hours of the day of the election to which they apply. 
(i)  Artisan signs are permitted at one sign per artisan per lot. Such signs shall have a maximum of four square feet per sign face, be a maximum of six feet in height; and be set back ten feet from all property lines. They must be attached to a construction sign if one is on the site and contain the name of the artisan only. No permit is required. The sign must be removed within 15 days of the artisan's completion of work, or abandonment of work. 
(j)  Ornamental signs are permitted at one sign per lamppost or column. Such signs shall be 16 square feet maximum; eight feet minimum from bottom of sign to ground/walkway under lamppost or column, and shall not exceed the height of lamp base/column cap. The sign shall represent in some clear fashion the event, season, festivity for which it is being displayed (i.e., an art festival sign shall include the name of the festival, possibly identify the dates of the festival and/or display a logo representing such festival; or a seasonal sign shall be reflective of the season it represents). The sign must be placed on and secured to a lamppost or column in such a manner that is deemed safe and secure according to the building official, and may be subject to review by the building department to ensure this. The signs are not permitted to be illuminated internally or in such a way that would require an electrical permit; and shall not obstruct the view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.67, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 309, 10-8-1986; Ord. No. 315, 3-18-1987; Ord. No. 389, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 489, 12-11-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 538, 4-25-2001) 
Sec. 34-1055. - Signs permitted by use. 
(a)  Permanent signs for commercial uses. The following permanent signs for commercial uses are permitted: 
(1)  Freestanding identification/monument signs. 
a.  Number of signs: 
1.  If located on U.S. Highway 1 or Donald Ross Road with less than 600 feet frontage: one sign; 
2.  If located on U.S. Highway 1 and Donald Ross Road: two signs, one per frontage, with a minimum of 450 feet linear, straight line, separation between signs; 
3.  If located on U.S. Highway 1 or Donald Ross Road with greater than 600 feet frontage: two signs, with a minimum of 450 feet, linear, straight line separation between signs; 
4.  If located on C.R. A1A and/or Ellison Wilson Road: one sign. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 60 square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum sign height: 12 feet, except signs on C.R. A1A and/or Ellison Wilson Road shall not exceed 7.5 feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: ten feet from all property lines, except signs on C.R. A1A and/or Ellison Wilson Road shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. 
e.  Sign copy limits: 
1.  Generally. Lettering and logo height may not exceed 20 inches except those signs with total areas not exceeding 36 square feet, which may be permitted lettering and logos up to 48 inches. Where temporary messages are permitted, tenant usage of such sign shall be controlled by the property manager and may only display current messages. Street numbers are required and must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward permitted sign area. 
2.  Single commercial buildings. Developments of a single commercial building may devote 100 percent of the sign area to individual tenants. Lettering or logos for tenants shall be a minimum of four square feet, not to exceed 20 inches in height. 
3.  Commercial retail centers. Commercial retail centers may use a maximum of 30 percent of sign area to list a special event and/or building leasing information, unless a permanent special event sign is located on the property (excluding construction and real estate sale signs). 
f.  Other limitations: 
1.  C.R. A1A: No temporary messages are permitted on signs fronting on C.R. A1A. 
2.  Ellison Wilson Road: May use a maximum of 30 percent of the sign area as a permanent or temporary special event and leasing message unless a permanent special event sign is located on the property. 
(2)  Freestanding monument signs. 
a.  Retail centers located on both U.S. Highway 1 and Donald Ross Road: 
1.  Number of signs: one sign along its longest frontage (must be located a minimum of 300 feet linear, straight line, from any other freestanding sign). 
2.  Maximum sign area: 60 square feet per sign face. 
3.  Maximum height: six feet. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: five feet from all property lines. 
5.  Sign copy limits: Tenant names shall comprise a minimum of four square feet. 
6.  Other limitations: Signs shall be low-profile freestanding signs with a solid base set on the ground of not more than ten feet; side supports shall be no more than two feet from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign when used. Such base or support structures shall be designed to incorporate building materials that complement the architectural theme and design style of the buildings on the premises. Street numbers required, must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward permitted sign area. 
b.  Outparcels/outbuildings: 
1.  Number of signs: one sign. 
2.  Maximum sign area: 24 square feet per sign face. 
3.  Maximum height: four feet. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: 20 feet from building and five feet from all property lines. 
5.  Sign copy limits: Tenant names shall comprise a minimum of four square feet. 
6.  Other limitations: signs shall be low-profile freestanding signs with a solid base set on the ground of not more than six feet; side supports shall be no more than two feet from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign when used. Such base or support structures shall be designed to incorporate building materials that complement the architectural theme and design style of the buildings on the premises. Street numbers are required and must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward the permitted sign area. 
(3)  Front entrance signs. 
a.  Number of signs: two signs per entrance, with one sign on each side of entrance, but not to exceed a maximum of two signs per frontage and four signs per development. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 24 square feet per side of entrance. For columns, if the entrance features are columns at the sides of an entrance, one sign per column is permitted, with each sign area not to exceed six square feet. 
c.  Maximum height: six feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: none. 
e.  Sign copy limits: name of building or retail center only. Lettering shall not exceed 20 inches in height. Street numbers are required and must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward the permitted sign area. 
f.  Other limitations: no temporary messages are permitted on the sign. 
(4)  Wall signs, including awning, canopy and cabinet signs. 
a.  In addition to any freestanding identification sign, freestanding monument sign or front entrance sign, commercial wall signs shall be permitted. Wall signs shall include flat wall signs, cabinet signs, canopy signs and awning signs. 
1.  Number of signs: 
i.  One per building occupant or two per building occupant with direct access from outside where building fronts on two or more streets; however, signs will be limited to one per frontage (in this case the shortest building frontage shall be used to calculate sign area). Except for outparcels/buildings, only one sign per building. 
ii.  Sign bonus: two additional wall signs (which includes awnings and canopies) may be permitted if the property owner/lessee does not use a permitted freestanding identification sign, freestanding monument sign or front entrance sign. If this option is chosen, then a sign identifying the building name, main anchor or tenant shall be permitted on two building facades (excluding the rear of the building). 
2.  Maximum sign area: 20 square feet per building of less than three stories or 12,000 square feet of facade area fronting street; or 0.5 percent of facade area, with buildings of three stories and more or more than 12,000 square feet of facade area fronting street; but not to exceed 80 square feet in any case. Corner lots shall use the shortest street frontage for calculation. If a commercial freestanding identification sign contains no more than four messages (i.e., name of the center and three major tenants), the wall sign area may be increased by four square feet per occupant. 
3.  Maximum height: 20 feet, except when sign bonus option applies, then sign height may exceed 20 feet provided the sign does not extend beyond the eave line or parapet wall, whichever is higher. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
5.  Sign copy limits: building name, business name, generic name only. The lettering and logo shall not exceed 20 inches in height. Where two signs are allowed, the contents and appearance of the signs need not be identical except when the sign bonus option has been used. 
6.  Other limitations: Signs shall not face abutting residential property unless completely screened from such residential property, with landscaping being the primary screening material. 
b.  Awning and canopy signs: Awning and canopy signs must be displayed on a vertically flat surface. The sign shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the horizontal length of the awning or canopy. Lettering and logos may not exceed 20 inches in height. 
(5)  Walkway occupant signs. 
a.  Number: one sign per principal entrance providing access from a walkway; and one additional walkway occupant directional sign at the ends of corridors may be permitted if all other criteria are met. 
b.  Maximum sign area: six square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: minimum eight feet above walkway surface to bottom of sign. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
e.  Sign copy limits: Only the individual business name or generic business may be displayed. An arrow no longer than six inches long may be displayed on the sign. 
f.  Other limitations: All signs must be uniform in design, shape, size, materials and colors; and they shall be nonilluminated. 
(6)  Incidental signs. 
a.  Number: one sign per secondary use/incidental structure. 
b.  Maximum sign area: six square feet. 
c.  Maximum height: Must be placed adjacent to the use/secondary structure and at the same height; or may be placed upon the incidental secondary structure. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
e.  Sign copy limits: Lettering and logo shall not exceed 20 inches. 
f.  Other limitations: Sign must be positioned on the outside of building and must direct users to a location (such as ATM, book depositories, etc.). If illuminated, it must be internally illuminated. 
(7)  Directional signs. 
a.  Number: one sign per entrance drive. 
b.  Maximum sign area: four square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: three feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: two feet from all property lines. 
e.  Sign copy limits: only directional words (enter/exit/parking/in/out, etc.) and/or the name/logo of the building or development. 
f.  Other limitations: Landscaping shall be required around base of the sign. This is a nonadvertising sign to aid traffic and should be used to designate access drives and parking areas. May be placed on an entrance wall; if so, will be subject to all listed requirements except for the setback requirement. 
(8)  Permanent special event signs. 
a.  Number: one monument sign. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 
1.  For uses with total gross floor area from 15,000 square feet to 55,000 square feet: 20 square feet; 
2.  For uses with total gross floor area from 55,001 square feet to 100,000 square feet: 25 square feet; 
3.  For uses with total gross floor area over 100,000 square feet: 30 square feet. 
c.  Maximum height: four feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: three feet from all property lines. 
e.  Sign copy limits: Usage shall be controlled by the property manager and may only display current messages. No more than four separate messages listing special events shall be permitted at one time. Special events shall only include grand openings, special holiday sales, sidewalk sales, and charity drives. Special sales on merchandise or services do not represent a special event. When no temporary messages are displayed, the sign shall list the name of the retail center. Lettering and logos shall be a minimum of four inches in height and a maximum of 20 inches in height. 
f.  Other limitations: Signs shall be externally lit only. 
(9)  Fuel service station signs. Fuel service stations are permitted one freestanding monument sign or front entrance sign; and one wall sign with symbolic logo and fuel service pump signs as follows: 
a.  Freestanding monument sign: 
1.  Number: one sign. 
2.  Maximum sign area: 40 square feet per sign face plus 24 square feet for displaying the fuel price. 
3.  Maximum height: eight feet. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: ten feet from all property lines. 
5.  Sign copy limits: Changeable copy on the sign is limited to type and price of fuel, and the words "cash" and "credit." Lettering and logos shall not exceed 20 inches in height. The changeable copy area of the sign shall not exceed 20 inches in height. Street numbers are required, must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward the permitted sign area. 
6.  Other limitations: Price sign must be integral part of total sign area. 
b.  Front entrance sign: 
1.  Number: one sign at one side of the property entrance. 
2.  Maximum sign area: 24 square feet per sign face. 
3.  Maximum height: six feet. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: none. 
5.  Sign copy limits: The sign contents shall be limited to the name of the station only with lettering and logo height not exceeding 20 inches. Street numbers are required and must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward the permitted sign area. 
6.  Other limitations: none. 
c.  Wall signs: 
1.  Number: one sign. The wall sign may also be an awning or canopy sign. 
2.  Maximum sign area: 20 square feet for buildings with 30 feet or less of frontage. For each additional two feet of building frontage over 30 feet, one square foot may be added to the sign area, to a maximum of 80 square feet. 
3.  Maximum height: 20 feet. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
5.  Sign copy limits: individual business name only. Lettering and logos shall not exceed 20 inches in height. 
6.  Other limitations: none. 
d.  Symbolic logos. Symbolic logos may be displayed on the wall sign provided all requirements for the wall sign are met. 
1.  Number: three symbolic logos. 
2.  Maximum sign area: three feet in diameter or eight square feet per sign face. The sign shall not exceed five feet in diameter or 16 square feet per sign face. 
3.  Maximum height: not applicable. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: none. 
5.  Sign copy limits: trademark, business name, or symbol identifying the business or service provided. 
6.  Other limitations: none. 
(10)  Gas pump/incidental signs. 
a.  Number: unlimited. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 18 inches by 18 inches (2.25 square feet per sign face). 
c.  Maximum height: not applicable. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
e.  Sign copy limits: Such signs shall relate to dispensing instructions such as "No Smoking", "Self Service", "Prepay After Dark", etc. 
f.  Other limitations: Signs must be displayed on the pump fueling islands. 
(11)  Internal site/directory signs. 
a.  Number: one sign per driveway aisle entrance. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 20 square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: five feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: 150 feet from front property line, 30 feet from side and rear property lines; must be located within site in a central, or conspicuous location so as to direct pedestrians throughout development. 
e.  Sign copy limits: only information to guide or direct pedestrian traffic and the name or logo of the development. 
f.  Other limitations: Shall be consistent with materials, architectural style, color, etc. of principal structures on site. Also, shall not impair in any way, internal/external traffic (including vehicular and pedestrian) circulation or driver vision. 
(b)  Temporary signs for commercial uses. The following temporary signs for commercial uses are permitted: 
(1)  Grand opening sign. 
a.  Number: one sign per street frontage, not to exceed two per property. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 20 square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: eight feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: ten feet from all property lines. 
e.  Sign copy limits: Sign shall be displayed in accordance with article IV, division 9 of this chapter. 
f.  Other limitations: signs shall not be displayed for more than 30 days. 
(2)  Construction and real estate signs. 
a.  Number: one sign per street frontage, not to exceed two signs per property. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 20 square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: eight feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: ten feet from all property lines. 
e.  Sign copy limits: 
1.  Construction signs, name of development, picture or rendering of completed project, name of project, developer, contractor, architect and contractor for construction project proposed or underway on the site; 
2.  Real estate signs, name, logo and phone number of realtor, owner, or developer, property description, price, and whether the property is for sale or lease. 
f.  Other limitations: 
1.  Construction signs shall not be erected until a valid building permit for the work has been issued by the town, and shall be removed within 15 days of receiving a certificate of occupancy or abandonment of project; 
2.  Real estate signs may be erected upon the availability of a property for sale or lease and shall be removed upon the sale or lease of the premises. For existing retail centers with freestanding identification signs used in part for special events, the leasing or sale message must be placed in the 30 percent area of the sign permitted for special events. 
(3)  Fixed banner signs for commercial building or center. 
a.  Number: one sign per business or center. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 20 square feet. 
c.  Maximum height: 24 feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: See subsection (b)(3)e of this section. 
e.  Sign copy limits: Banners must be hung vertically and at a maximum dimension of 31 inches wide and 94 inches high. Banner must be a minimum eight feet above surface of a walkway. No more than 50 percent of the banner may contain a message or logo. The message may only display the name and logo of the building or retail center and/or a special event. 
f.  Other limitations: Banners may be displayed for a maximum period of 45 days at a time, two times per year. 
(c)  Permanent signs for residential uses. The following permanent signs for residential uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family subdivisions, townhome developments and multiple-family developments. For single-family subdivisions, townhouse developments and multiple-family developments, either freestanding identification signs or front entrance wall signs are permitted: 
a.  Freestanding identification sign. 
1.  Number: one sign per street frontage with a maximum of two per development (minimum separation of 200 feet linear, straight line). 
2.  Maximum sign area: if less than 50 total units, eight square feet per sign face; if 50 total units or more, 32 square feet per sign face and sign shall be a monument sign. 
3.  Maximum height: if less than 50 total units, six feet; if 50 total units or more, six feet with a maximum length of ten feet. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: if less than 50 total units, ten feet from all property lines; if 50 total units or more, five feet from all property lines. 
5.  Sign copy limits: the name of the development and street address numbers. Lettering shall not exceed 18 inches in height; logos shall not exceed 24 inches in height. Street numbers required, must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward permitted sign area. 
6.  Other limitations: A sign area bonus for an additional 12 square feet may be added to the maximum sign area allowance if a water feature is designed/integrated as part of the sign. Also, the maximum height/length limitation for developments with 50 total units or more may be altered to accommodate the water feature. Water features include fountains or other moving water elements. 
b.  Front entrance sign. 
1.  Number: two signs per street frontage, one per wall on each side of entrance. Maximum number of signs shall not exceed four signs per development. 
2.  Maximum sign area: ten square feet per sign face. For columns, if the front entrance wall features are columns aligning both sides of an entranceway, then only one sign per column is permitted at a maximum sign area of six square feet per sign face. 
3.  Maximum height: Signs shall not exceed the height of the wall upon which they are placed. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
5.  Sign copy limits: the name of the development and street address numbers. Lettering shall not exceed 18 inches in height; logos shall not exceed 24 inches in height. Street numbers required, must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward permitted sign area. 
6.  Other limitations: A sign area bonus for an additional 12 square feet may be added to the maximum sign area allowance if a water feature is designed/integrated as part of the sign. Water features include fountains or other moving water elements. 
(2)  Transient facilities. For transient facilities in the RMT residential transient zoning district, either freestanding identification sign, front entrance wall signs, or wall signs shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  Freestanding identification sign. 
1.  Number: one monument sign. 
2.  Maximum sign area: if under 20 total units, 20 square feet per sign face; if 20 total units or more, 40 square feet per sign face; if more than 50 total units and located along U.S. Highway 1, 60 square feet per sign face (in this case the sign must be located along U.S. Highway 1, otherwise a maximum of 40 square feet shall apply). 
3.  Maximum height: if under 20 total units, eight feet; if 20 total units or more, ten feet. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: ten feet from all property lines. 
5.  Sign copy limits: name of the building. Lettering shall not exceed 18 inches in height. Logos shall not exceed 24 inches in height. Street numbers required, must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward permitted sign area. 
6.  Other limitations: A sign area bonus for an additional 12 square feet may be added to the maximum sign area allowance if a water feature is designed/integrated as part of the sign. Water features include fountains or other moving water elements. 
b.  Front entrance sign. 
1.  Number: two signs with one per wall aligning each side of entrance. For columns, if front entrance wall features are columns aligning both sides of an entranceway, then only one sign per column is permitted. For arches, if the entrance feature extends over the entranceway, such as an archway, then a maximum of one sign may be placed on the archway wall. 
2.  Maximum sign area: 24 square feet. For columns, six square feet; For arches, 50 percent of the length of the wall over the entranceway or 20 square feet, whichever is less. 
3.  Maximum height: six feet; for arches, 20 feet. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
5.  Sign copy limits: name of building. Lettering and logo shall not exceed 20 inches. Street numbers required, must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward permitted sign area. 
6.  Other limitations: A sign area bonus for an additional 12 square feet may be added to the maximum sign area allowance if a water feature is designed/integrated as part of the sign. Water features include fountains or other moving water elements. 
c.  Wall sign. 
1.  Number: one sign per entrance, except for rear facade. 
2.  Maximum sign area: 24 square feet. 
3.  Maximum height: 20 feet. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
5.  Sign copy limits: building name only. Lettering and logos shall not exceed 20 inches in height. 
6.  Other limitations: none. 
(3)  All residential uses. Directional and internal site/directory signs for all residential uses shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  Directional signs. 
1.  Number: one sign per entrance drive. 
2.  Maximum sign area: four square feet per sign face. 
3.  Maximum height: three feet. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: two feet from all property lines. 
5.  Sign copy limits: only directional words (enter/exit/parking/in/out, etc.) and/or the name/logo of the building or development. 
6.  Other limitations: Landscaping shall be required around base of the sign. This is a nonadvertising sign to aid traffic, and should be used to designate access drives and parking areas. May be placed on an entrance wall; if so, will be subject to all listed requirements except for the setback requirement. 
b.  Internal site/directory sign. 
1.  Number: one sign per driveway aisle entrance. 
2.  Maximum sign area: 20 square feet per sign face. 
3.  Maximum height: five feet. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: 100 feet from front property line, 30 feet from side and rear property lines; must be located within site in an central, or conspicuous location so as to direct pedestrians throughout development. 
5.  Sign copy limits: only information to guide or direct pedestrian traffic and the name or logo of the development. 
6.  Other limitations: Shall be consistent with materials, architectural style, color, etc. of principal structures on site. Also, shall not impair in any way, internal/external traffic (including vehicular and pedestrian) circulation or driver vision. 
(d)  Temporary signs for residential uses. The following temporary signs for residential uses are permitted: 
(1)  Construction and real estate sign. 
a.  Number: one sign per street frontage, not to exceed two signs per property. 
b.  Maximum sign area: four square feet per sign face; if five total units/residential dwellings or more are being displayed/represented with one sign, 20 square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: six feet; signs allowed over four square feet, eight feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: ten feet from all property lines. 
e.  Sign copy limits: for construction signs, name of development, picture or rendering of completed project, name of project, developer, contractor, architect and contractor for construction project approved or underway on the site; for real estate signs, name, logo and phone number of realtor, owner, or developer property description, price, and whether the property is for sale or lease. 
f.  Other limitations: Construction signs shall not be erected until a valid building permit for work has been issued by the town, and shall be removed within 15 days of receiving a certificate of occupancy or abandonment of project; real estate signs may be erected upon the availability of a site/building of an approved project for sale or lease and shall be removed upon the sale or lease of the premises or within one year after receiving a certificate of occupancy, whichever comes sooner. 
(2)  Garage sale sign. 
a.  Number: one sign per site/lot. 
b.  Maximum sign area: two square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: three feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: five feet from all property lines. 
e.  Sign copy limits: none. 
f.  Other limitations: no permit required. Sign must be removed within five days of its placement. 
(3)  Sale/rental sign. 
a.  Number: one sign per street frontage, not to exceed two signs per property. 
b.  Maximum sign area: four square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: six feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: five feet from all property lines. 
e.  Sign copy limits: none. 
f.  Other limitations: no permit required. Sign must be removed within 15 days of sale or rental of the property. For sale/rental signs displayed/representing more than five dwelling units, see subsection (f)(1) of this section for appropriate regulations. 
(4)  Ornamental signs. 
a.  Number: one sign per lamppost or column of a property or project site. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 16 square feet. 
c.  Maximum height: minimum of eight feet from bottom of sign to ground/walkway under lamppost or column. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
e.  Sign copy limits: Sign shall represent in some clear fashion the event, season, festivity for which it is being displayed (i.e., an art festival sign shall include the name of the festival, possibly identify the dates of the festival and/or a logo representing such festival; or a seasonal sign shall be reflective of the season it represents). 
f.  Other limitations: Sign must be placed on and secured to a lamppost or column in such a manner that is deemed safe and secure. May be subject to review by the building department to ensure this. Signs not permitted to be illuminated internally, or in such a way that would require an electrical permit. 
(5)  Open house sign. 
a.  Number: one per lot or unit. 
b.  Maximum sign area: four square feet (each side). 
c.  Maximum height: four feet. 
d.  Minimum setback: five feet from all property lines or from the edge of the pavement of an adjacent roadway, whichever is less. 
e.  Sign copy limits: Sign copy shall be limited to the term "open house," a graphic depiction of an arrow, and the name and contact information for the realtor or person conducting the open house. The name and contact information shall not occupy more than one-third of the sign face. 
f.  Other limitations: 
1.  Open house signs are limited to Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
2.  An open house sign must relate to the property upon which it is located or be placed within the immediately adjacent right-of-way. 
(e)  Permanent signs for institutional, governmental, utility and recreational uses. Freestanding identification signs, front entrance wall signs, or wall signs are permitted as follows: 
(1)  Freestanding identification sign. 
a.  Number: one sign per street frontage, with a maximum of two signs per property. Properties with 600 feet or more of street frontage are permitted two signs per street frontage provided the signs are separated by a minimum of 250 feet. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 24 square feet per sign face; if use is on U.S. Highway 1 and the sign is located on U.S. Highway 1, 60 square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: ten feet; if sign is located on U.S. Highway 1, 12 feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: ten feet from all property lines. 
e.  Sign copy limits: name of building only. Lettering and logos shall not exceed 20 inches in height. Street numbers required, must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward permitted sign area. 
f.  Other limitations: If the sign is greater than four feet in height, the sign must be a monument sign. 
(2)  Front entrance sign. 
a.  Number: two signs per street frontage with one sign on each side of entrance. Maximum of four signs per property; for columns, if front entrance wall features are columns aligning both sides of an entranceway, one sign per column is permitted. For arches, if the entrance feature extends over the entranceway, such as an archway, a maximum of one sign may be placed on the archway wall. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 24 square feet. For columns, six square feet; for arches, 50 percent of the length of the wall over the entranceway or 20 square feet, whichever is less. 
c.  Maximum height: six feet; for arches, 20 feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
e.  Sign copy limits: name of building. Lettering and logos shall not exceed 20 inches in height. Street numbers required, must be in Arabic numerals no less than six inches in height and will not be calculated toward permitted sign area. 
f.  Other limitations: A sign area bonus for an additional 12 square feet may be added to the maximum sign area allowance if a water feature is designed/integrated as part of the sign. Water features include fountains or other moving water elements. 
(3)  Wall sign. 
a.  Number: one sign per street frontage not to exceed a total of two signs per property. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 24 square feet. 
c.  Maximum height: 20 feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
e.  Sign copy limits: building name only. Lettering and logos shall not exceed 20 inches in height. 
f.  Other limitations: none. 
(4)  Walkway occupant signs. 
a.  Number: one sign per principal entrance providing access from a walkway; and, one additional walkway occupant directional sign at the ends of corridors may be permitted if all other criteria is met. 
b.  Maximum sign area: six square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: minimum eight feet above walkway surface. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
e.  Sign copy limits: Only the individual business name or generic business may be displayed. An arrow no longer than six inches long may be displayed on the sign. 
f.  Other limitations: All signs must be uniform in design, shape, size, materials and colors; and they shall be nonilluminated. 
(5)  Incidental signs. 
a.  Number: one sign per secondary use/incidental structure. 
b.  Maximum sign area: six square feet. 
c.  Maximum height: Must be placed adjacent to the use and at the same height as a wall sign or upon the incidental secondary structure. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
e.  Sign copy limits: lettering and logo shall not exceed 20 inches. 
f.  Other limitations: Sign must be positioned on outside of building and must direct users to a location (such as ATM, book depositories, etc.). If illuminated, it must be internally illuminated. 
(6)  Directional signs. 
a.  Number: one sign per entrance drive. 
b.  Maximum sign area: four square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: three feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: two feet from all property lines. 
e.  Sign copy limits: only directional words (enter/exit/parking/in/out, etc.) and/or the name/logo of the building or development. 
f.  Other limitations: Landscaping shall be required around base of the sign. This is a nonadvertising sign to aid traffic, and should be used to designate access drives and parking areas. May be placed on an entrance wall; if so, will be subject to all listed requirements except for the setback requirement. 
(7)  Permanent special event signs. 
a.  Number: one monument sign. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 20 square feet for uses with total gross floor area from 15,000 square feet to 55,000 square feet; 25 square feet for uses with total gross floor area from 55,001 square feet to 100,000 square feet; 30 square feet for uses with total gross floor area over 100,000 square feet. 
c.  Maximum height: four feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: three feet from all property lines. 
e.  Sign copy limits: Content of the sign shall be controlled by the property manager and shall only display current messages. No more than four separate messages listing special events shall be permitted at one time. Special events shall only include grand openings, special holiday sales, sidewalk sales, and charity drives. Special sales on merchandise or services do not represent a special event. When no temporary messages are displayed, the sign shall list the name of the retail center. Lettering and logos shall be a minimum of four inches in height and a maximum of 20 inches in height. 
f.  Other limitations: Signs shall be externally lit only. 
(8)  Internal site/directory sign. 
a.  Number: one sign per driveway aisle entrance. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 20 square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: five feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: 100 feet from front property line, 30 feet from side and rear property lines; must be located within site in an central, or conspicuous location so as to direct pedestrians throughout development. 
e.  Sign copy limits: only information to guide or direct pedestrian traffic and the name or logo of the development. 
f.  Other limitations: Shall be consistent with materials, architectural style, color, etc. of principal structures on site. Also, shall not impair in any way, internal/external traffic (including vehicular and pedestrian) circulation or driver vision. 
(f)  Temporary signs for institutional, governmental, utility and recreational uses. The following temporary signs for institutional, governmental, utility and recreational uses are permitted: 
(1)  Construction and real estate signs. 
a.  Number: one sign per street frontage, not to exceed two signs per property. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 20 square feet per sign face. 
c.  Maximum height: eight feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: ten feet from all property lines. 
e.  Sign copy limits: for construction signs, name of development, picture or rendering of completed project, name of project, developer, contractor, architect and contractor for construction project approved or underway on the site; for real estate signs, name, logo and phone number of realtor, owner, or developer property description, price, and whether the property is for sale or lease. 
f.  Other limitations: Construction signs shall not be erected until a valid building permit for work has been issued by the town, and shall be removed within 15 days of receiving a certificate of occupancy or abandonment of project; real estate signs may be erected upon the availability of a site/building of an approved project for sale or lease and shall be removed upon the sale or lease of the premises. 
(2)  Fixed banner signs for commercial building or center. 
a.  Number: one sign per business or center. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 20 square feet. 
c.  Maximum height: 24 feet. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: See subsection (f)(2)e of this section. 
e.  Sign copy limits: Banners must be hung vertically and at a maximum dimension of 31 inches wide and 94 inches high. Banner must be a minimum eight feet above surface of a walkway. No more than 50 percent of the banner may contain a message or logo. The message may only display the name and logo of the building or retail center and/or a special event. 
f.  Other limitations: Banners may be displayed for a maximum period of 45 days at a time, two times per year. 
(3)  Ornamental signs. 
a.  Number: one sign per lamppost or column of a property/site. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 16 square feet. 
c.  Maximum height: minimum of eight feet from bottom of sign to ground/walkway under lamppost or column. 
d.  Minimum setbacks: not applicable. 
e.  Sign copy limits: Sign shall represent in some clear fashion the event, season, festivity for which it is being displayed (i.e., an art festival sign shall include the name of the festival, possibly identify the dates of the festival and/or a logo representing such festival; or a seasonal sign shall be reflective of the season it represents). 
f.  Other limitations: Sign must be placed on and secured to a lamp post or column in such a manner that is deemed safe and secure. May be subject to review by the building department to ensure this. Signs not permitted to be illuminated internally, or in such a way that would require an electrical permit. 
Editor's note- Helpful exhibits 1 through 4 are displayed on the following pages. 




(Ord. No. 207, §§ 5.68-5.68.6, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 258, 10-13-1982; Ord. No. 309, 10-8-1986; Ord. No. 389, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 426, 8-12-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 469, 5-10-1995; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 489, 12-11-1996; Ord. No. 491, 2-12-1997; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 538, 4-25-2001; Ord. No. 593, § 5.68.4, 6-14-2006) 
Sec. 34-1056. - Noncommercial messages. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, any sign erected pursuant to the provisions of this division may, at the option of the applicant, contain either a noncommercial message unrelated to the business on the premises where the sign is erected or a commercial message related to the business and located on the business premises. 
(b)  The noncommercial message may occupy the entire sign face or portion thereof. The sign face may be changed from commercial to noncommercial messages as frequently as desired by the owner of the sign, providing each of the following is met: 
(1)  The size and design criteria conform to the applicable portions of this article; 
(2)  The sign is permitted by this article; 
(3)  The sign conforms to the requirements of the applicable zoning designation; and 
(4)  The applicant obtains all appropriate permits. 
(c)  For purposes of this article, noncommercial messages shall never be deemed off-premises signs. 
Secs. 34-1057-34-1078. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 34-1079. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this division is to protect, preserve, and enhance the natural environment and beauty of the town by creating minimum standards for landscaping and vegetation protection. Landscaping that meets these standards will: 
(1)  Improve the aesthetic appearance of the town. 
(2)  Improve air and water quality by such natural processes as transpiration and the maintenance of permeable land areas for aquifer recharge and surface water filtration. 
(3)  Reduce noise and pollution through the filtering and buffering capacity of living trees and vegetation. 
(4)  Promote energy conservation through: 
a.  The creation of shade which reduces heat gain in or on buildings and paved areas; and 
b.  The channeling and control of breezes to facilitate the natural cooling of buildings. 
(5)  Reduce erosion by stabilizing the soil. 
(6)  Provide habitat for wildlife. 
(7)  Conserve freshwater resources through the use of drought-tolerant plants. 
(8)  Provide a visual buffer between otherwise incompatible types of land uses. 
(9)  Increase land values by requiring landscaping in developments, thereby becoming a capital asset. 
(10)  Provide direct physical and psychological benefits to humans by reducing noise and glare in addition to breaking up the visual monotony and softening the perception of an urban environment. 
(11)  Promote innovative and cost-conscious approach to design, installation and maintenance of landscaping, and encourage water and energy conservation. 
(12)  Require the removal of nuisance vegetation to ensure preservation of protected or native vegetation and encourage no disruption of native ecosystems. 
(13)  Provide for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.70.1, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1080. - Landscape plan submission and approval. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this division shall apply as follows: 
(1)  To any new development or modification to existing development wherein that portion of the site which is being modified must comply with the requirements contained herein to the extent that it is physically practicable; 
(2)  To any modification to existing development wherein there results an increase of ten percent of the gross floor area of the structure, or structures, situated on the site in which case the entire site shall be upgraded to present landscape standards. However, accessory structures which are no greater than 1,000 square feet in gross floor area shall not be required to meet these standards; 
(3)  A single-family dwelling and a duplex shall be exempt from all provisions of this division with the exception of those regulations pertaining to swales and visibility at intersections, maintenance of rights-of-way, irrigation restrictions and automatic rain switches required on all new irrigation systems, and those properties greater than four acres in area which must adhere to the Environmentally Sensitive Lands Ordinance. 
(b)  Landscape plan required. At the time of application for approval for all site plans and site plan revisions, special exceptions, planned unit developments, and variances, except for a single-family dwelling and a duplex, a landscape plan shall be submitted for review by the planning and zoning board and approval by the town council. 
(c)  Contents of plan. The landscape plan, signed and sealed by a landscape architect registered in the state, shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 30 feet, including dimensions and distances, and clearly delineate the existing and proposed parking spaces or other vehicular and/or water outlets, the location and size of buildings, if any, to be served, and the location, size, number, name and description of all landscape materials to be installed or, if existing, to be used in accordance with the requirements hereof. Such description shall include both scientific and common name and native or nonnative designation. The percentage of native plant material utilized for each type of plant including trees, shrubs, and ground cover shall be provided, and a notation stating that all landscape areas, excluding native preserve areas, shall be provided with 100 percent automatic irrigation shall be included on landscape plan. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.70.2, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 392, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1081. - Administration. 
    The director shall administer these regulations under the direction of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.71, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1082. - Letter required from project landscape architect. 
    Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the project landscape architect is required to submit a signed and sealed letter to the town planning, zoning and building department certifying that the landscaping on site is in accordance with the approved landscape plan. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.71.1, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1083. - Performance surety. 
    In the event that the landscaping requirements of this chapter have not been met at the time that a certificate of occupancy or certificate of use is requested, the town council may approve such request provided the town council enters into an agreement with the owner or his agent that the provisions and requirements of this chapter will be complied with. The owner or his agent shall post a performance bond or other approved surety in an amount equal to 125 percent of the cost of materials and labor and other attendant costs incidental to the installation of the required landscaping. The surety shall: 
(1)  Run to the town; 
(2)  Be in a form satisfactory and acceptable to the town; and 
(3)  Specify the time for the completion of the landscape requirements. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.72, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1084. - Landscape requirements. 
(a)  In keeping with the purpose and intent of this division, the following general requirements shall apply in all zoning districts in the town. 
(b)  A graphic survey of existing vegetation, delineating all viable native vegetation and all trees greater than four inches in diameter (caliper) at four feet above ground, shall be submitted. Such graphic survey shall be prepared by a landscape architect or land surveyor registered in the state and be of the same scale as the landscape plan. 
(c)  Reasonable requirements for the preservation of outstanding natural and cultural features shall be required. These features include trees with trunks larger than eight inches in diameter measuring four feet above the ground, groves, watercourses, historic sites, and similar irreplaceable assets in which there is public interest. 
(d)  All new trees shall be located so as to provide unrestricted flow or access to drainage swales or utility easements. Vegetation in easements and rights-of-way must have appropriate utility company and agency approval. In addition, the height of damage-prone trees shall be limited along hurricane evacuation routes. 
(e)  New trees shall meet the specifications as set forth in section 34-1088(f). 
(f)  Trees shall be hardy and suitable to local soil and climate. 
(g)  The use of native vegetation plantings shall be maximized, and at a minimum all plant materials of each type, including trees, shrubs and ground cover, shall be at least 50 percent native. In addition, xeriscape principles shall be utilized in all landscape designs and installations (see section 34-1088(a)). 
(h)  Existing native vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. The town encourages applicants to make all native vegetation to be removed from the site available, either by fee or donation, to the town and its residents for reuse. The developer shall notify the town three weeks prior to vegetation removal, so that the town may notify residents by notice at town hall and phone message of such vegetation availability. Upon such notice residents shall have two weeks to contact the developer regarding removal of native vegetation. 
(i)  The type and location of landscaping shall take into consideration the preservation of native vegetation areas, and the director may make exceptions to the regulations in this division to ensure the preservation of such native vegetation areas. 
(j)  All conditions and requirements of the Environmentally Sensitive Lands Ordinance, article IV, division 14 of this chapter, and section 34-1123 shall be complied with. 
(k)  Changing 30 percent or more of all trees and shrubs on a site from the originally approved landscape plan shall require submittal of a new plan showing new plant types and locations to the planning and zoning department for review and approval. 
(l)  The public works, planning and zoning, and code compliance departments shall be responsible for managing the town's tree planting program. The public works department shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of trees present on town-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.73, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 434, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1085. - Removal of invasive plants. 
    East of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL), invasive exotic pest plants, including the Brazilian pepper, Australian pine, and melaleuca, shall be removed and replaced with appropriate native coastal vegetation. Any exotic plant recurrence shall be required to be removed and replaced with appropriate vegetation. Such native coastal vegetation shall serve to stabilize the coastal dune area. This provision shall apply to all properties. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.73.1, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 489, 12-11-1996; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1086. - Protection of trees and other vegetation to be preserved on site. 
    Trees and other vegetation which are to be preserved on a site shall be protected from damage during the construction process according to appropriate tree and vegetation protection techniques. The Tree Protection Manual for Builders and Developers, published by the state division of forestry, department of agriculture and consumer services, shall be the standard for determining the appropriateness of proposed techniques for tree protection. All vegetation areas shall be fenced off with screening to prevent any damage. All trees and vegetation which are to be preserved and do not survive shall be replaced by a plant or tree of equal size, or an equivalent number of trees based on trunk diameter. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.73.2, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1087. - Parking area landscaping. 
(a)  All areas used for parking of vehicles (including boats, trailers or construction equipment) or any other vehicular use shall conform to the minimum landscaping requirements provided herein, except under, on, or within buildings and parking areas serving a single-family dwelling and a duplex. 
(b)  Adjacent to street. On the site of a building or open lot use providing an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area, where such area will not be entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure (such as a wall or fence, provided landscaping is provided on the side facing the abutting street, see section 34-905) from any abutting street, excluding dedicated alleys, there shall be provided landscaping between such area and such street as follows: 
(1)  A strip of land at least five feet in width located between the abutting street and the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area shall be landscaped; 
(2)  Landscaping of land strips shall include at least one tree for each 30 lineal feet or fraction thereof. In addition, a hedge or other durable landscape barrier of at least four feet in height shall be placed within such landscaped strip. If a hedge is placed within such strip, plants shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height immediately after planting and shall be of a species that will grow to a height of four feet in one year's time. 
(c)  Landscaping relating to abutting properties. On the site of a building or structure or open lot use providing an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area, such area shall be provided with a landscaped barrier, preferably a hedge that is a minimum of 24 inches in height immediately after planting and shall be of a species that will grow to a height of four feet in one year's time, to form a continuous screen between the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area and the abutting property in a planting strip of not less than five feet in width. In addition, at least one tree for each 30 lineal feet or fraction thereof shall be placed within such strip. The provisions of this subsection may not be applicable, at the discretion of the town council, when a property line abuts a dedicated alley. 
(d)  Landscaping interior parking areas. 
(1)  A minimum of 20 square feet of landscaping for each parking space shall be provided within the interior of an off-street parking area. 
(2)  Each row of parking spaces shall be terminated by landscaped islands which measure not less than five feet in width (inside of curb to inside of curb) and 90 square feet in area. At least one tree shall be planted in each 90-square-foot island. In addition, no more than ten parking spaces may occur in a row without a landscape island as described in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Landscaped divider medians shall be used to meet interior landscape requirements. The divider medians shall form a continuous landscaped strip between abutting rows of parking spaces. The minimum width of a divider median shall be five feet. One tree shall be planted for each 30 lineal feet of divider median or fraction thereof. Trees in a divider median may be planted singularly or in clusters. The maximum spacing of trees shall be 40 feet. 
(4)  All interior landscaped areas not dedicated to trees or to preservation of existing vegetation shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, shrubs or other appropriate landscape treatment. Sand or pavement shall not be considered appropriate landscape treatment. 
(5)  All terminal landscape islands shall be surrounded with a continuous nonmountable concrete curb. 
(6)  Exceptions to subsections (d)(2) and (3) of this section and the requirement for wheel stops in article IV, division 4 of this chapter may be made for an area in a parking lot no greater than 20,000 square feet where it is demonstrated that a public gathering place or square is desired to be available for special events. Such gathering place or square area must be bounded by either landscape islands or medians per subsection (d)(2) or (3) of this section, whichever is applicable, and subsection (d)(4) of this section, to form a greenbelt along the perimeter. 
(e)  Landscaping between parking areas and buildings for single-family attached and multifamily residential and nonresidential uses. Parking rows and traffic aisles must be separated from principal structures on the sides, front, and rear (excluding designated loading areas) by a landscape strip at least four feet in width and a minimum four-foot-wide walkway, unless the town determines that, based on the site design, pedestrians would require no use of the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.74, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1088. - Design, installation, maintenance, irrigation and plant material standards. 
(a)  Design. Xeriscape principles shall be utilized in landscape design and installations. Principles of xeriscape include: 
(1)  Appropriate planning and design to include consideration of the size and shape of the lot, soil type, topography, intended use of area site-specific planting to minimize irrigation waste. 
(2)  Use of soil analysis and appropriate amendments to provide better absorption of water and to provide beneficial plant nutrients. 
(3)  Efficient irrigation systems which permit turf and other less drought-tolerant plantings to be watered separately from more drought tolerant plantings, consideration of low volume drip, spray or bubbler emitters for trees, shrubs and ground covers. 
(4)  Reduction of turf areas, utilizing less water-demanding materials such as low water demand shrubs and living ground covers in conjunction with organic mulches. 
(5)  Utilization of drought tolerant plant materials and the grouping of plants with similar water requirements. 
(6)  Utilization of mulches to increase moisture retention, reduce weed growth and erosion and increase the organic content of soil upon degradation. Mulch should be initially applied at a three inch depth, but pulled away from direct contact with stems and trunks to avoid rotting. Mulched planting beds are an ideal replacement for turf areas. 
(7)  Appropriate maintenance to preserve the intended beauty of the landscape and conserve water. 
(b)  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed according to accepted good planting procedures with the quality of plant materials as hereinafter described, and shall be installed so as to meet all other applicable ordinances and code requirements. There shall be no vehicular encroachment over or into any landscaped area. Wheel stops and/or curbs shall be placed at least two feet from the edge of such landscaped area. Where a wheel stop or curb is utilized, the paved area between the wheel stop or curb and the end of the parking space may be omitted, provided it is landscaped with ground cover in addition to the required landscaping as set forth herein. A representative of the town charged with the issuance of building permits shall inspect all landscaping and no certificate of occupancy or similar authorization will be issued unless the landscaping meets the requirements herein. 
(c)  Maintenance. 
(1)  The owner, tenant, and their agent, shall be responsible for the continued proper maintenance of all landscaping located on their property and on adjacent rights-of-way which shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Proper maintenance shall include: 
a.  Periodic watering to maintain healthy flora, more drought tolerant material, minimize fungus growth and stimulate deep root growth; 
b.  Pruning to maintain the health and viability of the tree in accordance with the American National Standards Institute, ANSI A300-2001 (Tree, Shrub and other Woody Plant Maintenance), as amended; hat racking and excessive pruning is prohibited; 
c.  Grasses shall be mowed as required; 
d.  All roadways, curbs and sidewalks shall be edged when necessary to prevent encroachment of grasses; 
e.  All lawns and planted areas shall be fertilized periodically to ensure continued healthy growth; 
f.  Dead plant material shall be replaced; and 
g.  Unprotected and/or prohibited harmful and illegal plants species, as outlined in subsection (f)(2) of this section, shall be removed. 
(2)  Palm pruning requirements. 
a.  Nor more than one-third of all fronds shall be removed. All brown fronds and hanging fronds (and those located immediately above such brown and hanging fronds) can be removed up to the horizon line. 
b.  No pruning above the horizon line, except for dead or diseased fronds, in accordance with the graphic below: 

Before Pruning After Proper Pruning         After 
Excessive Pruning Mature palms often 
need pruning to remove 
lower fronds that are 
chlorotic or dead. There 
should be no pruning of 
live green fronds above 
the horizon line. After pruning, palms 
should retain green fronds 
at the horizon line. 
Fronds that are dead or 
more than half chlorotic 
should be cleared. Pruning in excess of 
one-third of fronds is 
prohibited. Over-pruned 
palms are unattractive 
and may attract pests.  
(3)  Landscaping may be inspected as needed, to ensure that the standards established in this section are maintained. The owner, tenant or his agent shall be notified in writing via certified mail by the town of any areas which are not being properly maintained and shall, within 30 calendar days from time of notification, address and rectify the deficiency. 
(d)  Irrigation standards for all development, excluding a single-family unit. 
(1)  Complete irrigation coverage. All landscaped areas shall be provided with a sprinkler system, automatically operated, to provide complete coverage of all plant materials and grass to be maintained. Exceptions to the requirement to provide irrigation are noted in subsections a and b of this subsection (d)(1). 
a.  Irrigation of existing plant communities. Existing plant communities and ecosystems, maintained in a natural state, do not require and shall not have any additional irrigation water added in any form. 
b.  Reestablished native plant areas. Native plant areas that are supplements to an existing plant community or newly installed by the developer may initially require additional water to become established. The water required during the establishment period shall be applied from a temporary irrigation system, a water truck or by hand watering from a standard hose bib source. 
(2)  Irrigation design standards. The following standards shall be considered the minimum requirements for landscape irrigation design: 
a.  All landscaped areas shall be provided with an irrigation system, automatically operated, to provide complete coverage of all plant materials and grass to be maintained. The use of recycled water is encouraged. 
b.  Wherever feasible, sprinkler heads irrigating lawns or other high water demand landscape areas shall be circuited so they are on a separate zone or zones from those irrigating trees, shrubbery or other reduced water requirement areas. 
c.  Irrigation spray, whenever possible, shall only cover permeable areas and in no instance spray onto any public access, sidewalk, street or other nonpervious area. Special attention should be paid to well water, as the iron and minerals in the water cause unsightly staining. 
d.  The use of low trajectory spray nozzles is encouraged in order to reduce the effect of wind velocity on the spray system. 
e.  The use of low volume or drip systems is encouraged. 
f.  The use of pop-up sprinkler heads is required in the swale area between the property line and the edge of pavement of the adjacent right-of-way to minimize pedestrian hazards. 
(e)  Plant material. Plant material used in conformance with the provisions of this chapter shall be of a root system adequate to promote continued growth, have healthy foliage or leaves and be free from apparent disease or insect infestation. Grass seed delivered on the job site in bags shall have state department of agriculture tags attached indicating the seed grower's compliance with the department's quality control program. 
(f)  Trees. 
(1)  Type and size. Trees shall be species having trunks which can be maintained in a clear condition over four feet of clear wood. Tree species shall be a minimum of 12 feet overall height immediately after planting with a minimum six-foot diameter spread of canopy measured at three radius points from the trunk and a minimum 2.5-inch caliper (trunk diameter) at four feet above ground. Three palms shall be considered equivalent to one tree, except for large specimen palms with a minimum overall height of 12 feet and a minimum 12-foot diameter spread of canopy, such as date palms, coconut palms, and royal palms, which shall be considered trees. A maximum of 50 percent of all required trees may be palms. 
(2)  Prohibited trees and plants. No tree or plant listed in the most current edition of the Manual of Prohibited Invasive and Non-Native Plant Materials published by the South Florida Water Management District shall be utilized as landscape material. 
(g)  Shrubs and hedges. Required shrubs and hedges shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height when measured immediately after planting. Hedges, where required, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, visual screen within a maximum of one year after time of planting. 
(h)  Ground covers. Ground covers, either vegetative or nonliving, used in whole or in part shall present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within three months after planting. 
(i)  Grass areas. Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in the county. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. In areas where other than solid sod or grass seed is used between the months of October and March, nursegrass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. 
(j)  Exemption. For single-family dwellings, the provisions of this section shall not apply to rear yards or other areas not visible from adjacent roadways and public rights-of-way. 
(k)  Enforcement. Failure to install or maintain landscaping according to the terms of this section or any approved plan or permit shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(l)  Violations. The following deficiencies shall be considered a separate and continuing violation of this section: 
(1)  Each tree or shrub that is not properly installed or properly maintained on site as required by this section; and 
(2)  Each day during which landscaping is not properly installed or maintained on site as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.75, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 392, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999; Ord. No. 617, § 2, 9-24-2008) 
Sec. 34-1089. - Landscaping at street intersections. 
    When a driveway or other accessway intersects a street or when a subject property abuts the intersection of two or more streets, all landscaping within the triangular areas described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall provide unobstructed cross visibility at a level between 30 inches and six feet. The triangular areas referred to are: 
(1)  The areas of property on both sides of a driveway or other accessway formed by the intersection of each side of the access way and the street line with two sides of each triangle being ten feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two sides; 
(2)  The area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two or more streets shall be the area described in section 34-898. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.76, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1090. - Recommended plant list. 
    The town's recommended plant list will be kept on file and will be available to the public in the planning and zoning department. This list will be continuously updated to eliminate those plants identified by the state as invasive, or otherwise detrimental to healthy local environments. It will include plants that are recommended and not identified as detrimental. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.80, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Secs. 34-1091-34-1122. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - COASTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-1123. - Protection of coastal ridge. 
    It is the intent of this division to maintain and protect the vegetation and structural quality of the coastal dune as it occurs in the town and to protect rare, endangered, and threatened plant and animal species located along the coast in the town. In addition to the applicable requirements of F.S. ch. 161, and where the town has jurisdiction, the regulations set forth in this division shall be followed. (Note: all references to the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL) refer to that line which was established in 1979 and do not pertain to the revised line, established in August 1997.) 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.120, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 384, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 499, 3-11-1998) 
Sec. 34-1124. - Limitations east of the CCCL. 
    Except for dune restoration and revegetation projects and limited coastal vegetation trimming (according to the limited vegetation trimming requirements in this division), no soil, sand, rock or vegetation (excluding removal of exotic pest plants) shall be disturbed east of the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL). In addition, no wall, fence or other structure, excluding dune walkovers and viewing platforms less than 144 square feet in area which are an extension of the dune walkover, shall be erected eastwardly of the CCCL. Provided, however, where a dune walkover or other shared pedestrian access exists within a detached single-family home subdivision which serves the residents of that subdivision, the owners of individual lots within the subdivision may construct viewing platforms upon their individual lots. All dune walkover construction and dune restoration fill projects east of the CCCL require a state department of environmental protection (DEP) permit and town approval of the town planning and zoning department. Dune revegetation projects and removal of any exotic pest plants greater than ten feet in height require only town approval of the town planning and zoning department. 

(Ord. No. 207, § 5.121, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 556, § 2(exh. A), 10-9-2002; Ord. No. 553, § 2(exh. A), 12-11-2002) 
Sec. 34-1125. - Limitations between the CCCL and the town's 50-foot setback west of the CCCL. 
(a)  Limitations on structures. 
(1)  Minor structures shall be permitted to be constructed between the Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL) and the town's 50-foot setback west of the CCCL after review and approval by the town planning and zoning department. However, privacy fences shall be allowed only to outline a pool and deck area and shall extend no further into the 50 foot setback area. Construction of dune walkovers and other minor structures shall be in accordance with state department of environmental protection (DEP) and town standards. 
(2)  Structures, other than minor structures, shall require review by the planning and zoning board and approval by the town council. Such review and approval shall include a balance between the intent of this division with other goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive development plan, such as, but not limited to, decreasing densities in the coastal area. 
(b)  Native dune vegetation within the town's 50-foot setback west of the CCCL shall be trimmed no lower than five feet above grade. The terms "trimming," "hedging," "cutting," "pruning," or any other term used to identify cutting any part of a sea grape plant shall be regulated by this division. If a petitioning party wishes to trim below the five-foot minimum, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The petitioner shall obtain and complete an application for trimming native dune vegetation below the required five-foot minimum. The application will be provided by the town and may be amended from time to time by the director of planning and zoning. The applicant will be required to submit, as part of the application, a complete evaluation of the subject area proposed for trimming by a qualified environmental professional as defined herein; and will require an application fee, as well as a fee for any professional review by the town associated with the application process. The petitioner will be required to obtain approval from the state department of environmental protection (DEP) prior to approval from the town. 
(2)  The bona fide environmental professional shall be proficient in all environmental aspects associated with the vegetation, trimming of vegetation, the dune, dune system and sea turtles. The town shall review the credentials of the individual claiming environmental professional status according to these disciplines. The applicant will be responsible for consulting with a party that has satisfactorily been approved by the town under this criteria. 
(3)  The professional's evaluation shall include consideration of the proposed trimming height; and such proposed trimming's effect on the vegetation, the dune, the dune system and impacts from the proposed trimming on the natural sea turtle and other wildlife activities in the area. 
(4)  Upon evaluation, the professional shall determine whether the impacts will positively or negatively affect, in any way, the vegetation, the dune, the dune system and/or natural sea turtle activity. 
(5)  Said determination shall be made in writing and incorporated into the application/or attached thereto with an accompanying recommendation for a specific height. 
(6)  The applicant shall be responsible for the town's fee for a bona fide professional review of said evaluation, consideration, determination and recommendation. The town's professional shall provide findings in writing within two weeks of a completely submitted application. Based on these findings the town may approve, deny or approve with specific conditions the petition. 
(7)  Procedures for trimming shall be followed according to figure 3 following this section; or according to the approved professional recommendations. 
(8)  Once approval is given for a property, such property shall be permitted to maintain the sea grapes according to said approval on a regular basis without further environmental review, however standard administrative trimming approval must still be obtained and the town's standard administrative form required every time trimming takes place. Additionally, if at any time after an approval is given, should any adverse impacts to the vegetation, the dune, the dune system, sea turtle and other wildlife activities in the area be questioned by the town, a reevaluation of the trimmed height effects will be required. In such a case, the town may require an adjustment, not to exceed the town's minimum five-foot height. 
(c)  No native dune vegetation within the town's 50-foot setback west of the CCCL shall be removed, except for exotic pest plants. Removal of any exotic pest plants greater than ten feet in height requires approval of the town planning and zoning department prior to removal. 


(Ord. No. 207, § 5.122, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 553, § 2(exh. A), 12-11-2002) 
Sec. 34-1126. - New oceanfront developments or oceanfront redevelopment. 
    Any new oceanfront development or oceanfront redevelopment shall be required to protect and preserve existing dune vegetation, except when the town requires the dune to be rebuilt. Dunes shall be required to be rebuilt and revegetated where they have been destroyed. Historical data and/or nearby properties with existing dunes shall be used for determination of required dune height. In addition, as part of the development or redevelopment, areas in need of revegetation eastward of the town's 50-foot setback west of the CCCL shall be revegetated with appropriate native dune vegetation. During construction activities, all dune preserve areas which could be impacted shall be fenced off with screening to prevent any damage to vegetation. 

(Ord. No. 207, § 5.123, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992) 
Sec. 34-1127. - Sand preservation zone, excavation. 
    Within the sand preservation zone, all excavated earth material shall be required to be either relocated on site and/or disposed of off site preferably in the town or otherwise elsewhere in the county within the sand preservation zone. The purpose of this requirement is to maintain the volume and quality of beach sand presently existing within the beach/dune system in the town and the county. An excavation permit shall be required from the town prior to any excavation in this zone. Prior to permit issuance, the applicant must supply a signed and sealed letter from a professional engineer stating the amount of material to be excavated and the relocation site. (Note: Any fill placed east of the CCCL requires a DEP permit.) 

(Ord. No. 207, § 5.124, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992) 
Sec. 34-1128. - Protection of sea turtles. 
    The town adheres to the county's turtle protection regulations as specified in article 14, chapter A of Palm Beach County's Unified Land Development Code, excluding, however, those provisions regarding sand preservation. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all requirements of the county's turtle protection regulations have been met. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.125, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992) 
Sec. 34-1129. - Applicability of chapter and county land development code. 
    See article IV, division 7 of this chapter and the county's Environmentally Sensitive Lands Ordinance per article 14, chapter C of the Palm Beach County Unified Land Development Code for additional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.126, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992) 
Sec. 34-1130. - Dune walkovers required for all beach accesses. 
(a)  All existing and new public and private accesses to the beach which serve more than 15 dwelling units shall be required to be provided with a dune walkover per town and DEP division of beaches and shores standards. 
(b)  Any existing dune walkovers (wooden structures) which do not meet town and DEP standards shall be considered nonconforming; however, when such structure requires replacement or repair of 50 percent or more of the total lineal feet of the structure, the entire structure shall be replaced and conform to town and DEP standards. 



(Ord. No. 207, § 5.127, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 489, 12-11-1996) 
Sec. 34-1131. - Emergencies and exemptions. 
(a)  In the case of emergencies, for example, those caused by hurricanes, severe storms, or other similar events, the town manager may make exceptions to the regulations in this division, in consultation with DEP if required, to protect the health, safety, and welfare of town residents and visitors. 
(b)  Exemptions to these regulations may be granted by town staff when the regulations established in this division conflict with other governmental agency requirements, or when minor modifications to existing improvements located within the town's 50-foot setback west of the CCCL will have no negative impact on the dune or other purposes of this division. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.128, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-1132. - Exterior lighting in commercial districts. 
    All exterior lighting for the buildings and parking areas shall be directed away from residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.130, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 383, 2-21-1990) 
Sec. 34-1133. - Use of reflective or mirrored material as exterior treatment of buildings. 
    Any building which utilizes reflective or mirrored material as building facing must be situated on its site in such a manner that at no time will the sun's reflection cast light into adjacent residential area and/or onto adjacent roads. The angles of the sun's reflection must be shown mathematically, taken into account for all seasons of the year. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.140, 8-8-1979) 
Secs. 34-1134-34-1159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - SPECIAL EVENTS (GRAND OPENINGS, SIDEWALK SALES, ETC.) 

Sec. 34-1160. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to set forth the conditions and requirements under which a special event may be permitted to operate within the town. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.150, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 390, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-1161. - Limitations and requirements. 
(a)  Grand openings. The following limitations and requirements apply to grand openings: 
(1)  Where permissible. Any commercial building or center. Institutional and government uses are exempted from these requirements; however, director approval is required. 
(2)  Number of grand openings permitted. One grand opening is permitted per center, building, or individual tenant after business has officially commenced or a significant change in business activity has occurred (i.e., expansion, new owner). 
(3)  Regulations. Activities permitted on site shall be related to such grand opening event, last no longer than 14 consecutive days, and abide by the regulations and procedures described in sections 34-1162-34-1164. If inclement weather has caused the grand opening event to be canceled, additional days may be granted by the director. 
(b)  Other special events. The following limitations and requirements apply to all special events other than grand openings: 
(1)  Where permissible. Other special events are permitted at any retail center or individual freestanding retail building. Institutional and government uses are exempted from these requirements; however, director approval is required. 
(2)  Number of special events permitted. The number of other special events permitted is unregulated. 
(3)  Regulations. Activities permitted on site shall be related to such special event, last no longer than three consecutive days unless extended by the director, and abide by the regulations and procedures described in sections 34-1162-34-1164. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.152, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 390, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-1162. - General regulations. 
(a)  The property manager or other authorized agent must apply for the special event permit. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  A special event may be located on the sidewalk immediately adjacent to and abutting a commercial building provided that the area in which the special event is located extends no farther along the sidewalk's length than the actual sidewalk frontage of the operating businesses and all other applicable provisions of these regulations are fulfilled. 
(2)  Common open plazas may be used in front of commercial businesses if access to businesses/tenants adjacent or next to the plaza area are not impeded or blocked. 
(3)  A special event which would require the use of any additional area on the site (i.e., parking area, open space, etc.) shall be reviewed by the town planning and zoning department and approved at the town's discretion. 
(c)  Sidewalk clearance. Outdoor displays and activities shall be permitted on a sidewalk only where the sidewalk is wide enough to adequately accommodate the usual pedestrian traffic in a safe manner. Walking space within the walkway shall be a minimum width of three feet. 
(d)  Outdoor displays and activities shall be required to maintain adequate building egress as defined by the building code of the town. 
(e)  Lighting may be incorporated into the landscaping of the premises as long as existing codes are met. 
(f)  Food and beverages. The outdoor preparation of food is prohibited at a special event unless a permit is obtained from the county health department. This, however, is not intended to prohibit hot dog vendor carts, commercial popcorn vendor carts, or similar type food warming services. All exterior surfaces within the special event area shall be kept clean at all times by the permittee. 
(g)  The permittee shall remove all trash and litter as it accumulates. The permittee is responsible for maintaining the outdoor areas, including the sidewalk surface and adjacent areas, in a clean and safe condition. 
(h)  The maximum hours of operation of a special event shall not extend beyond the normal hours of operation of the associated business or center; however, an extension of hours may be applied for and granted at the discretion of the town. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.153, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 390, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-1163. - Findings and conditions for approval. 
    In connection with granting approval for a special event permit, the planning and zoning department shall make findings that the proposed operation meets the limitations of these regulations and the planning and zoning department may impose such conditions in granting its approval as it deems are needed. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.154, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 390, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-1164. - Form and conditions of permit. 
    In addition to naming the permittee and any other information deemed appropriate by the department, the permit shall contain, and be subject to, the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit an exhibit or letter of explanation stating: 
a.  The dates the special event will be held; 
b.  The number and percent of tenants to participate, list of tenants to participate; 
c.  The location of displays/activity and statement of the minimum walk space width provided for pedestrian traffic; 
d.  The type of activity planned during the special event, i.e., sidewalk sale, other outdoor displays, music, lights, food, musicians, etc. 
(2)  The permit shall be specifically limited to the area shown on the exhibit or stated in the letter of explanation which will be attached to and made part of the permit. 
(3)  Any future additions or revisions to the approved exhibit and permit shall be subject to review pursuant to these regulations. 
(4)  The permit shall be issued to the premises only and shall not be transferable in any manner. 
(5)  The planning and zoning department may require the temporary removal of any outdoor displays when street, sidewalk, or utility repairs necessitate such action. 
(6)  The department of public works or the police department may immediately remove or relocate all or parts of the special event displays in emergency situations. 
(7)  The town and its officers and employees shall not be responsible for special event components relocated during emergencies. 
(8)  The permittee shall use positive action to ensure that its use of the sidewalk or other areas in no way interferes with or embarrasses pedestrians or limits their free unobstructed passage. 
(9)  All displays and any other objects provided with a special event shall be maintained with a clean and attractive appearance. 
(10)  Each permit shall be effective for the time allotted. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.155, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 390, 5-16-1990; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Secs. 34-1165-34-1191. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - LIMITED HOME OCCUPATIONS 

Sec. 34-1192. - Rules and regulations. 
    The following rules and regulations shall apply to limited home occupations: 
(1)  The use must be conducted entirely within the dwelling by a member of the immediate family residing on the premises. No persons outside of immediate family members will assist or be employed. 
(2)  No chemical equipment is to be used except that which is normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. No electrical or mechanical equipment which causes outside interference may be installed or used. 
(3)  No commodity or product shall be dispensed on the premises, nor shall a display of products be visible from the exterior of the dwelling. 
(4)  No external evidence or sign that the dwelling is being used for the home occupation shall be allowed. 
(5)  There shall be no noise, dirt, fumes, vibration or electromagnetic disturbance that would disturb the neighborhood area. 
(6)  The activity involved shall not noticeably detract from the outward residential character of the neighborhood. 
(7)  There will be no pedestrian traffic, vehicle traffic or any type of public nuisance as a result of this minor business activity on the resident's premises. 
(8)  Any equipment is to be stored inside an enclosed shelter, shed or garage. No outside storage shall be permitted. 
(9)  There will be no vehicle over the size of a pickup truck or van parked at the residence. 
(10)  If at any time there is a complaint of noncompliance with the provisions of this section which is sustained, then the right to conduct a limited home occupation shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.161, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 393, 5-16-1990) 
Secs. 34-1193-34-1217. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - GROUP HOMES 

Sec. 34-1218. - Family care homes. 
    Family care homes shall not be located within a radius of 1,000 feet of another existing such home measured along a straight airline route from the nearest point on any property line used as a family care home; and shall be required to file an appropriate state license with the town prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or occupancy of the building. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.170(1), 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991) 
Sec. 34-1219. - Family day care homes. 
    Family day care homes shall be required to file an appropriate state license with the town prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or occupancy of building, and shall procure a business tax receipt from the town prior to being issued a certificate of occupancy or occupancy of building. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.170(2), 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991) 
Sec. 34-1220. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 689 , § 17, adopted January 25, 2017, repealed § 34-1220. Former § 34-1220 pertained to adult day care homes and derived from Ord. No. 207, adopted August 8, 1979 and Ord. No. 416, adopted September 25, 1991. 
Sec. 34-1221. - Community residential homes. 
    Community residential homes: 
(1)  Shall not be located within a radius of 1,200 feet of another existing such home, measured along a straight airline route from the nearest point on any property line used as a community residential home; 
(2)  Shall not be located within a radius of 500 feet of an area of single-family zoning; 
(3)  Shall meet all other siting and review criteria and requirements as set forth in F.S. ch. 419; and 
(4)  Shall be required to file an appropriate state license with the town prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or occupancy of the building. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.170(4), 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991) 
Secs. 34-1222-34-1245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 668, § 5, adopted May 28, 2014 amended the title of Art. IV, Div. 12, to read as herein set out. Formerly, said division was entitled "Congregate Living Facilities." 

Sec. 34-1246. - Applicability. 
    The requirements of this division shall apply to all assisted living facilities (ALFs) within the town. These standards shall prevail over less restrictive standards applicable to such facilities imposed by this chapter or otherwise by law. All ALFs shall be subject to the requirements for special exception uses. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.180.1, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 668, § 5, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-1247. - Maximum density. 
    The maximum density for any assisted living facility shall be 18 dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.180.2, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 668, § 5, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-1248. - Number of residents to be specified. 
    The total number of residents proposed, including resident staff, for a assisted living facility shall be specified in the initial application and on the approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.180.3, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 668, § 5, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-1249. - Conversion to conventional dwelling units. 
(a)  Conversion to other uses. Assisted living facilities which are converted to other uses, including other residential uses, shall comply with all regulations in effect at the time of application for building permits for the new use. 
(b)  Prior to conversion to conventional dwelling units, a building designed to accommodate a assisted living facility shall, if necessary, be structurally modified to comply with residential density restrictions in the comprehensive development plan and this chapter. 
(c)  No site plan for a assisted living facility shall be certified until a declaration of restrictions in a form approved by the town attorney has been recorded to run with the land records maintained by the clerk of the circuit court in and for the county. This declaration of restrictions shall expressly provide that: 
(1)  The conversion will not result in an increase in the number of dwelling units permitted on the site unless the converted project has obtained a valid PUD approval; if that approval has not been granted, the converted project will have to comply with the density permitted in the underlying zoning district; and 
(2)  The total number of permitted units may be determined by referring to the approved site plan on file with the planning and zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.180.4, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 668, § 5, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-1250. - Supplemental property development regulations. 
(a)  Generally. Unless otherwise provided, assisted living facilities (ALFs) shall be governed by the building site area requirements for multiple-family dwellings in the RH residential multiple-family-high-density zoning district or the planned unit development in which it is established. 
(b)  Cooking facilities. 
(1)  Central dispensing and consumption of food. Each assisted living facility shall provide and continuously maintain central facilities for daily food dispensing and consumption. 
(2)  Food preparation in individual living quarters. Individual kitchen facilities may be provided in the living quarters of a ALF. 
(c)  Maximum occupancy of sleeping area. The maximum number of persons per sleeping area shall be determined by applying the space requirements of the state. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are: 
(1)  Those accessory land uses customarily necessary to a multiple-family residence; and 
(2)  Those noncommercial land uses customarily incidental to a assisted living facility, such as a common dining room, a central kitchen, a nursing station, a medical examining room, a chapel, a library, and offices necessary to manage the facility. 
(e)  Commercial land uses. A limited amount of commercial uses may be established as a permitted use in a assisted living facility. Such uses shall be limited to retail and assisted living personal service uses designed to serve exclusively the residents of the facility, such as a barber or beauty shop, small convenience retail sales and banking services. No more than ten percent of the gross floor area of the facility shall be dedicated to such commercial uses. There shall be no exterior signage or other indication of existence of commercial uses which may attract nonresidents. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.180.5, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 668, § 5, 5-28-2014) 
Sec. 34-1251. - Location, concentration and neighborhood compatibility. 
    The following standards and guidelines shall apply to assisted living facilities: 
(1)  Mandatory standards. 
a.  Each assisted living facility shall: 
1.  Be located within five road miles of a full service professional fire rescue station; 
2.  Not be established on a septic tank; and 
3.  Not obtain potable water from a private well. 
b.  An assisted living facility shall be contiguous and have primary access to a paved collector or arterial street. 
(2)  Qualitative guidelines. Each application for a special exception for an assisted living facility shall also be evaluated based on the following qualitative guidelines. No special exception shall be approved unless it is demonstrated that, to the greatest extent possible, each facility shall: 
a.  Be physically designed to conform to and be compatible with the general architectural character of the neighborhood in which it will be established; and 
b.  Each application for a special exception shall be accompanied by a mapped inventory of all approved and all existing licensed facilities, and all proposed facilities applications which have been filed with the planning and zoning department within a one-mile radius of the proposed facility. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.180.6, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 668, § 5, 5-28-2014) 
Secs. 34-1252-34-1275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS 

Sec. 34-1276. - Purpose. 
    The town lies adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean in southeast Florida. This area historically has been frequented by tropical storms and hurricanes which have produced very high winds and very significant property damage. Being that a satellite dish antenna possesses considerable surface area, far more so than conventional television, radio and amateur radio operator antennas, and being that very high winds frequent this area, a satellite dish antenna represents a real safety hazard in the event that it should be blown from its mounting in a high wind. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.190.1, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 290, § 1, 9-11-1985; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-1277. - Appearance. 
    It is the intent of this division to provide for the reasonable, safe and aesthetic installation of satellite dish antennas. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.190.2, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-1278. - Permit. 
(a)  No person shall construct or cause to be constructed a satellite dish antenna without first obtaining a permit therefor when required by the Florida Building Code. 
(b)  A building permit shall be obtained when required by the Florida Building Code. Signed and sealed plans, drawn by a state-registered professional engineer, shall be submitted to the town for its review and approval, prior to the issuance of a building permit. Plans shall include a site sketch denoting proposed antenna location, building locations, property line dimensions and minimum lot setbacks; landscape and/or fence screening plans for the antenna; and structural drawings indicating dimensions of footing, placement of reinforcing rods, support lines and any other pertinent information. Construction plans shall comply with all town codes, including building, electrical and plumbing. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.190.3, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996) 
Sec. 34-1279. - Technical requirements. 
(a)  Zoning districts. Satellite dish antennas shall be permitted as an accessory structure in all zoning districts, excluding the beach zoning district where they shall not be permitted under any circumstances. Satellite dish antennas shall be a permitted accessory use in the CG commercial general, MC medical commercial, CO commercial office, REC-PUB public recreation and GOV government zoning districts and special exception accessory use in all other permissible zoning districts. 
(b)  Site area regulations. 
(1)  In all zoning districts, other than RV park, MH manufactured home community, CG commercial general, MC medical commercial and CO commercial office, satellite dish antennas shall: 
a.  Be freestanding and ground-mounted in the rear yard; 
b.  Be roof-mounted if the dish is no greater than 32 inches in diameter; 
c.  Be roof-mounted if the dish is no greater than 81/2 feet in diameter and such dish is located above a seven-story building level (minimum 60 feet in height); or 
d.  Be a dish with a professional umbrella covering on both the top and bottom of the dish and on its mechanical devices and be located in the side or rear yard. 
(2)  In the CG commercial general, MC medical commercial and CO commercial office zoning districts, the satellite dish shall: 
a.  Be freestanding and ground-mounted in the side or rear yard; 
b.  Be roof-mounted if the dish cannot be sufficiently placed in the side or rear yard and the dish is not greater than 81/2 feet in diameter; or 
c.  Be a dish with a professional umbrella covering on both the top and bottom of the dish and on its mechanical devices and be located in the front, side or rear yard. The dish shall meet all required setbacks for an accessory structure and shall be permitted only when the dish does not negatively impact, and is compatible with, the surrounding area. 
(3)  In the RV park and MH manufactured home community zoning districts, the satellite dish shall: 
a.  Be mounted on the roof at the rear of an RV, manufactured home, screen room or porch, whichever is applicable. The mounting of the dish shall be as close to the roof as possible and the dish shall be a foldaway antenna and a maximum of 32 inches in diameter; or 
b.  Be a maximum of six feet in diameter, be located in the rear or side yard, meet the required setbacks for accessory structures and have a professional umbrella covering on both the top and bottom of the dish and on its mechanical devices. 
(c)  Size and height regulations. 
(1)  The dish of the antenna shall not exceed 12 feet in diameter if circular in shape, or 12 feet in its maximum dimension if not circular but some other shape such as a square, rectangle or any polygon, unless specified otherwise in this division; 
(2)  The maximum height from grade to the highest point of the antenna structure when the antenna is perpendicular to grade shall be 14 feet, unless specified otherwise in this division. 
(d)  Use for display or advertising prohibited. Only satellite dishes which are actually required for obtaining the signal may be erected and maintained on the property. Satellite dishes may not be used for display or advertising purposes on the exterior of any structure. Where a commercial enterprise is engaging in the sale of satellite dishes, the erection of more than one dish shall be presumed to be for display or advertising purposes. 
(e)  Screening for satellite dish antennas which are greater than 36 inches in diameter and located in a residential zoning district. The antenna and supporting structure shall be screened from view from any street right-of-way and the ground level of all adjacent properties. Such screening may include the use of shrubbery, trees, foliage, fencing, or other appropriate screening material. Any solid building materials to be utilized for screening purposes shall be consistent with the design and color of the principal building. A professional umbrella covering on both the top and bottom of the dish as well as on its mechanical devices as permitted in subsection (b) of this section shall not require any screening. 
(f)  Color. The antenna and supporting structure shall be either green or black if ground-mounted, and white, black, or the color of the building if roof-mounted. All umbrella coverings shall be color coordinated with the principal buildings on the site. 
(g)  Special exceptions. By special exception, the satellite dish antenna may be located in a side yard or be placed on the roof of the principal structure. The review and approval procedure is that contained in section 34-93. The application for the special exception shall include: 
(1)  All information required for a building permit to install a satellite dish antenna; 
(2)  Satisfactory evidence that a useable satellite signal cannot be obtained from the areas permitted in this section; 
(3)  Suitable evidence of screening from any street right-of-way and the ground level of all adjacent properties; 
(4)  Suitable evidence that the satellite dish antenna can withstand hurricane-force winds; and 
(5)  Any other justification for said special exception. 
(h)  Public purpose. When it can be demonstrated that the use of a satellite dish antenna by a governmental agency at a specific location will provide a significant public benefit and purpose and will contribute to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public, and in particular the residents of the town, upon review by the planning and zoning board and approval by the town council, any of the conditions or restrictions provided in subsections (a)-(g) of this section, pertaining to location, landscaping, diameter, height, setbacks, ground coverage, color and number permitted may be waived or appropriately modified in the best interest of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.190.4, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 439, 2-24-1993; Ord. No. 476, 12-13-1995; Ord. No. 485, 9-4-1996; Ord. No. 668, § 5, 5-28-2014) 
Secs. 34-1280-34-1301. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - COMMUNITY APPEARANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 34-1302. - Intent and purpose. 
    The community appearance standards for the town are designed to enhance the appearance and environment of the streets, bicycle and pedestrian ways, and public spaces of the town as well as provide vehicular (motorized and nonmotorized) and pedestrian access to all public and private land. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.200, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1303. - Applicability. 
    The community appearance standards set forth in this division shall apply to all new residential (excluding an individual single-family or duplex residence) and nonresidential developments and major alterations resulting in an increase of ten percent or more of the gross floor area of a structure on a site. However, accessory structures which are no greater than 1,000 square feet in gross floor area shall not be required to meet these standards. The town council shall consider variations from these standards, on a case-by-case basis, to determine if such variations meet the intent and purpose of this division. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.200, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1304. - Permits required. 
    All improvements within a right-of-way, such as but not limited to road construction, landscaping, sidewalks, lights, and traffic signs, require town approval as well as a right-of-way permit from the right-of-way agency prior to installation. In addition, any improvements within an easement require approval from the easement holder. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.200, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1305. - Street enhancement; diagrams. 
(a)  The diagrams that follow this division show how the streets and rights-of-way in the town shall be enhanced. A development shall be required to enhance the public street or right-of-way adjacent to its property up to the centerline as shown in the following diagrams. If a particular street is not shown, or a new public street is created within a development, then the general streetscape diagram shall be used for minimum requirements. The bike lanes shown on existing streets require approval and construction by the respective right-of-way agency, unless otherwise specified in a development approval. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town council retains the discretionary authority to modify the sidewalk and walkway designs depicted in the diagrams referenced herein to delete or revise the requirements relating to brick pavers and brick accents. 
(b)  The streetscape and design standards depicted in the diagrams that follow this division for signs within streets and rights-of-way throughout the town shall only be required for street signs, stop signs, combination street/stop signs, and any attachments thereto. 
(c)  All improvements within a right-of-way shall meet the minimum requirements of the state Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for the Design, Construction, and Maintenance of Streets and Highways (FDOT Green Book), as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.200, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999; Ord. No. 622, § 2, 8-26-09; Ord. No. 649, § 2, 2-8-2012) 
Sec. 34-1306. - Public parks, open spaces, and access easements. 
    Improvements within all public parks, open spaces, and access easements shall follow as closely as possible the standards in this division. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.200, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 34-1307. - Landscaping of streets. 
    The landscaping of the streets should follow the street sections conceptually, shown on the diagrams that follow this division. The following landscaping types should be used; however, the town will consider other types not listed, on a case by case basis, to determine their suitability for the proposed location. The plant list was compiled to meet the unique conditions of the town and the selection criteria included; salt tolerance (when located east of U.S. Highway 1), freeze tolerance, water conservation, shade, and aesthetic/view preservation of the ocean. 
(1)  Shade trees. All shade trees shall be planted at a minimum 16-foot overall height, minimum six feet of clear trunk (minimum eight feet of clear trunk if located in a county right-of-way), and spaced a maximum 30 feet on center. The town may permit additional distances between shade trees based upon site specific conditions. 
(2)  Palm trees. Palm trees may be mixed in with shade trees; however, shade trees shall be spaced a maximum 45 feet on center with palm trees placed in between shade trees (three palms shall be considered equivalent to one shade tree). However, large specimen palms, such as coconut palms, canary island date palms, and royal palms, shall be considered shade trees if a minimum overall height of 16 feet. 
(3)  Accent trees, shrubs and ground covers. Accent trees, shrubs and ground covers are encouraged along with shade trees. Accent trees shall be a minimum eight to ten feet overall height at time of planting. Shrubs shall be a minimum 24 inches overall height at time of planting and spaced a maximum 30 inches on center. Ground covers shall be a minimum 12 inches overall height at time of planting and spaced a maximum 18 inches on center. 
(4)  Swale areas. All swale areas shall be sodded and graded to drainage standards acceptable to the town engineer and other right-of-way agencies, if applicable. 
(5)  Protection and maintenance. All trees and vegetation in a right-of-way are protected and may not be removed except by the town or by private citizens who have obtained written approval from the public works department. The town's landscape code, section 34-1088, requires that all landscaping in a right-of-way be maintained by the adjacent property owner. 
(6)  Irrigation. All landscaping in a right-of-way shall be provided with a 100 percent automatic irrigation system (for safety purposes, only pop-up sprinkler heads shall be permitted in rights-of-way). All shade trees shall be irrigated with individual bubblers. 
(7)  Recommended plant list. The town's recommended plant list will be kept on file and will be available to the public in the planning and zoning department. This list will be continuously updated to eliminate those plants identified by the state as invasive, or otherwise detrimental to healthy local environments. It will include plants that are recommended and not identified as detrimental. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 5.200, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 421, 2-19-1992; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 512, 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 517, 12-1-1999) 








All new construction and alterations which meet the applicability section of these standards shall be required to provide sidewalks/pedestrian paths along the abutting right-of-way. When such new sidewalk shall be within 100 feet of existing pavement (for example, an existing sidewalk or drive). Such new sidewalk shall be required to extend to the existing pavement in order to connect the system. 
Sidewalks/pedestrian paths shall be of poured concrete and meet the construction standards as shown in the details that follow. 
Brick paver accents, as shown in the street sections, shall be provided every 30 feet along the sidewalk. In addition, sidewalks across driveways shall be brick paved. 
Brick accents shall be "holland brick" by Paver Systems (or equal), Color Mix III and placed in a Herringbone pattern 90 degrees, or used in a running bond pattern as an edger. 
All brick pavers shall be edged approximately per manufactures' requirements. 
Brick pavers shall be required for crosswalks across streets, provided that the right-of-way agency approves such treatment. 









Secs. 34-1308-34-1310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - DISPENSING AND SALE OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 34-1311. - Medical and dental offices. 
(a)  Purpose. These regulations are enacted to discourage the misuse and abuse of narcotics and other controlled substances such as pain medications, and to address the impacts upon land uses that are associated with businesses that operate principally to dispense pain medications for chronic pain but without the services of typical medical offices that provide thorough on-site examinations, medical treatments or procedures and continued medical oversight. Such businesses have been determined to be associated with the excessive use of, addiction to, and subsequent illegal sales and distribution of controlled substances. 
(b)  Applicability. This section applies to all medical or dental offices or clinics within the town, excluding veterinary offices or clinics. 
(c)  On site dispensing of controlled substances. On-site dispensing of controlled substances that are identified in Schedules II, III or IV in F.S. §§ 893.03, 893.035 or 893.0356, is strictly prohibited, unless otherwise expressly permitted by statutory or general law. However, the following are exempt from this prohibition: 
(1)  A health care practitioner when administering a controlled substance directly to a patient if the amount of the controlled substance is only intended to treat the patient during that particular treatment session. 
(2)  A pharmacist or health care practitioner when administering a controlled substance to a patient or resident receiving care as a patient at a hospital, nursing home, ambulatory surgical center, hospice, or intermediate care facility for the developmentally disabled that is licensed by the State of Florida. 
(3)  A health care practitioner when administering a controlled substance in the emergency room of a licensed hospital. 
(4)  A health care practitioner when administering or dispensing a controlled substance to a person under the age of 16. 
(5)  A health care practitioner when dispensing a one-time, 72 hour emergency re-supply of a controlled substance to a patient. 
(d)  Acknowledgment of regulations. The health care practitioner responsible for the operation or supervision of any medical or dental office or clinic shall execute an affidavit acknowledging the regulations set forth in subsection (3) above prior to payment of the required business tax, and annually thereafter upon renewal of same prior the issuance of a business tax receipt. Failure or refusal to execute the required affidavit shall constitute prima facie evidence that the subject medical or dental office or clinic is operating in violation of the code of ordinances, which may result in code enforcement action, revocation of business tax receipt, and/or any other action permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 646, § 3, 4-13-2011) 
Sec. 34-1312. - Drug stores and pharmacies. 
(a)  Purpose. These regulations are enacted to discourage the misuse and abuse of narcotics and other controlled substances such as pain medications, and to address the impacts upon land uses that are associated with drug stores and pharmacies affiliated with medical or dental offices or clinics that operate principally to dispense pain medications. Such businesses have been determined to be associated with the excessive use of, addiction to, and subsequent illegal sales and distribution of controlled substances. 
(b)  Applicability. This section applies to all drug stores and pharmacies within the Town. 
(c)  Limitation. No more than 15 percent of the total number of prescriptions sold within a 30 day period can be derived from the sale of Schedule II controlled substances as listed in F.S. § 893.03. All pharmacies, including those located within drug stores, shall be staffed by a state licensed pharmacist who shall be present during all hours the pharmacy is open for business. This restriction shall not apply to a pharmacy operating as an accessory use to a facility licensed under F.S. ch. 395, (e.g., a hospital). 
(d)  Acknowledgment of regulations. The owner or operator of a pharmacy or drug store shall execute an affidavit acknowledging the regulations set forth in subsection (3) above prior to payment of the required business tax, and annually thereafter upon renewal of same prior the issuance of a business tax receipt. Failure or refusal to execute the required affidavit shall constitute prima facie evidence that the subject pharmacy or drug store is operating in violation of the code of ordinances, which may result in code enforcement action, revocation of business tax receipt, and/or any other action permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 646, § 3, 4-13-2011) 
Secs. 34-1313-34-1315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - LOCAL EXEMPTION RELATING TO FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 34-1316. - Intent. 
    The intent of this section is to implement the provisions of F.S. § 509.233, and provide a local exemption procedure to certain provisions of the Food and Drug Administration Food Code, as adopted by the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation, in order to allow patrons' dogs within certain designated outdoor portions of public food service establishments. 
(Ord. No. 676, § 2, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 34-1317. - Permit required. 
(a)  Public food service establishments seeking to utilize the local exemption shall apply for and receive a permit from the town prior to allowing patrons' dogs on their premises. When applying for a permit, the applicant shall provide the following information on the form provided by the town: 
(1)  The name, location and mailing address of the public food service establishment, including the license number issued by the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation. 
(2)  The name, mailing address, and telephone contact information of the permit applicant. 
(3)  A diagram and description of the outdoor area to be designated as available to patrons' dogs including: 
a.  The dimensions of the designated area; 
b.  A depiction of the number and placement of tables, chairs, and restaurant equipment, if any; 
c.  The entryways and exits to the designated outdoor area; 
d.  The boundaries of the designated area and of other areas of outdoor dining not available to patrons' dogs; 
e.  Any fences or other barriers; and 
f.  The surrounding property lines and public rights-of-way, including sidewalks and common pathways. 
(The diagram shall be accurate and to scale but need not be prepared by a licensed design professional). 
(4)  A description of the days of the week and hours of operation that patrons' dogs will be permitted in the designated outdoor area. 
(b)  A permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire automatically upon the sale of the establishment and shall not be transferred to a subsequent owner. A subsequent owner shall be required to apply for a new permit. 
(c)  The town shall forward a copy of all approved applications and permits to the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation. 
(Ord. No. 676, § 2, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 34-1318. - Regulations and requirements. 
    The following regulations and requirements shall be applicable to all food service establishments issued a permit to allow patrons' dogs within designated outdoor areas pursuant to this section: 
(a)  All public food service establishment employees shall wash their hands promptly after touching, petting, or otherwise handling dogs. Employees shall be prohibited from touching, petting, or otherwise handling dogs while serving food or beverages or handling tableware or before entering other parts of the public food service establishment. 
(b)  The establishment shall advise patrons in a designated outdoor area to wash their hands before eating and shall provide waterless hand sanitizer at all tables in the designated outdoor area. 
(c)  The establishment shall instruct patrons and employees that they shall not allow dogs to come into contact with serving dishes, utensils, tableware, linens, paper products, or any other items involved in food service operations. 
(d)  Patrons shall keep their dogs on a leash no more than six feet in length and under reasonable control at all times. 
(e)  Dogs shall not be allowed on chairs, tables or other furnishings, nor shall they be permitted to sit on the laps of patrons. 
(f)  The establishment shall clean and sanitize all table and chair surfaces within the designated area with an approved product between seating of patrons. Spilled food and drink shall be removed from the floor or ground between the seating of patrons. 
(g)  The establishment shall clean accidents involving dog waste immediately and sanitize the area with an approved product. The establishment shall keep a kit with the appropriate materials for this purpose within or in immediate proximity to the designated outdoor area. 
(h)  The establishment shall provide at least one pet waste disposal bag station and an appropriate container for pet waste disposal bags. All contents shall be removed at least daily. 
(i)  The establishment shall post signs at least 12 inches by 12 inches in size reminding employees of the applicable rules in the kitchen, the employee restrooms and all food or beverage service stations, if any, with the designated area. 
(j)  The establishment shall post table top signs at least five inches by seven inches in size reminding patrons of the applicable rules on each table within the designated area. 
(k)  The establishment shall post signs at least 12 inches by 12 inches in size that the designated outdoor area is available for the use of patrons and patrons' dogs, including one sign within the designated area and one sign at each entrance and exit to the designated area. 
(l)  Dogs shall not be permitted to travel through indoor or non-designated outdoor portions of the public food establishment, and ingress and egress to the designated outdoor portions of the public food establishment must not require entrance into or passage through any indoor area of the food establishment. 
(m)  Patrons shall not be forced to travel through the designated outdoor portion of the public food establishment in order to access the indoor portion or the non-designated outdoor portion. 
(Ord. No. 676, § 2, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 34-1319. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The town's code enforcement division shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this section and shall respond to all complaints filed pursuant to its provisions. The town shall provide copies of all complaints, along with the resolution of same, to the Division of Hotel and Restaurants of the Department of Business and Professional Regulation. 
(b)  All violations of this division shall be treated as a violation of this chapter in accordance with sections 34-34 and 34-35 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 676, § 2, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 34-1320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - VACATION RENTALS 

Sec. 34-1321. - Applicability. 
    The regulations set forth in this division shall apply to any building or structure utilized as a vacation rental within any town zoning district. A vacation rental is a dwelling unit that is also a transient public lodging establishment, but is not a time share project. A transient public lodging establishment, as defined by section F.S. § 509.013(4)(a), as amended, is any unit which is rented out to guests more than three times in a calendar year for periods of less than 30 days or one calendar month, whichever is less, or which is advertised or held out the public as a place regularly rented to guests for periods less than 30 days or one calendar month, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 710 , § 2, 1-23-2019) 
Sec. 34-1322. - Registration and inspection. 
(a)  Registration required. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate a vacation rental within the corporate limits of the town without first registering the vacation rental with the planning and zoning department in accordance with the requirements of this division. All existing vacation rentals shall be required to be registered by October 1, 2019. 
(b)  Initial registration. Every vacation rental owner or operator shall first register with the town by submitting to the planning and zoning department a properly completed and notarized registration form, as prescribed by the town, together with a registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the town council. A separate registration form shall be required for each vacation rental. The registration form shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A copy of the business tax receipt issued by the town; 
(2)  A copy of the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation license as a transient public lodging establishment/vacation rental; 
(3)  A copy of the vacation rental's current and active certificate of registration with the Florida Department of Revenue for the purpose of collecting and remitting sales taxes, transient rental taxes and any other taxes required by law to be remitted, as applicable; 
(4)  Proof of the establishment of an account with the Palm Beach County tax collector for the payment of tourist development taxes or that payment is arranged through a third party; 
(5)  Copies of the postings required by section 34-1323(5) below; 
(6)  A copy of a sample lease agreement; and 
(7)  A completed vacation rental responsible party designation, in the format prescribed by the town, which includes the information required by section 34-1323(4) below. 
(c)  Registration renewal. After a vacation rental is initially registered, the registration shall be renewed by October 1 of each year through the execution of a renewal affidavit, in the format prescribed by the town, and the payment of the renewal fee established by resolution of the town council. 
(d)  Registration updates. Any changes to the information or submittals included with the initial registration must be reported to the town within 30 days of the occurrence of such changes. 
(e)  Incomplete registration/renewal. If the registration form or renewal form submitted pursuant to this section is incomplete, the registrant shall be informed of such deficiency and shall have ten days to correct the deficiency. 
(f)  Inspection. Inspection by the town to verify compliance with the requirements of the division may be required subsequent to initial registration with the town and annually after each renewal. Noncompliance with the requirements of this division discovered during any inspection shall be treated as a violation of the Town Code and be processed in accordance with section 34-1324 below. Failure to allow the town to inspect the vacation rental within 20 days after the town notifies the owner or responsible party that the town is ready to conduct an inspection shall constitute a separate violation of the Town Code and be processed in accordance section 34-1324 below. 
(g)  Evidence of vacation rental operation. Advertising, listing or posting a property on the internet, utilizing any mass communication medium or in any publication as being available for use as a vacation rental creates a rebuttable presumption that the owner or operator is utilizing the property as a vacation rental. Nothing set forth herein precludes the town from presenting other forms of evidence of vacation rental operation. 
(h)  False information, it shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with the requirements and obligations set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 710 , § 2, 1-23-2019) 
Sec. 34-1323. - Vacation rental standards. 
    No person or entity shall operate a vacation rental within the town unless such vacation rental complies with the following standards: 
(1)  Minimum life/safety requirements: 
a.  Swimming pool, spa and hot tub safety. A swimming pool, spa or hot tub shall comply with the current standards of the Residential Swimming Pool Safety Act, as set forth in F.S. ch. 515. 
b.  Smoke and carbon monoxide (CO) detection and notification system. If an interconnected and hardwired smoke and carbon monoxide (CO) detection and notification system is not in place within the vacation rental, then one such system shall be required to be installed and maintained on a continuing basis consistent with the requirements of Section R314, Smoke Alarms, and Section R315, Carbon Monoxide Alarms, of the Florida Building Code-Residential. 
c.  Fire extinguisher. A portable, multi-purpose dry chemical 2A:10B:C fire extinguisher shall be installed, inspected and maintained in accordance with NFPA 10 on each floor/level of the dwelling unit. The extinguisher(s) shall be installed on the wall in an open common area or in an enclosed space with appropriate markings visibly showing the location. 
d.  Battery powered emergency lighting of primary exit. Battery powered emergency lighting which provides illumination automatically in the event of any interruption of normal lighting shall be provided for a period of not less than one hour to illuminate the primary exit. 
e.  Emergency egress and maintenance. Halls, entrances and stairways within a vacation rental shall be clean and ventilated. Hall and stair runners shall be kept in good condition. Rails shall be installed on all stairways and around all porches and steps. 
f.  Local phone service. A land line with the ability to call 911 shall be available within the vacation rental. 
(2)  Maximum occupancy. Each vacation rental dwelling unit shall comply with the occupancy limitations set forth in the Property Maintenance Code referenced in section 6-104 of this Code, provided, however, that in no event shall maximum occupancy of such dwelling unit exceed two persons per bedroom plus two additional persons. 
(3)  Lease requirements. There shall be a written or online lease, rental, tenant or other recorded agreement memorializing each vacation rental tenancy between the owner or responsible party and the occupant(s). The agreement shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
a.  The maximum number of occupants for the unit as specified in subsection (2) above; 
b.  The number of parking spaces associated with the vacation rental unit, if applicable, and the location of such spaces; 
c.  The names and ages of all persons who will be occupying the unit; 
d.  The dates of such occupancy; and 
e.  A statement that all occupants must evacuate from the vacation rental following any evacuation order issued by local, state or federal authorities. 
The town reserves the right to request and receive a copy of any vacation rental lease or rental agreement from the owner or responsible party at any time. 
(4)  Vacation rental responsible party. Each vacation rental must designate a responsible party to respond to routine inspections as well as non-routine complaints and any other problems related to the operation of the vacation rental. The property owner may serve in this capacity or shall otherwise designate another person 18 years or older to perform the following duties: 
a.  Be available by telephone at the listed phone number 24 hours per day, seven days per week and be capable of handling any issues relating to the operation of the vacation rental; 
b.  If required, be willing and able to come to the vacation rental within two hours following notification from an occupant, the owner, or the town to address any issues relating to the operation of the vacation rental; 
c.  Maintain a record of all lease or rental agreements for the vacation rental; 
d.  Receive service of any legal notice on behalf of the owners for violation of the requirements set forth in this division; and 
e.  Otherwise monitor the vacation rental to ensure compliance with the requirements set forth in this division. 
(5)  Minimum vacation rental information required postings. The vacation rental shall be posted with the following information, either on the back of or next to the main entrance door or on the refrigerator: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the vacation rental responsible party; 
b.  The days of trash pick up and recycling pick up and a notification that all garbage or trash must be placed in a garbage or trash can or other approved garbage receptacle and that all recyclables must be placed in approved recyclable containers; 
c.  The location of the nearest hospital; 
d.  The location of designated parking spaces/areas, if applicable; 
e.  Notice of restrictions during sea turtle nesting season; and 
f.  For units located within multi-family buildings more than two stories in height, a building evacuation map (at least 81/2 inches by 11 inches) shall be posted on or next to the interior portion of each bedroom door. 
(6)  Other regulations. Vacation rentals must comply with all other regulations, standards and requirements set forth in the town Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, the requirements of Chapter 4 (Animals), Chapter 6 (Buildings and Building Regulations), Chapter 12 (Environment), Chapter 16 (Offenses), Chapter 30 (Traffic and Vehicles), and Chapter 34 (Zoning). 
(Ord. No. 710 , § 2, 1-23-2019) 
Sec. 34-1324. - Violations; remedies; enforcement. 
(a)  Violations. Non-compliance with any provision of this division shall constitute a violation of the town Code of Ordinances and each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(b)  Remedies and enforcement. Any violations of this division may be enforced pursuant to section 1-10 of the town Code of Ordinances, through the code enforcement process set forth in chapter 2, article VI of the town Code of Ordinances, or through any other manner authorized by law, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief. 
(c)  No waiver. A valid vacation rental registration shall not be construed as a waiver of any of the requirements contained within the town Code of Ordinances or the town's Comprehensive Development Plan nor shall such registration be construed as approval of a use or activity that would otherwise be illegal under Florida law or prohibited by the Florida Building Code or the Florida Fire Prevention and Life Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 710 , § 2, 1-23-2019) 
Secs. 34-1325-34-1327. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 34-1328. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the planned unit development (PUD) classification is to provide for a special exception to develop residential, commercial and recreational uses in conformance with provisions and standards which ensure compatibility among all the land uses, foster innovation in site planning and development, and encourage sound design practices. Provisions are included for planned unit developments to permit establishment of areas in which diverse uses may be brought together in a compatible and unified plan of development which shall be in the interest of the general welfare of the public. In planned unit development, land and structures may be constructed and used for any lawful purpose in accordance with the provisions set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 6.10, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 264, 7-13-1982; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-1329. - Procedure. 
    The procedure for obtaining a special exception for undertaking development as a planned unit development (PUD) shall be as follows. This procedure shall be in lieu of the special exception procedures contained in section 34-93. See section 34-1334 for a minor amendment to an approved planned unit development. 
(1)  The owner or agent thereof (hereinafter referred to as "owner") of the land shall apply in writing and shall submit five copies of a preliminary development plan as described in section 34-1331 to the town. 
(2)  The town staff shall consider the proposed application, shall review the preliminary development plan with the owner, and shall prepare recommendations with regard to the preliminary development plan. 
(3)  The town staff shall provide its recommendations to the owner indicating its approval in principle, or its disapproval. If the preliminary development plan is approved in principle, the town staff shall state any specific changes it may require. 
(4)  The owner shall submit five copies of any application for special exception and five copies of a revised development plan as described in section 34-1332. 
(5)  The planning and zoning board shall then consider the development plan and submit its recommendation to the town council. The planning and zoning board's failure to adopt a recommendation by motion shall be treated as no recommendation. 
(6)  After receipt of the planning and zoning board recommendations, public notice shall be given and a public hearing held by the town council on the proposed special exception subject to the specifications of the development plan. 
(7)  If the special exception and development plan are approved by the town council, the council shall indicate such approval through the adoption of a resolution setting forth all conditions applicable to the planned unit development. 
(8)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any phase of the development plan, approval shall be obtained as described in subsections (1)-(7) of this section. 
(9)  The developer shall post a form of surety or guarantee described in the town's subdivision regulations, in an amount equal to 110 percent of the town engineer's estimate for items listed in section 34-1332(a)(1) and (2) and those infrastructure improvements as described in section 34-1332(a)(4) of the development plan by phase. 
(10)  Failure to meet the conditions set forth in the resolution approving the special exception and development plan shall constitute grounds for the repeal of the PUD approval by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 6.20, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 264, 7-13-1982; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994) 
Sec. 34-1330. - Findings required by planning and zoning board. 
    The planning and zoning board, after determining that the requirements of this division have been met, shall recommend the approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval of the development plan to the town council. The planning and zoning board may recommend the establishment of a planned unit development provided it determines that: 
(1)  The uses proposed will not be detrimental to the natural characteristics of the site or to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a beneficial effect which could not be achieved under any other zoning. 
(2)  Land surrounding the proposed development can be developed in coordination with the proposed development and be compatible in use. 
(3)  The proposed planned unit development special exception is in conformance with the general intent of the comprehensive development plan of the town. 
(4)  Existing and proposed streets are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic within the proposed development and in the vicinity of the proposed development. 
(5)  Existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the proposed development. 
(6)  Each phase of the proposed development, as it is proposed to be completed, contains the required spaces, landscape and utility areas necessary for creating and sustaining a desirable and stable environment. 
(7)  Each phase of the proposed development, as it is proposed to be completed, contains a comprehensive network of bicycle and pedestrian facilities in order to create and sustain alternative modes of transportation and a desirable environment. 
(8)  The architectural design of buildings meets the appearance review criteria as described in section 34-116(2)b. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 6.30, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 264, 7-13-1982; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-1331. - Preliminary development plan. 
    The owner shall submit an application for a planned unit development special exception with a preliminary development plan which shall include the following: 
(1)  Application form and fee. 
(2)  Survey of the property, showing existing features of the property, including contours, buildings, structures, trees over eight inches in trunk diameter, streets, utility easements, rights-of-way and adjacent land uses. 
(3)  Proposed site plan, showing building locations, occupancy and land use areas, including any subdivision intended within the development, and phasing for development of the plan. 
(4)  Proposed traffic circulation, parking areas, pedestrian walks, bikeways (paths and lanes), and landscaping. 
(5)  Proposed public utilities plan including water supply, sewerage and stormwater drainage. 
(6)  Proposed grading plan, showing one-foot contour intervals, building locations, and proposed storm drainage system. 
(7)  Preliminary drawings of buildings to be constructed in the development which shall include exterior elevations. 
(8)  Statement justifying area regulations modifications. In reference to section 34-1333(b)(3)a and b, the applicant shall provide a full written justification for each modification requested. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 6.40, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 264, 7-13-1982; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Sec. 34-1332. - Development plan. 
(a)  The owner shall submit a development plan for review by the planning and zoning board and approval by the town council prior to the issuance of any building permit. Plans and specifications shall bear the signature and seal of the professional person responsible for the design and drawings and contain the following items: 
(1)  Traffic circulation, required parking and loading areas, pedestrian walks, and bikeways (paths and lanes). 
(2)  Landscaping plan, including site grading and landscape planting and structures. 
(3)  Preliminary drawings of buildings to be constructed in the current phase, including floor plans, exterior elevations and sections. 
(4)  Conceptual final engineering plans, including street improvements, drainage system, and public utility extensions. All such improvements shall comply with construction standards outlined in the town's subdivision regulations. All lots shall have frontage on an accepted town, county, or state road, or private road built to town specifications. 
(5)  Engineering feasibility studies for the solution of any anticipated problems which might arise due to the proposed development, as required by the planning and zoning board. 
(6)  Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase for buildings, parking spaces and landscaped areas, if applicable. 
(7)  Complete documentation of community association or other means for the continued maintenance of common areas and buildings. 
(b)  In addition to the site plan, a plat shall be submitted for approval which shall be in accordance with the town's subdivision regulations. 
(c)  The development plan shall be in general conformance with the approved preliminary development plan. Approval shall be secured by the owner for each phase of the development. Development of each phase shall commence within two years of approval of the development plan for each phase. If development of the first phase does not commence within two years, the approved development plan shall terminate. If development of subsequent phases does not commence within two years of approval of the development plan for that phase, the development plan shall terminate and no additional building permits shall be issued until a new development plan is approved. Commencement of development shall consist of receipt of a validly issued building permit and first building inspection approval for a minimum of one principal structure or completion of 25 percent of the total cost of the infrastructure (water, sewer, roads, and drainage) for the subject phase. Infrastructure costs for the project shall be reviewed and approved by the town engineer prior to final engineering plan approval. 
(d)  Prior to the expiration of the two-year period, a one-year extension to commence development may be applied for with the town council. An extension may be granted upon a determination by the town council that the applicant has made a good faith effort to commence construction but has been prevented from doing so for reasons beyond the control of the applicant. No more than a one-year extension may be granted to each particular phase. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 6.50, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 264, 7-13-1982; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 454, 11-16-1994; Ord. No. 689 , § 18, 1-25-2017) 
Sec. 34-1333. - Standards. 
(a)  The standards for a planned unit development (PUD) are to provide the planning and zoning board and town council with a means to evaluate applications for these developments consistent with the provisions and general intent of this chapter and the comprehensive plan of the town. The minimum size of all PUD's shall be as follows: 
Use Minimum Number of Acres Single-family detached dwellings 2 Moderate density residential uses (maximum eight units per acre) 3 High density residential uses, any mix of residential uses exceeding eight units per acre or any mix of residential and commercial uses 4  
The uses identified above include all associated accessory uses. 
(b)  The following standards are intended to provide the necessary latitude for the developer to make creative and efficient use of his property: 
(1)  Use regulations. Any use or uses permitted by right, any accessory use or uses or special exception use or uses permitted in the zoning district in which the PUD is to be located may be permitted in a planned unit development special exception. 
(2)  Mixed use regulations. A planned unit development in residential districts in excess of 20 acres may be permitted with mixed uses according to the following schedule: 
Use Maximum % Commercial 5% of total area Office 5% of total area Institutional 10% of total area Governmental 10% of total area Recreational 15% of total area Utility 5% of total area  
(3)  Area regulations. 
a.  Area standard modifications. Except as provided in subsection b of this subsection (b)(3), area regulations applicable to the district in which a PUD may be permitted may be modified by 25 percent of the standard. For example, a 1,000 square foot minimum dwelling unit size may be reduced to 750 square feet. 
b.  Constant standards. The following area standards may not be modified as a part of the PUD special exception process: 
1.  Maximum height in RH district* 
2.  Minimum front yard setback** 
3.  Minimum rear yard setback 
4.  Ocean setback 
*Maximum height in other residential districts may be increased by one story provided the additional floor is occupied by dwelling units. 
**In order to allow variety in streetscape appearance and design flexibility, the front yard setback may be reduced to 15 feet for any portion of a dwelling except for that portion of a house which is a front end loaded garage. Front end loaded garages shall be setback the required minimum front yard setback in order to allow for sufficient stacking depth for driveway parking. Side entry garage dwellings shall have a minimum stacking depth of 25 feet for driveway parking. 
c.  Side yard setbacks. The minimum side yard setback requirements for all zero lot line developments shall be zero feet on one side and on the other side a minimum of ten feet. A minimum five-foot wide nonexclusive access easement shall be established along the lot line of the ten-foot required side yard, in order to allow for adjacent property owners to perform construction, remodeling, maintenance and repairs to the zero lot line side of any structure, in favor of the required association. A minimum 25-foot setback shall be required on corner lots adjacent to public streets. However, a minimum ten-foot side setback shall be required from an adjacent property which is not part of the development. All building walls facing a street or adjacent property which is not part of the development shall be required to have architectural features and treatments, such as but not limited to windows, ornamentations, and glass block. Such features and treatments are required to prevent solid blank building wall facades. 
(4)  Density modification. Under a planned unit development the maximum average dwelling unit density per gross acre may be increased as set out in the following schedule: 
Zoning 
District Maximum Average Density 
per Gross Acre RS 5 RM-1 10 RM-2 15 RM-OO 15 RMT 15 RH 20  
(Ord. No. 207, §§ 6.60-6.64, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 264, 7-13-1982; Ord. No. 329, 1-20-1988; Ord. No. 372, 8-16-1989; Ord. No. 416, 9-25-1991; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994; Ord. No. 499, 3-11-1998; Ord. No. 596, 9-27-2006) 
Sec. 34-1334. - Minor amendments. 
    A minor amendment to the originally approved planned unit development may be approved by the planning and zoning director or his designee, in consultation with the town manager, only if the amendment adheres to the following requirements: 
(1)  An increase in the total floor area of any principal structure does not exceed ten percent and there is no increase in the number of principal structures, or in the number of residential dwelling units as specified by the adopted master plan. However, a decrease in the total floor area of any building, or reduction in the number of principal structures, stories, or units as specified by the master plan may be approved as minor amendments. 
(2)  There is no change in the boundary of the planned development. 
(3)  Rearrangement of uses or locations on a property may be permitted unless they conflict with a specific provision of the adopted planned unit development approval. 
(4)  There is a relocation of no more than ten percent of the total building footprint on a site. For example, if there are two buildings on a site and each has 5,000 square feet of building footprint, then the total building footprint for the site is 10,000 square feet. If one building relocates 500 square feet and the other building relocates 1,000 square feet, then the total relocation is 1,500 square feet out of 10,000 square feet, which is a relocation of 15 percent of the total building footprint. This would qualify as a major amendment under this provision. 
(5)  Any increase in traffic generation shall be by no more than ten percent above that established by the development plan approved by the town council. However, the county's traffic performance standards, as specified in section 7.9 of the Palm Beach County Unified Land Development Code, must be adhered to. 
(6)  There is no increase in negative impacts on adjacent properties. 
(7)  There is no major alteration in the architectural design. Major alteration in design shall mean any change in the character of the structure. However, an amendment to a previously approved planned unit development that was not reviewed under the current appearance criteria in section 34-116(2)b may be amended in architectural design to conform with the current appearance standards and not be considered a major alteration. 
(8)  The amendment does not violate any of the conditions which were placed on the approval. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 6.70, 8-8-1979; Ord. No. 264, 7-13-1982; Ord. No. 450, 5-11-1994) 
Secs. 34-1335-34-1351. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMING STATUS 

Sec. 34-1352. - Intent. 
    Within the zoning districts established by this chapter or amendments adopted subsequent thereto, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful prior to the adoption of this chapter or amendment thereto, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or any subsequent amendment. It is the intent of this article to allow these nonconformities to continue, without increase in degree of nonconformity, until they are removed under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 7.10, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-1353. - Rights. 
    To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. The term "actual construction" is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner pursuant to a building permit issued and unexpired at the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Where permitted demolition or removal of any existing building has been substantially begun in preparation to rebuild, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 7.20, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-1354. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  In any district where permitted, a single-family detached dwelling and customary accessory building may be erected on any single nonconforming lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board of adjustment. No lot presently classified nonconforming under any previous zoning ordinance shall be declared a conforming lot under the provision of this chapter unless or until such lot meets the minimum requirements set forth herein and as applied in the district in which such lot is located. Any permitted use in the applicable district may be constructed on any existing nonconforming lot at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in any district if said lot is less than the minimum building site area required for building lots in the district in which it is located provided, however, that the structure complies with all other area requirements of this chapter and provided further that the owner of said lot does not own any adjacent vacant land which would create a conforming lot if said vacant land were combined with the lot deficient in area. 
(b)  Except as herein provided, if two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the subject lots involved shall be considered to be an undivided lot for the purpose of complying with site development regulations of this chapter, and no portion of said lot shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes the degree of compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of any lot be made which creates a lot with a width or area below the requirements stated in this chapter, except as provided in section 34-1355. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 7.30, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-1355. - Land with nonconforming uses. 
    Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter as those which are existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendment thereto, which are prohibited, or incompatible to, and inconsistent with the permitted uses set forth within any particular zoning district. Although such uses do not conform to the provisions of this chapter or the particular zoning district within which the use may be located, such uses may continue subject to the following limitations and restrictions: 
(1)  Change of use. A change from a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use which is not a continuation of the original nonconforming use which existed at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is prohibited. 
(2)  Change in volume or intensity of use. A change that results in the increase of density or intensity of the use which existed at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is hereby prohibited. 
(3)  Change in location of use. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot, parcel, or site which was occupied by such use on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(4)  Change of ownership or tenancy. All rights and obligations associated with a nonconforming use of land run with the land and are not personal to the present owner, tenant, or proprietor of the nonconforming use and are not affected by a change in ownership or tenancy. 
(5)  Increase, extension, or enlargement of use. A nonconforming use shall not be increased, extended, or enlarged in a way that increases its nonconformity or occupies a greater area of land than was occupied on the adoption date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or in any manner which increases its noncompliance with the use regulations of this chapter. An expansion of any impervious ground surface of any building or structure shall be deemed to be an increase, extension, or enlargement as specified herein. 
(6)  Repairs and maintenance. Routine repairs and maintenance of buildings and structures which house or contain nonconforming uses necessary to maintain health and safety may be permitted. 
(7)  Additions and expansions of facilities. Additions to or expansions of facilities within or which house a nonconforming use shall not be permitted. 
(8)  Replacement or restoration of use-Generally. In the event that any existing nonconforming use is located in a building or structure which is damaged by any means other than fire, flood, wind, explosion, act of God, or act of a public enemy, to an extent of 50 percent or more of the total cost to reconstruct the structure to the latest building codes, as determined by an appraiser acceptable to the town, it shall not be replaced, restored, or reconstructed except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. If the damage is to an extent less than 50 percent it may be replaced or restored as described in subsection (9) of this section. 
(9)  Same-Exceptions. In the event that any existing nonconforming residential use, other than those located within the coastal high hazard area, is located in a building or structure which is damaged by fire, flood, wind, explosion, act of God, or act of a public enemy, it shall be allowed to be replaced, restored or reconstructed to the density or intensity of use and building site area characteristics that existed prior to destruction. Actual construction to replace, restore, or reconstruct the use shall commence within two years from the date of destruction, or the nonconforming status of the use shall lapse, and said use shall revert to normal nonconforming status regulation and requirements of this chapter. One extension to the two-year period of continuing nonconforming density or intensity of use status, said extension not to exceed one year, may be requested prior to the expiration of the two-year period. Such request for extension shall be heard and decided by the board of adjustment. 
(10)  New services or activities. No new services or activities shall be permitted in an existing nonconforming use as provided for in this article. 
(11)  Abandonment or discontinuance of use. The abandonment or discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of time which exceeds six months shall immediately render the nonconforming use status of the specific nonconforming use null and void. The continuance of said use after said period is specifically prohibited, and any subsequent use shall fully conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the zoning district in which such use is located. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 7.40, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-1356. - Nonconforming building and structures. 
    Nonconforming buildings and structures are declared by this chapter as those which are existing at the time of the passage of this chapter or amendment thereto, which do not conform to the regulations of area, height, lot coverage, or other requirements of the district in which such building or structure is located. Although such buildings or structures do not conform to the provisions of this chapter or the particular zoning district within which the building or structure may be located, such buildings or structures may continue subject to the following limitations and restrictions: 
(1)  Increase, extension, expansion, or enlargement. A nonconforming structure shall not be increased, extended, expanded, or enlarged in a way which increases or extends its nonconformity. Therefore, a nonconforming structure shall be permitted to expand its first floor structural footprint so long as: 
a.  The structure is expanded into a conforming front, side, or rear yard setback; and 
b.  All other regulations of the zoning district are complied with (except the dimensional lot area requirements of the zoning district in which it is located). However, an addition to a nonconforming structure, above the first floor level, is permitted to match an existing, nonconforming first floor footprint. Any building or structure or portion thereof, may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
(2)  Replacement, restoration, or reconstruction. 
a.  Generally. In the event that any existing nonconforming building or structure is damaged by any means, other than fire, flood, wind, explosion, act of God, or act of a public enemy to an extent of 50 percent or more of the total cost to reconstruct the structure to the latest building codes, as determined by an appraiser acceptable to the town, it shall not be replaced, restored, or reconstructed except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. If the damages is to an extent less than 50 percent, it may be replaced, restored, or reconstructed as described in subsection (2)b of this section. Any building or structure which remains damaged or disrepaired, regardless of the percentage of construction (or damage) value or area of square footage which is damaged, for a period of six months following the date of damage without the issuance of a valid building permit, shall not be replaced, restored, or reconstructed unless it is brought into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  Exceptions. In the event that any existing nonconforming residential building or structure, other than those located within the coastal high hazard area, is damaged by fire, flood, wind, explosion, act of God, or act of a public enemy, it shall be allowed to be replaced, restored or reconstructed to previously existing building site area characteristics. Actual construction to replace, restore or reconstruct the development, shall commence within two years from the date of destruction, or said status shall be relinquished and said development would revert back to normal nonconforming status regulations and requirements of this chapter. One extension to the two-year period of continuing nonconforming building and structure status, said extension not to exceed one year, may be requested prior to the expiration of the two-year period. Such request for extension shall be heard and decided by the board of adjustment. 
(3)  Repairs and maintenance. Routine repairs and maintenance of nonconforming buildings and structures necessary to maintain health and safety may be permitted. 
(4)  Change in location. Should any nonconforming buildings or structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever from its original permitted location, it shall thereafter conform to the property development regulations for the zoning district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 7.50, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-1357. - Nonconforming characteristics of use. 
    If characteristics of use such as but not limited to parking, loading, and landscaping are made nonconforming by this chapter as passed or amended, no change shall be made in such characteristics of use which increases its nonconformity. However, routine repairs and maintenance of nonconforming characteristics of use may be permitted. Said repairs and maintenance shall include such activities as resurfacing of parking lots and driveways, and replacement of damaged or destroyed landscape materials. Any nonconforming characteristics of use, or portion thereof, may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 7.60, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-1358. - Savings clause. 
    Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, any use or structure which was: 
(1)  Discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 12 months during any four-year period (except where government action impedes access to the premises) between August 8, 1979, and the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; or 
(2)  Was destroyed to an extent of more than 50 percent of its accessed value at time of destruction between August 8, 1979, and the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; 
shall not be used, replaced, restored or reconstructed unless it is brought into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 7.70, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-1359. - Repairs, maintenance, and improvements. 
(a)  On any nonconforming structure or portion of such structure, work may be done on ordinary repairs, maintenance or improvements provided: 
(1)  That the extent of the nonconforming aspect of the structure or portion shall not be increased; and 
(2)  That these provisions shall apply only where deterioration is not to an extent of 50 percent or more of assessed valuation of the structure or portion. 
(b)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to safe condition of a nonconforming structure or portion thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official, provided that such repairs are made within one year of initial notice. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 7.80, 8-8-1979) 
Sec. 34-1360. - Required area or space cannot be reduced. 
    The area or dimension of any lot, yard, parking area or other space shall not be reduced to less than the minimum required by this chapter except as provided in this chapter; and, if already less than the minimum required by this chapter, said area or dimension may be continued but shall not be further reduced except as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 207, § 7.90, 8-8-1979) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1980 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1980 Code, as supplemented through June 23, 2004, which are included herein. Sections of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances included herein, see the table immediately following this table. 
1980 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-8 1-1-1-8 1-10, 1-11 1-10, 1-11 2-2 2-44 2-4.1-2-4.8 12-23-12-30 2-13-2-21 2-87-2-95 2-31 2-119 2-59-2-70 2-210-2-221 2-71-2-77 8-1-8-7 2-88 8-9 2-91 8-10 2-101-2-109 2-251-2-259 3-1-3-3 4-1-4-3 3-17 4-4 4-1 6-23 4-2 6-104 4-3 6-28 4-19-4-21 6-25-6-27 4-31 6-41 4-93-4-95 6-60-6-62 4-95 6-63 4-97-4-105 6-64-6-72 4-116 6-103 4-117, 4-118 6-105, 6-106 4-121 6-108 5-2-5-10 28-19-28-27 6-1-6-5 12-49-12-53 6-6-6-14 12-53-12-61 7-1-7-5 12-83-12-87 7-6-7-11 12-87-12-92 8-1 14-1 9-1, 9-2 16-1, 16-2 9-3(a)-9-3(u) 12-115-12-135 9-4, 9-5 16-3, 16-4 9-6, 9-7 6-1, 6-2 9-9, 9-10 16-5, 16-6 9-11, 9-12 12-1, 12-2 9-31-9-38 10-19-10-26 10-11 18-19 10-14-10-18 18-20-18-24 10-18 18-25, 18-26 10-19-10-33 18-27-18-41 10-35-10-40 18-42-18-47 10-51-10-57 18-68-18-74 10-68-10-76 18-92-18-100 10-86-10-94 18-129-18-137 11-17-11-21 20-23-20-27 11-30-11-32 20-58-20-60 11-40-11-42 20-79-20-81 13.5-21 22-19 14-11-14-17 24-19-24-25 14-29-14-64 24-54-24-89 14-65 24-91 14-66 24-90 14-67-14-71 24-92-24-96 16-1-16-4 28-58-28-61 16-6-16-9 28-81-28-84 16-10 28-84 16-10.1, 16-10.2 28-85 17-1, 17-2 30-1, 30-2 17-13-17-17 30-23-30-27 17-34-17-36 30-58-30-60 17-41-17-48 30-79-30-86 17-49-17-58 30-116-30-125 17-61-17-67 30-149-30-155 18-1-18-4 32-40-32-43 18-85-18-93 32-75-32-83 18-97-18-100 32-134-32-137 18-111-18-113 32-158-32-160 18-127 32-110 18-141-18-143 32-189-32-191 18-144-18-146 32-191-32-193  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 3  8-18-1953 1 16-4 53  7-11-1960 1, 2 32-136, 32-137 54  9-12-1960 2 24-54 3-7 24-58-24-62 9 24-64, 24-65 10-21 24-66-24-77 21-32 24-78-24-89 33 24-91 34 24-90 35-37 24-92-24-94 38 24-96 39 24-95 40, 41 24-56, 24-57 42 24-63 43 24-55 58  9-11-1961 1 2-119 60  2-12-1962 1-3 12-51-12-53 4, 5 12-53, 12-54 7-11 12-55-12-59 14, 15 12-60, 12-61 16, 17 12-49, 12-50 63  1-14-1963 2 6-103 5, 6 6-105, 6-106 10 6-108 69  7- 8-1963 1 30-79, 30-80 2, 3 30-80, 30-81 4 30-85 6-8 30-82-30-84 9 30-86 73  9-14-1964 2, 3 12-83, 12-84 4 12-86 5 12-85 6, 7 12-87 8-12 12-88-12-92 77  2-26-1965 2 6-2 77  2-26-1965 3 6-1 92  3-13-1966 1 30-1 30-23 111 11- 9-1970 1 18-19 2 18-29-18-33 18-36 3 18-34, 18-35 4 18-68-18-74 5 18-37 18-39-18-41 18-92-18-99 6 18-23-18-28 18-38 18-42, 18-43 18-135, 18-136 7 18-44-18-46 8 18-21, 18-22 18-47 18-129 18-131-18-134 18-137 10 18-20 11 16-3 112 12-21-1970 1 2-87 2-6 2-89-2-93 7 2-88 8 2-94 121  9-11-1972 3 28-19, 28-20 4 28-27 145  3-12-1975 1 30-2 1-3 30-24-30-26 155 11-12-1975 2 6-28 158 12- 3-1975 1 32-158 3 32-159 159  1-14-1976 1 16-2 160  1-14-1976 1, 2 2-44 7-76  5-19-1976(Res.) 1-5 20-23-20-27 172 12- 8-1976 2 16-1 173 12- 8-1976 1 1-10 182  2-15-1978 5 6-25, 6-26 183  2-15-1978 1 6-60 2 6-62 3 6-61 4, 5 6-63, 6-64 6 6-72 7 6-68 8 6-66 9, 10 6-69, 6-70 11 6-67 12 6-65 13 6-71 185  5-17-1978 1, 2 32-158, 32-159 207  8- 8-1979 1.10 34-1 1.20 34-2 1.30 34-3 2.00-2.185 34-4 3.10, 3.11 34-236, 34-237 3.20 34-238 3.30-3.33 34-239 3.34.1, 3.34.2 34-240, 34-241 3.35 34-242 4.00 34-243 4.11-4.15 34-264-34-268 4.21-4.26 34-285-34-290 4.31-4.36 34-309-34-314 4.41-4.46 34-332-34-337 4.51-4.56 34-363-34-368 4.61, 4.62 34-625, 34-626 4.62.1 34-627 4.63-4.66 34-628-34-631 4.67-4.67.7 34-632 4.71-4.76 34-653-34-658 4.81-4.86 34-690-34-695 4.91-4.96 34-719-34-724 4.101-4.106 34-747-34-752 4.111-4.116 34-773-34-778 4.121-4.126 34-810-34-815 4.131-4.136 34-839-34-844 4.141-4.146 34-395-34-400 4.201-4.213 34-429-34-441 4.215 34-442 4.301-4.312 34-468-34-479 4.314 34-480 4.401-4.414 34-499-34-512 4.416 34-513 4.501-4.505 34-535-34-539 4.601-4.603 34-557-34-559 4.604-4.609 34-561-34-566 4.701-4.703 34-596-34-598 4.704-4.707 34-600-34-603 5.12-5.14 34-896-34-898 5.16-5.29 34-899-34-912 5.31-5.36 34-867-34-872 5.40.1-5.40.5 34-980-34-984 5.50 34-985 5.56-5.59 34-1014- 
34-1017 5.61-5.67 34-1048- 
34-1054 5.68-5.68.6 34-1055 5.70.1, 5.70.2 34-1079, 
34-1080 5.71 34-1081 5.71.1 34-1082 5.72, 5.73 34-1083, 
34-1084 5.73.1, 5.73.2 34-1085 5.74-5.76 34-1087- 
34-1089 5.80 34-1090 5.100 34-873 5.110 34-874 5.120-5.128 34-1123- 
34-1131 5.130 34-1132 5.140 34-1133 5.150 34-1160 5.152-5.155 34-1161- 
34-1164 5.161 34-1192 5.170(1)-5.170(4) 34-1218- 
34-1221 5.180.1-5.180.6 34-1246- 
34-1251 5.190.1-5.190.4 34-1276- 
34-1279 5.200 34-1302- 
34-1307 5.370-5.373 34-949 5.374-5.377 34-950-34-953 6.10 34-1328 6.20 34-1329 6.30 34-1330 6.40 34-1331 6.50 34-1332 6.60-6.64 34-1333 6.70 34-1334 7.10 34-1352 7.20 34-1353 7.30 34-1354 7.40 34-1355 7.50 34-1356 7.60 34-1357 7.70 34-1358 7.80 34-1359 7.90 34-1360 8.10 34-27 8.20 34-28 8.30 34-29 9.10 34-30 9.20 34-31 9.30 34-32 9.40 34-33 9.50 34-34 9.60 34-35 9.70 34-36 9.80 34-37 10.00 34-93 11.10 34-115 11.20 34-116 11.30 34-117 11.40 34-118 11.50 34-119 12.00-12.04 34-63-34-67 13.00 34-137 13.10 34-138 13.30 34-139 13.40 34-140 13.50 34-141 13.60 34-142 14.00 34-168 14.19-14.25 34-169-34-175 15.00-15.02 34-204-34-206 220 10-29-1980 1 28-27 224  2-25-1981 34-395-34-400 229  2-25-1981 1 30-27 242  9- 9-1981 1, 2 2-95 249 11-11-1981 1 28-27 252  3-10-1982 1 4-4 258 10-13-1982 34-1055 261 12- 8-1982 1 16-5 264  7-13-1982 34-1328- 
34-1334 266  9-28-1983 1 28-58, 28-59 269  1-11-1984 1 30-116-30-125 278 10- 9-1984 2 6-23 285  6-12-1985 1-8 32-75-32-82 287  7-10-1985 34-981 288  7-10-1985 1 32-83 290  9-11-1985 1 34-1276 295  2-19-1986 34-398 302  6-25-1986 34-625-34-632 304  7- 9-1986 1 28-58-28-61 307  8-13-1986 2 20-23 309 10- 8-1986 34-1048- 
34-1055 315  3-18-1987 34-1054 316  3-18-1987 34-750 329  1-20-1988 34-1333 331  1-20-1988 1 16-2 332  2-17-1988 2 6-41 335  4-20-1988 2 18-42 337  5-18-1988 1-3 32-134-32-136 4-6 32-158-32-160 341  8-17-1988 34-138 343  9-21-1988 34-1014 344 10-19-1988 34-204-34-206 345 10-19-1988 34-169, 34-170 346 10-19-1988 2 12-23-12-30 347 10-19-1988 34-63-34-67 354  2-15-1989 34-949 355  3-15-1989 34-4 365  5-17-1989 34-138 371  7-19-1989 34-268 34-289 34-313 34-336 34-367 34-843 372  8-16-1989 34-1333 374 11-15-1989 34-4 375 11-15-1989 34-625-34-632 376 11-15-1989 34-868-34-870 377 10-18-1989 34-1050 382  2-21-1990 34-902 383  2-21-1990 34-4 34-873, 34-874 34-896-34-912 34-1079- 
34-1085 34-1087- 
34-1090 34-1132 384  2-21-1990 34-1123 388  4-18-1990 34-871 389  5-16-1990 34-4 34-1048- 
34-1055 390  5-16-1990 34-1160- 
34-1164 391  5-16-1990 1 6-23 392  5-16-1990 34-1080 34-1088 393  5-16-1990 34-4 34-266 34-287 34-334 34-365 34-397 34-901 34-1192 394  5-16-1990 1 16-6 395  6-20-1990 1 28-27 396  9-19-1990 1 6-23 398  9-17-1990 34-168 399 10-17-1990 1 20-58-20-60 20-79-20-81 400 10-17-1990 1 18-100 401  9-17-1990 34-93 402 12-19-1990 2 22-19 404  2-20-1991 2-4 12-1 406  3-20-1991 34-37 2 6-25 6-27, 6-28 408  4-17-1991 34-138 409  5-15-1991 34-429-34-442 34-468-34-480 34-499-34-513 410  5-15-1992 1 2-251-2-259 412  6-19-1991 2 20-60 20-81 416  9-25-1991 34-905 34-981 34-1050 34-1218- 
34-1221 34-1246- 
34-1251 34-1276- 
34-1279 34-1328- 
34-1333 417 10-16-1991 I-VIII 10-19-10-26 421  2-19-1992 34-4 34-264-34-268 34-1048- 
34-1055 34-1084 34-1123- 
34-1130 34-1302- 
34-1307 422  2-19-1992 1 18-100 423  8-12-1992 2 32-40-32-43 3 32-40-32-43 424  8-12-1992 1 8-1-8-7 8-9, 8-10 425  7-29-1992 3 28-61 426  8-12-1992 34-904 34-1055 429 10-28-1992 1 2-44 430 10-28-1992 5 18-137 10 30-27 11 32-110 12 2-94, 2-95 14 14-1 15 18-20 18-22 18-38 16 20-23, 20-24 20-27 17 30-1 18 32-81 433 12- 2-1992 34-363-34-368 34-395-34-400 34-724 434 12-16-1992 34-4 34-118 34-333-34-335 34-439 34-477 34-510 34-626, 34-627 34-629 34-631 34-1084 439  2-24-1993 34-1279 440  4-14-1993 1-3 32-189-32-191 4-6 32-191-32-193 445  1-26-1994 2 4-1 447  2-23-1994 1 8-9 448  8-10-1994 1 28-19-28-27 450  5-11-1994 34-4 34-137 34-867-34-872 34-949-34-953 34-1048- 
34-1055 34-1079, 
34-1080 34-1082- 
34-1085 34-1087- 
34-1089 34-1123 34-1160- 
34-1164 34-1302- 
34-1307 34-1328- 
34-1334 452 11- 8-1995 34-168 453  9- 7-1994 2 12-115-12-135 454 11-16-1994 34-4 34-36 34-243 34-429-34-442 34-468-34-480 34-499-34-513 34-903 34-905 34-909 34-1048- 
34-1055 34-1123 34-1329 34-1332 465 12-14-1994 34-747-34-752 466 12-14-1994 34-264-34-268 467 12-14-1994 34-535-34-539 468 12-14-1994 34-719-34-724 469  5-10-1995 34-4 34-285-34-290 34-309-34-314 34-332-34-337 34-363-34-368 34-395-34-400 34-1048- 
34-1055 472  4-10-1996 2-4 30-58-30-60 475 12-13-1995 2 4-2, 4-3 476 12-13-1995 34-557-34-559 34-561-34-566 34-625-34-632 34-653-34-658 34-1048- 
34-1055 34-1079- 
34-1085 34-1087- 
34-1089 34-1276- 
34-1279 478  2-28-1996 34-398 34-400 482  4-10-1996 34-596-34-598 34-600-34-602 484  5-22-1996 1 28-27 485  9- 4-1996 34-4 34-264-34-268 34-535-34-539 34-557-34-559 34-561-34-566 34-596-34-598 34-600-34-602 34-871 34-903 34-980-34-984 34-1276- 
34-1279 486  8-28-1996 1 2-210-2-221 487  9-18-1996 34-4 34-982-34-984 489 12-11-1996 34-1048- 
34-1055 34-1085 34-1130 491  2-12-1997 34-363-34-368 34-557-34-559 34-561-34-566 34-625-34-632 34-653-34-658 34-1048- 
34-1055 494  9-24-1997 34-309-34-314 34-332-34-337 34-395-34-400 34-901 499  3-11-1998 34-1123 34-1333 500  7-29-1998 1 28-27 506 11-18-1998 1 8-1 8-9 511  3-24-1999 1 4-4 512  7-28-1999 34-909 34-1048- 
34-1055 34-1302- 
34-1307 514  6-23-1999 34-949 515  5-26-1999 2(Exh. A) 12-2 516  8-14-1999 34-658 517 12- 1-1999 34-116 34-722 34-980-34-984 34-1079- 
34-1085 34-1087- 
34-1089 34-1302- 
34-1307 527 11-15-2000 34-4 34-557-34-559 34-561-34-566 536  5- 9-2001 34-912 538  4-25-2001 34-4 34-1048- 
34-1055 543  6-13-2001 1 28-27 548  8-22-2001 1-3 28-81-28-83 549  8-22-2001 1 28-84, 28-85 553 12-11-2002 2(Exh. A) 34-1124, 
34-1125 556 10- 9-2002 2(Exh. A) 34-1124 563  6-25-2003 1 28-27 564  6-25-2003 2 30-149-30-155 570  3-16-2004 2 4-4 571  6-23-2004 2 6-23 3 6-104 4 6-28 581  8-24-2005 2(Exh. A) 34-4 34-627 34-629 34-631, 34-632 582  1-12-2005 2(2-121)- 
2(2-123) 2-62-2-64 583  1-26-2005 2 8-11 588 11- 9-2005 6-24 2(4-1) 6-23 2(4-3) 6-104 2(4-4) 6-28 3 6-27 4 6-61 4(4-95)-4(4-98) 6-62-6-65 5(4-116) 6-103 5(4-117)- 
5(4-121) 6-105-6-109 592  5-24-2006 2(Exh. A) 34-314 34-337 34-400 593  6-14-2006 5.64 34-1051 5.68.4 34-1055 596  9-27-2006 34-1333 598  9-14-2006 2-4       Added 22-1 603  1-24-2007 2       Added 20-91 608  5- 9-2007 2 6-108 609  7-25-2007 2 20-23, 20-25 20-26 610  2-27-2008 1-9 Adopting ord., 
p. xi 617  9-24-2008 2 34-1088(c)(1)-(3), (d), (f)(2)       Added 34-1088(j)-(l) 621 11-12-2008 2       Added 30-161-30-174 622  8-26-2009 2 34-1305 623  8-26-2009 2 34-119 624  8-26-2009 2 34-37 625  8-26-2009 2 34-658 626  9-10-2009 2 30-170 630  9-23-2009 2 28-58 28-60 631 10-14-2009 2 28-58 632 10-28-2009 2 34-442(11) 634  2-10-2010 2 30-168(c) 3 30-170 639  6-23-2010 2       Added 30-181-30-184 643  9-27-2010 2 28-58 644  1-12-2011 2 34-626(1) 3       Rpld 34-627(5)       Rnbd 34-627(6)-(12)       as 34-627(5)-(11) 4       Added 34-629(13) 645  1-12-2011 2       Added 34-905(3) 646  4-13-2011 2 34-4 3       Added 34-1311, 34-1312 647  8-24-2011 2       Rpld 2-251-2-259       Added 2-251-2-256 649  2- 8-2012 2 34-1305 655  9-26-2011 2 16-4 3 18-36, 18-37 662 12-12-2012 2 30-21-30-26, 30-58-30-60 663  1-23-2013 2       Added 16-21-16-26 664  6-26-2013 2       Rpld 30-161-30-174       Rpld 30-181-30-184       Added 30-161-30-163 668  5-28-2014 2 34-4 3       Added 34-210 4 34-243 34-626 34-627 34-629 34-632       Added 34-654(9) 34-656(2)       Added 34-850-34-855 5 34-950 34-981(b)(5)a. 34-1050(3) 34-1051(12) Ch. 34, Art. IV, Div. 12(tit.) 34-1246-34-1251 34-1279(a), (b)(1), (2) 671  7-23-2014 2       Added 4-1       Rnbd 4-1, 4-2       as 4-2, 4-3       Added 4-4       Rnbd 4-3, 4-4       as 4-5, 4-6 675  9- 9-2014 2 1-10 676 11-18-2014 2       Added 34-1316-34-1319 677 11-18-2014 2 34-4 3       Added 34-853(12) 4       Added 34-875 678 12-10-2014 2 34-116(2)b.1., 3. 679  1-28-2015 2       Added 16-7 685  5-25-2016 2       Added 34-63(b) 686  8-10-2016 2 34-28 3 34-64, 34-66 687  8-10-2016 2       Rpld Art. III, § 6-41       Added Ch. 7, 7-1-7-27 689  1-25-2017 2 34-2-34-4 3 34-27, 34-31 4 34-116, 34-117 5 34-238 34-243 6 34-268 7 34-290 8 34-314 9 34-337 10 34-368 11 34-400 12 34-598 13 34-627 34-632 14 34-654 15       Added 34-856 16 34-871 17       Rpld 34-1220 18 34-1332 693 10-26-2016 2       Added 12-3 3       Added 18-48 694  5-24-2017 2 34-142(g) 699  8-23-2017 2 8-3 700  8-23-2017 2 7-2(c) 701 10-25-2017 2 34-4 3 34-853 4 34-875 705  9-12-2018 2 34-4 3 34-902 34-908 710  1-23-2019 2       Added 34-1321-34-1324  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Florida Statutes. 
F.S. Section  
this Code 1.01 et seq. 1-2 1.01(1)-1.01(5) 1-2 2.04 1-5 ch. 50 2-219 50.041 2-219 50.051 2-219 ch. 97 et seq. Char. Art. V Ch. 8 chs. 97-106 8-1 100.361 Char. Art. V, § 6 101.657 8-11 111.07 2-44 111.065 2-44 112.311 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III ch. 119 Ch. 2 ch. 121 2-87 121.021 2-87 121.051(2)(b) 2-87 ch. 161 34-1123 161.053 7-12 161.055 7-4 161.54 7-21 161.141 7-4 161.161 4-4 ch. 162 Ch. 2, Art. VI 162.01 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 162.01-162.13 2-221 162.02-162.10 2-210-2-218 162.11 2-220 162.12 2-219 ch. 163 34-400 ch. 163, pt. II 34-28 34-236 ch. 163, pt. II. 34-29 163.3161 et seq. Ch. 20 Ch. 34 163.3174 34-28 163.3180(12) 20-91(b)(2) 163.3220 20-60 ch. 166 Char. Arts. I-VII Ch. 2 34-4 34-138 166.031(6) Char. Art. III, § 5 Char. Art. V, § 5 166.041 Char. Art. III, § 7 166.101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 166.201 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 166.231 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. III ch. 170 Ch. 24 ch. 171 Char. Art. II ch. 173 12-92 177.011 et seq. Ch. 26 ch. 180 Ch. 24 ch. 186 et seq. Ch. 20 ch. 192 et seq. Ch. 28 ch. 202 Ch. 28, Art. IV 202.19 28-81 202.19(2)(a) 28-82, 28-83 202.20 28-81 202.20(1)(b) 28-82 ch. 205 Ch. 28, Art. II 205.042 28-19 205.043(1)(c) 28-23 205.043(2), (3) 28-24 205.053 28-25 205.053(1) 28-22 205.054 et seq. 28-21 ch. 218 Ch. 2, Art. V 286.011 Ch. 2 Char. Art. III, § 7 ch. 298 Ch. 32, Art. VI ch. 316 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II, 
Div. 2 ch. 316 Ch. 30 30-59 34-4 34-983 316.008 Ch. 30 316.008(1) 30-1 316.008(1)(a) Ch. 30, Art. II 316.0083 30-162 316.074(1) 30-162 316.075(1)(C) 30-162 316.193 30-149 316.293 Ch. 12, Art. V 316.1945 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II 316.1955 30-59, 30-60 316.1955 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II, 
Div. 2 316.1955- 
316.1959 30-58 316.1957- 
316.1959 34-981 316.1964 30-58 316.1967 30-58 316.1967(6) 30-60 316.1995 30-2 316.2055 12-57 ch. 318 30-59 ch. 320 30-59 34-983 320.01 7-12 320.01(1)(b) 34-557 34-566 320.03(8) 30-60 320.8249 7-24 320.8285 14-1 320.8325 14-1 322.264 30-149 322.341 30-149 327.33 18-98 336.045 Ch. 24 337.401(3)(c)1 28-84 337.401(3)(c)1.b 28-85 ch. 366, ch. 367 Ch. 32 366.02 7-4 370.12 4-4 ch. 372 Ch. 4 ch. 372, pt. IV 20-60 ch. 373 Ch. 32 373.036 7-4 373.175 Ch. 32, Art. III 373.203 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. V 373.403 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. VI 380.01 et seq. 20-60 381.0065 7-4 ch. 395 34-1312 ch. 397 34-4 397.311(18) 34-4 401.2101 et seq. Ch. 10 ch. 402 34-4 ch. 403 Ch. 12 12-132 403.011 et seq. 12-2 18-34 403.064 Ch. 32, Art. IV 403.413 Ch. 12, Art. III 18-35 403.415 Ch. 12, Art. V 403.702 et seq. Ch. 22 403.850 et seq. Ch. 32 ch. 418 Ch. 18 ch. 419 34-4 34-1221 ch. 480 34-949 489.501 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II ch. 499, 893 30-149 509.013(4)(a) 34-1321 509.233 34-1316 ch. 513 Ch. 14 513.01(9) 34-557 34-566 ch. 515 34-1323 ch. 551 16-24 ch. 553 Ch. 6 553.35 et seq. Ch. 14 553.70(10)(K) 7-4 553.73(5) 7-7 553.60 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. III 553.70 et seq. 6-23 553.501 et seq. 34-981 562.45(2) 16-2 604.50 7-4 ch. 633 18-43 ch. 650 2-119 650.02 2-119 ch. 705 Ch. 12, Art. II 705.101(6) 30-155 705.105 30-155 ch. 723 Ch. 14 ch. 767 Ch. 4 768.28 2-44 ch. 775 et seq. Ch. 16 775.082 2-255 775.083 2-255 ch. 790, ch. 791 18-37, 18-38 796.07 30-149 ch. 810 16-3 18-23 ch. 828 Ch. 4 4-4 18-36 ch. 849 16-25 ch. 893 30-149 893.03 34-1311 34-1312 893.035 34-1311 893.0356 34-1311 938.15 1-11 943.14 1-11  
